Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday , 18 December 1998 .
Order of business
The next item is the order of business .
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents pursuant to Rule 95 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed .
Strasbourg
Monday :
I would inform the House that I have received a second motion of censure on the Commission pursuant to Rule 34 , tabled by Mr Fabre-Aubrespy and 68 other Members .
With the agreement of the authors of the motion and the Commission , I propose that this motion should be added to the joint debate on the other motion of censure and the oral questions on today 's agenda .
Mr Striby has the floor .
Mr President , once again I must raise the troublesome question I asked two months ago about when we are going to be moving into the IPE IV building .
Rumour and hearsay are not good enough when it comes to Parliament 's seat .
We know that the matter has been settled in the Treaties , but in its physical dimension - bricks and mortar - it remains unresolved .
We are dealing with the order of business , Mr Striby .
The question of IPE IV and its completion has nothing to do with the agenda .
You can table questions under Rule 28 , and you no longer have the floor .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , do you agree that we should take your motion of censure together with the one which is already on the agenda ?
Mr President , I think it is a good idea to have a joint debate because I would not want to force a new debate tomorrow morning , to be followed by a vote on Thursday , 48 hours later .
I think it would be appropriate , given the formal nature of the procedure and the fact that the introduction of a motion of censure is exceptional , for the first signatories of the two motions , namely Mrs Green and myself , to speak first in this debate .
The motion you quote comes from all the political groups in Parliament without exception , namely a total of 69 Members .
Thank you , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
The Commission also has to agree to these two motions of censure being taken in joint debate .
Could I ask the President of the Commission if he is in agreement with this procedure ?
The President of the Commission agreed to this proposal
Mr President , Rule 34 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure states that the debate on a motion of censure shall not take place until at least 24 hours after its receipt is announced to Members .
I was very curious to know why , given that one censure motion has already been tabled , certain Members saw fit to table another motion of censure which , at least under our Rules , should not and could not take place at the same time .
But now I understand the reason : it is because Mr Fabre-Aubrespy is seeking it as a device to be able to speak earlier in the debate than he otherwise would .
I put to the vote the proposal that the two motions of censure should be taken in joint debate .
Parliament approved the proposal
Tuesday and Wednesday : no changes
Thursday :
The Green Group has asked for the vote on the five reports on Agenda 2000 from the Committee on Agriculture , in other words those by Mr Mulder , Mr Garot , Mr Goepel , Mr Fantuzzi and Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , to be taken this Thursday instead of on 28 January , as currently scheduled .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has the floor to explain this request .
Mr President , our group requests that the debate on Agenda 2000 , in other words the reform of agriculture policy , and the vote on the reports discussed should not be held at different times .
We asked for the vote to be held this week , but if this is not possible for reasons of time , we believe it would be better to postpone the entire debate plus the vote until the Brussels part-session .
Voting is not a technical act , but one of great political importance .
We must not uncouple the debate , which is concerned primarily with amendments and examination of the various issues , from the vote .
I trust the House will be amenable to our proposal .
Thank you , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
Mr Goepel has the floor to speak against the request .
Mr President , whilst I believe a vote of confidence to be extremely important , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf is quite right in saying that Agenda 2000 is a matter of great political importance too .
We should not put aside everything to do with this , but should debate the market sectors on Wednesday as planned , irrespective of other events .
It would be a clear belittling of the most important issue which this House will be debating between now and the year 2006 simply to postpone it and say we will deal with this at the two-day mini-session in Brussels .
I appreciate that there is simply not time to vote on over 400 amendments .
We could certainly hold the vote in Brussels , but we should debate Agenda 2000 on Wednesday .
I put the request from the Green Group to the vote .
Parliament rejected the request
Mr President , I quite understand that the vote on Agenda 2000 and the 400 amendments to it has been postponed .
What I do not understand is that we are dealing with the Hermange report on Thursday evening but not voting on it on Friday morning , as would normally be the case .
I should like to know the reason , and I think this is a procedure which should not be repeated in future .
The groups will decide in future , Mr Posselt .
This time , the Conference of Presidents decided that it was preferable to vote separately on a different day , namely 28 January , and to hold the debate this week .
Given that no alternative proposal has been made , we cannot change anything at the moment , since no amendment to the agenda was proposed at the appropriate time .
Friday : no changes
Brussels
Wednesday , 27 January and Thursday , 28 January 1999 : no changes
The order of business was adopted thus amended
Motion of censure - refusal to grant a discharge for 1996
Mr President , the honourable Members who withdrew their signatures , on behalf of my delegation , are Gérard Caudron , Danielle Darras and Marie Noëlle Lienemann plus myself , that is to say all the French Socialists .
There is still one more than the minimum .
So in any event , the number of signatures is above the minimum required for the vote on the motion of censure .
Mr President , on 17 December immediately after the vote on the Elles report I tabled a motion of censure on the European Commission on behalf of the Parliamentary Group of the Party of European Socialists .
It had been my public position in this House and in the media for some weeks prior to that vote that the decision on discharge of the 1996 budget was a clear statement about the financial competence or otherwise of the European Commission .
Those in this House who are prepared to declare the Commission financially incompetent must take the only possible institutional step in their power and seek to sack it .
The motion of censure was tabled by me to demand that those who felt the Commission was culpable with respect to the 1996 budget should face up to their responsibility .
The next three months are critical for the development of the European Union and for the enlargement process .
As we move towards the special summit at the end of March , which is charged with bringing forward a common position on reforming agricultural policy , on new rules for the distribution of funds to the regions , and with making sure that the future financing of the Union is fair to all Member States , it is vital that the European Commission is working at its most effective in close partnership , a partnership of trust and confidence , with both Parliament and the Council .
This House cannot extend this crisis into those coming weeks .
One of the fundamental reasons for the tabling of the motion of censure was to decide now , immediately , whether or not the European Commission is to be able to do its work .
If it is not , then we should decide so now .
I would say to the drafters of some resolutions which are tabled for joint debate with this motion of censure that their approach is sure to lead to an ongoing crisis for weeks if not months .
That is in nobody 's best interest and certainly not of those who are depending on the outcome of European Union policies - the people of the European Union .
During the vote on discharge of the 1996 budget in December , the great majority of my group voted in favour because we believed that the Commission had satisfied Parliament in three of the six areas in which we had expressed our concerns and had gone some way in three other areas .
We were of the view that in some respects the European Commission was simply not able to comply with all our demands , as for instance where there are shared or joint responsibilities with the Council or national governments .
We had supported the demands of the Committee on Budgetary Control when it postponed discharge in March and asked for further clarification and action .
We believed that when the discharge vote came before us in December we had already exercised considerable influence for change and with the prospect of an equally difficult discharge for the 1997 budget immediately before us we could continue to make even more changes inevitable .
This was Parliament acting responsibly and driving the agenda for change .
With some success to our name , thanks to the work of the Committee on Budgetary Control , and the opportunity to achieve even more in the coming months in the context of the 1997 discharge , the great majority of my Group want the Commission to get on with its work for Agenda 2000 .
That was the basis for our position in December .
It must be said that there are colleagues in this House in all groups - mine included - who believe that such is the severity of the problems which was displayed by the European Commission over the 1996 discharge , that they could not grant discharge and they will vote for the motion of censure .
I believe those colleagues are sincere and I respect them , even if I am of a different view .
There are others , however , whose motives are more about the smell of an election in their nostrils or a particular domestic agenda to which they are playing .
Murmurs of dissent
So be it !
The fascinating thing about politics is that it is not static : it is a dynamic process and moves on quickly .
A major weakness in our constitutional arrangements which has been revealed by this current crisis is that , unlike executives in almost any other setting , the European Commission has no ability to come to this House and ask for a vote of confidence .
I listened with amusement to the reaction of parliamentarians on the eve of the Elles vote when the Commission made clear in its statement that it considered the vote a matter of confidence .
The view that this was in some way bringing undue pressure to bear is surely overly sensitive .
In any democratic parliamentary process which I know , this sort of thing is part and parcel of normal , robust interaction between the executive and the parliament to which it is democratically accountable .
But in a company boardroom , a voluntary organisation or national governments , if the parliament , shareholders or members declared that the executive was financially incompetent , then that executive would surely be entitled to know whether it had the confidence of that parliament , those shareholders or members , and there would be a procedure by which they could ask for a vote of confidence or otherwise .
My first demand , on behalf of my Group , is that the Treaty and / or Rules of Procedure should be changed to put in place such a procedure .
In the three weeks since the motion of censure was tabled , things have changed .
In that time there has been a large number of new allegations which require rigorous investigation and rapid action , as well as continuing press speculation about existing accusations .
As I have already explained , the motion of censure was posited on the failure to grant discharge in December .
However , the recent accusations demonstrate the problems which lie at the heart of the current crisis .
It is not a matter of whether we have political differences with the European Commission .
Of course we have such differences as between one institution and another , and as political families with a clear view of where we want Europe to go in the future .
But political differences of that sort are what democracy is all about and we accept that it is part of the battle of ideas .
It is not a matter entirely of competence either .
Let us be honest and say that any Commission which has been responsible for seeing through so smoothly the introduction of the single currency , performing the intensely complex and huge task of opening negotiations with six applicant States and keeping another five applications under active consideration - just to mention two unique events of recent days and months - cannot be declared totally incompetent .
It is much more about the ambience , the ethos of secrecy , patronage , nepotism and obstructionism which appears to surround the Commission and its Members .
It is this wider sense of petty corruption which is doing such devastating damage to the Commission and its officials and it is this which simply must be dealt with .
I should like to say to President Santer that it has been my view for some time - and I have argued this with him before - that the European Commission is at present the accumulation of 15 national administrative cultures .
Increasingly these 15 national cultures are creating tensions in working practices in terms of the cultural expectations , norms and values which accompany them .
Too often they simply do not gel into a coherent whole .
There is a real opportunity now to grasp the nettle and lay down the parameters of a European administrative culture .
Such a change would give confidence to the Commission officials , from the highest to the lowest , that they have common rules of engagement in their work , well defined , understood and , most importantly , endorsed , enacted and enforced from the top .
In that respect this Parliament too has much to gain and learn from such an approach .
We would have to respect such parameters and bring a maturity to our work of monitoring and controlling Commission spending and policy implementation .
I accept that in some areas we can be accused of duplicity : moving goalposts once demands have been fulfilled ; using different national norms and values as the gauge and , in some instances , acting inappropriately as judge and jury .
All of us here agree completely that fraud and corruption is totally unacceptable , even were it to be minuscule .
All of us here across this House are committed to weeding out abuses , using our powers to expose fraud and bring those responsible to justice in the proper way through the appropriate judicial authorities .
My group has done more than its fair share in this respect and we will support every effort to continue .
All of us in this House understand just what it means to be the subject of press campaigns and sometimes vilification on the basis of unproven allegations .
If we are to demand the heads of certain individuals on the basis of public campaigns before proper investigation is completed , or sometimes even started , then perhaps we should have resigned en masse when the media was at its most vitriolic in claiming that MEPs were abusing their allowances and expenses regime .
Of course we all recognise that to act on media speculation would be inappropriate .
But we must also recognise that the lack of a transparent set of rules governing relations between Commissioners , their cabinets and their directorates-general has fuelled claims of nepotism , patronage and financial gain .
This must be dealt with now .
I hope that when the President of the Commission responds to this debate he acknowledges the need for immediate action in this area and tells us what he intends to do .
My group 's second demand is for a set of transparent rules governing relations between Commissioners , their cabinets and their directorates-general before the end of March 1999 .
My group will not allow individuals , whether they be Commissioners or junior officials , to be tried by the press .
But I want to make it perfectly clear that if accusations against any individual are proven - no matter how powerful or how lowly , no matter what gender , no matter what political affiliation - we will demand that they be brought to account .
We do not have the institutional right to cherry-pick amongst the College of Commissioners .
We may wish we had .
We have argued for it in the IGC in the past and will no doubt argue with renewed vigour for it in the future .
But at present we do not have such a right .
It is for this reason that we will not support those resolutions from other political groups which are seeking to apportion blame for all the ills of the Commission on the heads of selected individuals against whom no case has yet been proven .
Applause
Anyway , were we to pick individuals or areas of suspected fraud or corruption , why is there no mention of the common agricultural policy where fraud is well-documented and ongoing ?
Applause
Why no mention of the programmes for PHARE and TACIS where the rumours are as serious and as widespread ?
Applause
If we are to sustain and increase our integrity as a monitoring and controlling body to which the Commission is accountable , we must not be partial in our criticisms .
There is another important issue concerning the treatment of whistleblowers .
My group supports the concept of whistleblowing .
Indeed , we were instrumental in this House in helping to introduce it .
Any person dealing with a whistleblower has two major responsibilities .
Firstly , he must protect the whistleblower , and his or her identity , and secondly protect those against whom accusations are being made until they are investigated properly .
This surely is natural justice .
In the cause of Paul Van Buitenen both those responsibilities were breached .
I regret that his personal integrity is now damaged .
Having spoken to him I have no doubt that he believes he has honest cause .
I have no doubt either that he has been used by some politicians and by some in the media and , in consequence , he has been abused .
I note that the dossier which Mr Van Buitenen gave to a Member of this Parliament included information which was already the subject of investigation in Parliament , in the Commission and in some cases before the courts .
I understand that he has provided other information which contains new allegations which are now to be investigated .
But had the Commission had procedures and structures which allowed abuses to be identified and followed up speedily and efficiently , then the Van Buitenen case would not have been necessary .
It is in this area where I believe the Commission is vulnerable and must show great determination .
The time is right to acknowledge that such is the depth of concern that only an independent review can restore confidence and trust in the way in which the Commission deals with abuses in its own programmes .
President Santer , in early December , after two discussions between ourselves , you wrote to me offering the opportunity for Parliament to be involved in your management reforms .
We think that is important and I will come back to it .
But I would ask you to go one step further and agree to an independent review under the joint auspices of our two institutions .
Nothing less will give confidence to Europe 's public that everything possible is being done to root out abuses as and when they are identified and brought to attention .
So our third demand is for an independent review to assess and make recommendations on the detection and follow-up of abuses before the end of this year .
President Santer , given your offer to this Parliament to be involved in your plans for management reform , it is important that Commission and Parliament produce a timetable for detailed discussions on those plans before the end of this week and schedule a full debate in the final May plenary session here in Strasbourg .
The aim would be that prior to your promised report to the Council at the Cologne summit in June , you have the advice , participation and I hope the support of this Parliament in creating a Commission which reflects a modern , transparent and efficient management structure and system .
My group 's fourth demand therefore is that a timetable for negotiations between Parliament and the Commission be drawn up by the end of this week to structure the final shape of the Commission management structure of the future .
Tabling a motion of censure is not a measure I take lightly .
It is the most powerful weapon which Parliament possesses .
But refusing to discharge the 1996 budget is not just the simple technical issue which some in this House are now trying to portray it as .
In the weeks leading up to the discharge vote , this issue became a major issue of confidence - rightly so , in my view .
There is very little as important as the way in which the Commission spends public money at a time when public funds are under desperately tight control for reasons which we all know .
It is simply unacceptable to say we do not trust the Commission with the spending of public money but we are not prepared to do anything further about it .
The only institutional power which this House has is to remove the entire Commission if we believe the situation is so grave and beyond redemption .
Simply to do nothing , to fail to respond is not acceptable .
This debate - and in particular the Commission 's response - is our opportunity to make that judgment .
Applause
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Santer , Members of the Commission , I shall be talking for three minutes on behalf of 69 Members , after hearing Mrs Green talk for seventeen and a half minutes on behalf of 64 or 65 Members !
I must begin , however , by expressing my warmest thanks to the 60 Members who have had the courage to put their names to another motion of censure , a genuine motion of censure .
These 69 Members represent all the political groups in this House : nine from the GUE Group , one from the Socialist Group , 13 from the Green Group , two from the ARE Group , two from the ELDR Group , four from the UPE Group , 11 from the PPE Group - to be followed , I gather , by many more - plus 16 from the I-EDN Group and 11 from the NI Group .
These Members represent all the European Union countries with the sole exception of Luxembourg .
In putting down this motion of censure which , unlike the Socialist motion , is an unambiguous motion of censure and not a motion of confidence in disguise , those Members who have signed it are , given the seriousness of the accusations levelled at the Commission , carrying through the logical consequence of the vote held on 17 December .
Because that is what this is all about .
Over the last four years , the Court of Auditors has not once given a clear endorsement of the legality and regularity of payments made by the Commission .
In its reports , the Court of Auditors has exposed the scandal of loans to tourism and the scandal of the Mediterranean programmes ; more recently , the scandal over ECHO and those concerning goods in transit and the Commission 's buildings ; and , more recently still , the cancellation of a recruitment competition due to cheating .
And we have just now received , for the first time , a document dated 8 January which I would invite you to read because it details all the facts of which the Commission stands accused , together with the legal procedures which have been instituted , albeit sometimes late in the day .
And I would invite you to ask some very simple questions : how , for example , can it be that Mr Perry had a privileged relationship with the Commission of the European Union for a period of 28 years , to the point where his name featured in the directory of Commission departments ?
How can it be that he negotiated contracts to a total value of several hundred million ECU with 17 directorates-general ?
The issue here is not the position of this or that Commissioner , not even the position of the President of the Commission ; what is at issue is the credibility of the European Parliament and the confidence of Member State citizens in the European institutions .
This is what we , who have put down the real motion of censure , are seeking to restore : we want to restore our people 's confidence in the institutions of the European Union and , contrary to what I have heard said , that will strengthen rather than weaken the building of Europe .
For this reason I would urge you , ladies and gentlemen , whatever happens in the next few days , to vote for the motion of censure , the only genuine motion of censure , which I and 68 of my fellow Members have put down .
Applause from certain quarters
Mr President , Mr Santer , Members of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I do not plan to use up the full 20 minutes .
I shall speak again presently after the Commission President has addressed the House .
We are undoubtedly - I think no one should have any illusions about it - experiencing a crisis of severe proportions in the European Union between Parliament and the Commission .
The first thing I must say is that the indirect or moral support given by the European Commission to the idea of a motion of censure was a major political blunder .
More specifically , we tried , under the direction of the chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control , Mrs Theato , on the basis of Mr Elles 's report and on the basis of Mr Bösch 's report , to get a dialogue going between the European Parliament and the Commission .
We asked for compliance with the rules of this House which say that if a discharge is not granted for a given year , the debate must be continued between the Commission and the Committee on Budgetary Control .
This , Mr Santer , is the first point made in our oral question : we want you to explain this to us .
We think you engaged in a political manoeuvre which has benefited neither the Commission nor Parliament and has now brought us to the brink of a deep political crisis .
I think in all honesty that this has to be said .
The whole matter has been heavily politicised and I think that was very wrong .
I said here on 17 December , on behalf of our group , that we retained our faith in the Commission President that he would carry out the reforms which were manifestly an absolute necessity , and in that way restore real confidence between Parliament and the Commission .
I also said at the time - and Mrs Green accused me of hypocrisy , but it was not hypocrisy , anything but - that we wanted to base ourselves on paragraphs 26 and 27 of the motion for a resolution in Mr Elles 's report .
As I say , we are now on the brink of a political crisis .
We risk a major political crisis .
So this is , in the true sense of the word , a debate on Parliament 's confidence in the Commission .
I agree with those who say - and I shall say it in my conclusion - that confidence between Parliament and the Commission is vitally important to the European Union .
Our two institutions act as a motor , a driving force , in the process of EU integration .
There is still , Mr Santer , a very large majority of more than two thirds in this House in favour of bringing this job of integration , this European Union , to completion under your inspiring guidance and on the basis of your proposal .
We cannot , you cannot , raise the question of confidence today .
The Treaty does not make provision for that .
We cannot put down a motion of confidence .
The Treaty does not make provision for it .
We have the feeling that the motion of censure is being used , and the term ' disguise ' has been mentioned , as a way of protecting certain Commissioners .
Applause
Well , I have to make the point most clearly that it would be disastrous for the Commission if a majority of Parliament were to vote against the Commission .
The formal rules of Article 144 of the Treaty will not help you .
Nevertheless - and I shall speak as objectively as possible - it is not the Commission 's political activities which are at issue here today .
This Commission can pride itself on having achieved very considerable and important political results .
Take the euro .
What would the outcome have been there but for the inspiring work done by the Commission ?
Take enlargement , the strengthening of the internal market , which now includes new areas such as energy and telecommunications , the European Employment Pact , announced back in January 1996 and now at last confirmed in Vienna by the European Council , and also the work you have done and prepared with a view to enlargement of the European Union , Agenda 2000 and so many other things .
These are not the issue today , but objectivity requires us to say that this European Commission has done important work here .
This Commission is confronted with a harsh legacy of bad management .
It is something it has inherited from the past .
You , Mr Santer , have repeatedly said that one of your priorities was to strengthen or introduce a new budgetary and administrative culture .
You said that you wanted to combat fraud , and you said too that your departments faced difficulties because of this inherited burden of bad management .
So it is not your political actions which are in question here .
What is in question - and the whole confidence issue relates to this - is management .
This may be unfair , since a good deal of it stems from the past , but you and every member of your College of Commissioners bear the political responsibility for reaching a solution .
You must show commitment if you are to win back the confidence of Parliament .
In the last few weeks , you have already spoken about the Commission of tomorrow .
You will shortly be telling us that you want to make this Commission of tomorrow a reality and see it forged in cooperation with Parliament , with the combating of fraud , transparency and the bringing of legal proceedings where necessary being a matter of course in order to bring about this process of rationalisation and reform .
We believe it is vital to have codes of conduct : codes of conduct for Commissioners , codes of conduct for relations between Commissioners , their private offices and departments , codes of conduct for officials ; we want close cooperation with Parliament in considering and debating the reform of the Staff Regulations ; we want transparency and good faith in the appointing of officials , more specifically those of grades A1 and A2 ; we want clear rules and restrictions on outside appointments ; we want clear rules for management of the budget , more specifically concerning technical assistance offices ; we want reform of the Financial Regulation - here too , we want clear rules for outside personnel .
But above all , fighting fraud is an absolute must .
We are talking now in this House about zero tolerance .
Zero tolerance must be applied .
We want an undertaking from you that you will in the very near future hold an open discussion with Parliament on an independent OLAF and your promise to stand by this vis-à-vis the other institutions .
We want you finally to take the initiative towards reaching an interinstitutional agreement jointly with ourselves .
Mr Santer , Members of the Commission , you face a twofold challenge .
As the saying goes ' desperate situations call for desperate remedies ' .
The softly-softly approach to these problems is no longer an option .
Secondly , and possibly the biggest problem , is that you have very little time left - very little time , and we insist that you set a clear timetable for all the proposals you announce .
I shall bring my comments to an end with the following . Watching all these events unfold , those of us who have pursued the goal of European integration with conviction and dedication , who have been allies in that endeavour - and we have been together so often , with various of your predecessors too - feel let down .
I feel let down , to find ourselves facing all this at the end of this parliamentary term , after we have introduced the euro , after the historic challenge of enlargement and the discussions we have had about our own remuneration .
The deadline allowed to you is very short , Mr Santer , and your pledges have to be very clear .
For me , it is not personal , electoral or party interests that count .
They do not count .
What matters to me is the future of the European Union , and I frequently feel let down .
The future of the European Union is something in which the European Commission must play an essential role , a European Commission which stands united and has the courage to take the measures we now expect of you .
Applause
Mr President , this debate is important , is necessary , and is inevitably for many here a painful debate .
It is about public accountability and how and where to draw the line .
It occurs at a critical stage in EU affairs .
For my group I want to say that we all share a consciousness about achieving the strategic agenda : the standing of the euro , the exploitation of the new powers foreseen in the Amsterdam Treaty , Agenda 2000 and enlargement , to name but a few .
In this regard , as institutions with a European vocation , the Commission and Parliament are natural allies .
But in addition to its legislative and strategic agenda the Commission is also responsible for the day-to-day management of EU affairs .
It is the job of this Parliament to ensure that these affairs are subject to democratic control and public accountability .
This House is the bar of public accountability before which the Commission is held accountable for its conduct in office .
In this domain it is natural to expect a certain degree of creative tension between the Commission , as executive , and Parliament .
This is healthy in any democracy .
We are holding this debate now because twice in the past 12 months the Commission has failed to win discharge for the 1996 budget , and because in advance of our vote on 17 December 1998 the Commission insisted that in the event of a negative outcome Parliament must clarify the situation by proceeding to a vote on a censure motion .
Many colleagues , across all political groups , while respecting the right of the Commission to adopt whatever political strategy it saw fit , deplored something they saw as tantamount to an interference in advance with parliamentary procedure and sovereignty .
Applause
While none can ever be certain , it is my strong personal conviction that the Commission turned a possible triumph into a certain defeat by that ill-timed intervention .
It is the European Commission which drew this debate upon itself .
In the opinion of the ELDR Group , a confidence debate opens a wider field of political vision and perspective .
This is not simply a reheating or recycling of the 1996 budget debate .
Procedures through the Committee on Budgetary Control provide the prospect of dealing with this affair in due course and by due process .
In this debate we have crossed a line from the politics of accounting to the politics of accountability .
The Treaty confers on Parliament the right to censure only the entire college of Commissioners .
This is a crude and indiscriminate instrument .
In popular terms it is often correctly described as the nuclear option , where on hitting the censure button the entire Commission is meant to disappear .
Like nuclear weapons themselves , it is so drastic a measure that it commends caution in its deployment .
My group believes that the European Commission is a political body .
Some argue that the Commission is merely a body of appointed bureaucrats .
There are certain key characteristics which distinguish bureaucratic from political systems .
The public perception of bureaucracy is one of red tape and endless buck-passing .
Passing the buck , shifting problems from one source to another , and not accepting ultimate personal responsibility , are among the negative features often associated in the public mind with bureaucrats .
In politics the buck must stop somewhere .
That is what the politics of democratic control and public accountability are all about .
The Treaty confers on the Commission the status of college .
The collegiality of the Commission is founded on the concept of collective responsibility .
In every Member State cabinet government operates on the basis of collective responsibility .
From time to time national cabinets and their credibility are threatened by individual ministerial or policy failure for one reason or another .
In all our democratic systems the undertaking of personal responsibility by ministers for various shortcomings or conflicts of interest , and occasionally their resignation , is seen as a strength , not as a weakness , of the system .
Applause
This recognises that , sometimes , making everyone responsible effectively means that no-one is responsible .
Why should that be the case for the European Commission ?
Some will answer : ' But that is the law ' .
Yet Article 159 of the Treaty anticipates the possibility of Commissioners resigning without reference to specific circumstance .
Article 160 provides for a tougher remedy in respect of individual Commissioners .
While I accept that the Treaty makes no reference to the right of Parliament to censure individual Commissioners , it is silent on the right of Parliament to demand an individual , clear political preference in respect of the conduct of Commissioners ' affairs .
Last month the Commission empowered itself to demand of this House a vote of confidence through the censure route .
The Commission has no legal right , as has been said , to do that .
But politically it made the choice .
This month we can borrow from the Commission 's precedent .
Let Parliament empower itself to call on individual Commissioners to consider their positions even if no formal legal base exists .
For some years now Parliament has demanded the right of individual censure .
This aspiration has not yet been accommodated in law .
It has been expressed today by us only in an abstract form .
Today 's debate , in a concrete way , challenges each individual MEP to consider whether politically the circumstances exist to warrant a clear political statement demanding individual responsibility .
My group was appalled , politically speaking , at the blandness of the terms of the Socialist pseudo-censure motion of December .
It offered political carte blanche to the entire Commission and in the light of the information available to us , it would have been incomprehensible for us to support it simpliciter .
Equally , to sack the entire Commission would appear disproportionate .
Consequently our strategy was to add to the censure debate an oral question .
In our motion for a resolution we have called on two named Commissioners to consider their positions .
I want it to be understood in the clearest terms that we are not acting in place of a court of law , nor as a public prosecutor ; we are making no presumption about guilt or innocence since these belong to the judicial domain .
We are charging no-one with personal fraud or rank corruption .
We are simply calling a political judgment that the rot in terms of mismanagement , irregularity , fraud and petty corruption will never stop if every Commissioner can constantly rely on the legal shield of collegiality and avoid personal responsibility .
Loud applause
This is the political issue at stake .
This is the choice that the House must make .
We must cross the bridge ; we must move from aspiration and the abstract in a concrete form to demand that individuals be accountable for the mismanagement in their own areas of responsibility .
Loud applause
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the motion of censure tabled by Mrs Green and 70 or so Socialist Members , whose number has now dwindled to 65 , which in reality is meant to be a motion of confidence in the Commission , represents a real abuse of procedure .
Whilst Parliament 's Rules of Procedure appear to have been respected formally , since the text put down bears the words ' motion of censure ' , the content of the bottle is not as stated on the label , the goods being sold are misrepresented , and this should , in my view , have made this text inadmissible on the grounds of the fundamental contradiction as regards the operative legal part and its explanatory statement .
This prompted some of our fellow Members , at the instigation of Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , to put down a real motion of censure .
The political objectives behind the Socialist text , to my mind , are still more reprehensible .
The aim is purely and simply to neutralise the political impact of the vote we took in December by a very large majority - 270 for and 225 against - to deny the Commission a discharge in respect of the management of budget appropriations in 1996 .
The Socialists are bad losers .
What is more , they appear to have been orchestrated by the Commission which , prior to the December vote , had challenged the European Parliament to table a motion of censure .
This House would make itself a public laughing-stock if , after so unambiguously refusing to give the Commission a discharge for its management in December , it then gave it a vote of confidence without further ado in January .
All that is hypocrisy on a massive scale , and our group will have no part of it .
Applause from certain quarters
For this reason we , like the Liberal Group and the PPE Group , want the Commission to give an account of what it intends to do as a consequence of our December vote , and we want it to shoulder its responsibilities in full , something it has not done convincingly so far .
Only from the answers it gives can we decide whether or not we should censure it ; that is the purpose of our oral question .
The multiple shortcomings in the Commission 's financial management which have come to light are so serious that they demand a firm and swift response from the Commission .
Its credibility is at stake .
These shortcomings are nothing new , it is true .
Their roots predate the time when the present Commission took office , but that fact does not exonerate the Commission as a whole from its own responsibilities , nor does it exonerate any one Commissioner individually , whether he held office before 1994 or since then .
But I prefer not to name names until the facts have established incontrovertibly who was responsible for what .
The main accusation currently levelled at the Commission is the veil of secrecy behind which it retreats in the face of the revelations made in various leaks originating from within its own departments .
By adopting ostrich tactics , by improperly pleading the excuse of confidentiality to the official audit and supervisory bodies , it has fostered the gravest suspicions .
If the Commission had voluntarily , and right from the outset , opted for full transparency vis-à-vis the outside audit and supervisory bodies , the Court of Auditors and the European Parliament , it would not be in the pitiful position it finds itself in today .
It would find it easier to refute , with proper supporting evidence , certain allegations which are unfounded or are motivated purely by partisan political considerations of the kind that pop up here and there in the press , rather than merely dismissing them indignantly , as it does at present .
But if , as a result of ongoing judicial or internal inquiries , serious clusters of presumptions suggest that present or past Commissioners or officials have failed in their duties , the Commission must have the courage to take the full consequences .
If members of the College of Commissioners are involved , it must ask them to resign , on pain of being compulsorily retired under the terms of Article 160 of the Treaty .
In the case of an official , of any grade , it must impose the requisite penalties and not simply punish a few scapegoats in lieu of more senior officials .
Applause from certain quarters
Only if it changes its behaviour in this radical way can the Commission recreate a climate of trust between itself and the European Parliament and all the Union 's institutions .
It must stop projecting the image of a closed shop of nepotism and favouritism .
It must also conduct a meticulous inquiry into the conditions surrounding its conclusion of service contracts , including those in the information technology sector .
Only by lopping off its diseased branches , by cleaning up its act , can it regain the moral authority it needs to tackle the major challenges which the European Union faces today .
By doing this it will restore confidence in the very big majority - I am tempted to say the overwhelming majority - of the members and officials of the Commission whose moral integrity is not in doubt .
Mr Santer , it is your duty to spearhead this change in behaviour .
As for the UPE Group , we shall decide , not only on the basis of what you say but of what you do in the next few weeks , whether or not a return to confidence is justified , but there is no question of our giving you on Thursday a ' blanket ' vote of confidence of the kind our Socialist Members would like .
Applause from the UPE Group
Mr President , Mr Santer , in the last part-session in December the European Parliament considered that the conditions for granting discharge to the Commission for the 1996 budget had not been met . It therefore voted to refuse discharge by a significant majority .
We believe that this was a decision of great significance and indisputable political importance , particularly as it was based on extremely serious accusations involving a combination of a lack of transparency and information , various irregularities , abuses of power and nepotism , as well as several cases of fraud involving enormous sums of money .
Now that we must again vote on this issue , we should firstly repeat what we said then : last December 's decision is valid in itself .
Therefore , regardless of the results of the motions of censure now being discussed , Parliament must continue and extend the questioning which prompted its decision , as the Commission must now , for several reasons , give an adequate , reasoned and appropriate response to the accusations directed against it .
We are emphasising these seemingly obvious aspects simply because the reasons and objectives that led the Socialist Group to table the motion of censure behind this debate seem to us to have dubious grounds and credibility .
I will not spend long on these procedural questions as I consider the substantive questions to be of greater interest .
However , because these questions have an important political aspect , despite their procedural nature , I must point out that the reasons and terms of this motion of censure have an unmistakeable underlying intention of responding positively and quickly to the inadequate statement by the Commission which preceded the discharge vote . In fact , it seems as if the European Parliament is answerable to the Commission , rather than the other way round as stipulated by the Treaties .
Similarly , these reasons and terms also have a clear underlying intention of finally and fully settling the issues that led to the refusal of discharge . They also perhaps have a hidden intention of preventing the tabling of a proper motion of censure in due course , once the full inquiry into the Commission 's responsibilities has been completed .
Clearly , we do not agree with the Socialist Group 's reasons as they may mean , and in fact do mean , joint responsibility for this whole problem .
Besides , it must be pointed out in this respect that this initiative by the Socialist Group has had the effect of raising public awareness in all our countries about something that was previously restricted to the institutions and to a few people in a few countries . This is something that was certainly not expected of them and that is definitely not welcome .
But it has obviously given increased relevance to this debate and particularly to the substantive questions .
However , the need for stability has been mentioned , particularly given the major decisions to be made shortly . This is a reason , according to some , for giving the Commission a vote of confidence .
We totally and immediately refute this argument because , if the current climate of suspicion continues together with a weakened and discredited Commission , any danger lies in the negative aspects of the current debate being transmitted to and infecting the other debate .
Besides , in our opinion there are no good or bad moments for rigorously and extensively tackling questions as serious as these on fraud .
In addition to which , and as we stated in the discharge motion , this is not a process that can be analysed based on immediate interests , the proximity of elections or the stage of the Commission 's mandate , but rather on the basis of what is fundamentally at issue .
Having reached this point and faced as we are with what purports to be a vote of confidence in the Commission , we feel that the gravity of the accusations threatening the latter makes these unavoidable .
These accusations originate from Parliament itself , in a series of reports adopted by large majorities in many cases , as well as from the Court of Auditors and even senior Commission officials .
They relate to various irregularities , particularly in the Tourism , ECHO , PHARE , TACIS , MED and Leonardo programmes , and are connected with vote-catching - and particularly with the so-called ' whistle-blowers ' - and cases of fraud involving extremely large amounts . These are accusations in which at least one inadequate collaboration with the legal authorities of certain countries is highlighted and in which undeniable problems and omissions in the transmission of information to the European Parliament are apparent .
To these can also now be added the unfortunate proceedings against a Commission official , as mentioned previously .
How is it possible , under these terms and in such a biased manner , to give a vote of confidence to the Commission ?
This will obviously not be given by a large majority of my group , just as with the vote in December .
We would state very clearly that , in our opinion , the Commission , regardless of its individual responsibilities , has a collective political responsibility for these problems which it must now accept .
We are therefore hoping , Mr Santer , for total clarity , a lack of equivocation and , in particular , a wide-ranging sense of responsibility .
We particularly hope that this affair will result in greater efficiency in the future in the implementation of policies . We want to see this take place basically through extensive analysis and substantial alteration in terms of the causes of such a wide range of offences , which are usually associated with a policy of service privatisation , but which are fundamentally linked to the imbalance between the extensive powers granted to the Commission and the limited democratic control of these powers .
Applause
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today sees a hard-nosed confrontation between Parliament and the Commission over our refusal to grant a discharge .
The Commission itself brought things to a head and secured the support of Parliament 's largest group in equating the refusal of the discharge with a motion of censure .
But it is the Commission which is primarily responsible for this blunder .
Meanwhile , many other items have been added to the list of things which are weakening the Commission 's position further .
This is not the only confrontation we have had .
There have been others during this parliamentary term .
The reason is that Parliament has been given greater powers and knows that it is prepared to use them .
We are the ones who have to be accountable to the peoples of Europe if taxpayers ' money is not spent wisely and honestly .
What makes us keen to confront the Commission is our belief that we need a strong Commission if we are truly to shape Europe , to develop the Union .
But the problem at the moment is not whether we need a Commission to take the Union forward , but whether a discredited and weak Commission is still capable of helping that European Union to survive .
That is the problem .
The way in which the Commission has proceeded against its official Mr Van Buitenen is quite simply disgusting .
His only crime is to have gone to Parliament after months of waiting in vain for his superiors to act .
This man has been suspended with immediate effect , and it is not the fact that this case came to light , but the fact that this suspension came to light which called forth a storm of protest .
Here too the Commission bears a heavy responsibility , not only for financial mismanagement but also for a number of specific dossiers .
For example the BSE crisis , for example the way in which the Commission approves the sale of genetically modified foods against the wishes of a majority of the population of Europe , the way in which economic issues are negotiated : for all these reasons , my group says yes to the censure motion .
But however that censure motion goes , the Greens want in any event to back a resolution which is as tough as it can be , because this Union must operate with a Commission which is able to keep things in order and take up the challenges which face it , and the ability of the Commission to do that with its current membership is very much open to question .
Applause from the Green Group
Mr President , it is not easy to be fair in a pernicious climate where anything goes .
Being fair , in our group 's view , means first asking the Commission to provide all the explanations we need to understand what has happened and to admit its mistakes , notably its errors of management .
We also need to know exactly whether there has been fraud or malpractice and , if so , who the perpetrators were .
And then we need to see firm undertakings from the Commission that it will reform its management and working methods .
This need for transparency and clarity is a democratic sine qua non .
It is not just Parliament 's right , but also its duty , to know the truth and to take the political action which its powers entitle it to take , namely the passing of a motion of censure .
But in all fairness , we must not launch off into wild accusations .
Yes , we must combat bad management and fraud .
But we can only do that by respecting the rule of law .
And what we are seeing today is a brawl which shows scant regard for anybody .
Unproven accusations are being fired off on the basis of rumour and hearsay .
That is already a serious matter when the responsibility of the Commission as a body is under attack , but it is more serious still when individuals are being named and accused left , right and centre .
If you accuse someone , you have to have proof .
You have to follow legal procedure too , allow people the right to defend themselves , and so on .
Thus there is no way we can approve a motion for a resolution of the kind which is doing the rounds in this House and which targets two Commissioners in particular , unless the judicial rules I mentioned have been respected .
Applause
We must not fall between the Scylla of immunity from punishment , which would be intolerable , and the Charybdis of unproven condemnation , which would be even more intolerable if the attackers are targeting individuals , rather than daring to attack the Commission as a whole .
The current climate within the European institutions is unhealthy and is damaging to the further building of Europe .
Exploiting these matters for political ends does nothing to improve the situation .
I hope , Mr Santer , that in your reply you will give Parliament the assurances it has been wanting to see for too long , so that the calm which we need and which you need can be restored .
Our group , or at least the majority of our group , will decide how to vote in a desire to do what can be done to preserve the credibility of the European institutions .
But that credibility is sorely undermined at present .
We have always wanted and always wished for a strong Commission .
As far as that goes , we have precisely the opposite .
Applause
Mr President , in February 1997 when the European Parliament was launching its inquiry into mad cow disease , our colleague Jean-Claude Martinez criticised the Commission for its ' deafening silence ' .
He criticised the gross errors , the lies , the maladministration and this silence , the purpose of which was not to imperil the 1993 single market and the single currency envisaged in the Maastricht Treaty .
If the French electorate had known the truth about BSE on 20 September 1992 , what chance would there have been of securing the few thousand ' yes ' votes needed for victory ?
The ideology behind building a federal Europe justified political passivity , according to Mr Martinez .
Mr MacSharry , the European Agriculture Commissioner , justified himself by saying that he wanted to protect the beef and veal market in the face of this terrible disease .
Trade before health , was the European Commission 's watchword .
Looking at the Elles report , it would seem that this harsh lesson has taught the Commission nothing .
Fraud and misappropriation of funds are now widespread throughout the Commission : the Directorate-General for Tourism , the MED programme , the ECHO programme , the security services , Edith Cresson 's private office .
Through ECHO , the EEC 's humanitarian office , for example , the European Union provides a quarter of world humanitarian aid .
Part of the aid to former Yugoslavia and the Great Lakes region of Africa has been misappropriated , to a total thought to be between ECU 500 000 and 1 500 000 .
As for the MED programme of aid to the Mediterranean countries , here too there have been grave irregularities , mainly involving the company ARTM , which did not take part in tendering procedures but was awarded most of the contracts for the MED programme .
And there are many more such examples .
In his defence , Mr Santer may claim that the frauds did not start with him but under his Socialist predecessor , Jacques Delors , for whom stewardship was of no importance .
It is true that embezzlement and misappropriation of public funds are a Socialist speciality , from the time of Mitterrand and Dumas to the present day , when the two Commissioners implicated in the recent affairs are both Socialists , Mrs Cresson and Mr Marín .
It goes some way towards explaining why Mrs Green , on behalf of the Socialist Group , should be protecting this Commission , which is guilty of serious dereliction of duty and ought to resign en bloc .
There is a danger of a rebound effect , that the European Parliament might be subjected to close scrutiny next , and then who knows ...
In point of fact , the European Commission , in its ' corporate ' reflex action to cover up gross misdemeanours of a criminal nature and manifest irregularities , its failure to launch internal disciplinary procedures or its late launching of them and its obstruction of the course of justice , can claim no extenuating circumstances whatsoever .
It is unacceptable and unjustifiable that an institution of this kind , which is irresponsible in the true sense of the word , should be demanding new powers as envisaged in the Maastricht and Amsterdam Treaties and , at the same time , should be wasting European taxpayers ' money without punishing the black sheep .
What it does do is suspend a Dutch Eurocrat for the crime of blowing the whistle on its Mafia-style practices .
It is the well-known technique of finding a scapegoat .
Messrs Chirac , Seguin , Pasqua , Madelin , Bayrou , Jospin , Cohn-Bendit , Hue , all of you upholders of a federalist Europe and the shameful Treaties of Amsterdam and Maastricht , you are responsible both for the exorbitant powers of the European Commission , a truly totalitarian bureaucracy , and for the culpable weakness you show towards this institution which has so sadly lost its way .
I mentioned the Socialists just now .
But the Christian Democrats are even more hypocritical .
They will not grant the discharge , but then they say that this rejection does not mean a referral back to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
It is the conditional censure on mad cow disease all over again , a kind of cardboard sword of Damocles , which only fools those who want to be fooled .
Ladies and gentlemen , voting to withhold the discharge from the European Commission and voting to censure it are two acts which are legally separate but which politically go together .
One cannot punish an authority and then fail to draw the political consequences without discrediting the institution to which one belongs .
The French National Front , with Jean-Marie Le Pen for whom I speak today , will vote to censure the European Commission and denounce this institution which is dedicated to building a supranationalist and federalist Europe and which , believing itself to be above the law , thinks that it can flout it with impunity .
With the European elections just a few months away , the Europe of nations and peoples which we represent rejects this wicked Europe , this Europe of privilege , of chicanery and abuse , whose absolutist rulers and lackeys will be punished next June by the peoples of Europe who care deeply about their national sovereignty and their identity .
I am also surprised , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , that my name is not amongst the signatories of your motion , since I did sign it and gave you my signature last week .
I am surprised too that your motion was not sent to some of our fellow Members .
Is this a desire to sideline some Members , including those from the National Front , for fear of playing into the hands of our opponents here ?
I prefer to assume it is an oversight , a piece of carelessness which is unlike you , however , and I hope that you will remedy this oversight with Parliament 's administrative services .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , last December the European Parliament held an in-depth debate on the discharge for implementation of the 1996 budget .
Today we are embarking on another debate .
On the table there are censure motions and a number of oral questions .
The real issue is that of confidence between our two institutions .
That confidence has been shaken of late , and I am prepared to accept my share of responsibility here .
Manifestly , clarification has become necessary .
I say that because I have a deep respect for the constitutional role of the European Parliament .
For more than four years now , I have seen how vital it is to the European Union that a relationship of trust should exist between our two institutions .
The successes we have achieved recently would not have been possible without close cooperation between the European Parliament and the Commission .
I am sure that the Members of this House will judge the Commission on its overall activities and its actual record as a college .
I shall try to show that the confidence of the European Parliament is well founded , and essential to the completion of the Union 's ambitious programme in the months to come .
Mr President , I have always said that I wanted to be judged on what I have done , on my track record .
I invite you to re-read my inaugural address to you in January 1995 and judge for yourselves whether I have kept my word .
Four years ago , I said that if we wanted a strong economy we would have to have a strong currency , and I added that I was optimistic , that economic and monetary union would come and it would change our peoples ' lives .
Eleven days ago we saw the birth of the euro .
It reflects a Europe which is getting there .
One thing is certain : right from the start , the Commission has played a leading part - prior to 1995 , of course , thanks to my predecessor Jacques Delors , but since 1995 as well .
Where would we be today if we had not presented our Green Paper on progress towards a single currency in May 1995 ?
If , together with my colleagues , I had not pushed forward week after week with the technical preparation , contradicted the detractors , called for budgetary discipline , reassured the many people who still expressed doubts ?
In this battle , I have always had the confidence of Parliament , and it was vital .
In my inaugural address , I stressed that the internal market was crucial to our efforts for growth .
As I announced at the time , we have opened up the energy and telecommunications markets .
We have spectacularly improved the speed at which directives are transposed into national law , imposing where necessary the sanctions provided for in Article 171 of the Treaty .
And as promised , we have pursued a rigorous competition policy .
Four years ago , I named employment as our principal priority .
I am gratified to see that the European Council has now come to share that view .
In January 1996 , I put to you the idea of a European Employment Pact .
You received it enthusiastically .
In Florence , however , the response of the European Council was polite but cool .
There was great scepticism .
It was only as a result of our joint action , plus action by some Member States , that a chapter was finally included in the Treaty .
A new and valuable step was secured at the special summit in Luxembourg with the adoption of the guidelines put forward by the Commission .
In Vienna , the Heads of State and Government took yet another step by endorsing the concept of a pact .
And thanks to the resumption of growth , thanks to the strategy put in place , unemployment is falling and in Europe it has now dropped below the 10 % level .
The battle is far from over , but the Union now has the weapons to win it .
In 1995 , the process of institutional deliberation following Maastricht was still in its infancy .
In June 1997 , the Treaty of Amsterdam was born .
This was a significant new step along the road towards European integration .
Cooperation between our two institutions was exemplary during the negotiations . And that is reflected in the end result which , though it does not meet all our aspirations , is a good one .
A chapter on employment , a significant advance towards an area of freedom , security and justice - these are concrete responses to our citizens ' concerns , with greater powers for the European Parliament and the President of the Commission .
The Union , following the strategy devised by the Commission , has launched the most ambitious accession process in its history .
That process , thanks to the pre-accession strategy which has been put in place , already makes the applicant countries part of our common family .
Who would have thought it just a few years ago ?
Of course much remains to be done , on the applicants ' side , certainly , but on our side too .
Hence the importance of Agenda 2000 , the expression of a global approach encompassing enlargement , policy reform and the financial framework .
This is the biggest package of measures which the Commission has ever put forward .
Mr President , in January 1995 I said that one area of work requiring particular effort was internal management .
I promised to improve the budgetary and administrative culture within the Commission .
I also promised to make the combating of fraud a priority .
Events surrounding the discharge prove that I was right to give such importance to this aspect of things , one which had been neglected too much in the past .
They prove too that the reforms already carried through are far from adequate and that much remains to be done .
Together with my colleagues , I have undertaken ambitious modernisation programmes whose objective is clear : to restore good management , to improve efficiency and supervision , to decentralise the work of our departments , to make our officials accountable .
We have made more reforms in four years than in the 40 years before that .
We have battled against irregularities , we have stepped up our efforts against fraud .
Protests
In 1994 , ladies and gentlemen - bear with me - UCLAF had a staff of 50 compared with 140 now .
In 1994 , UCLAF handled 220 inquiries .
Today the figure is 950 and the results are there to see , in UCLAF 's annual reports .
In improving the work of UCLAF we have uncovered cases in which Commission officials are implicated , and each of these cases causes me pain .
Every time it is Europe which is the great loser .
We have been criticised for our handling of these cases .
I assure you that there is no malign intent on our part , there is no intention to cover up anything at all .
I have been a public servant for 30 years . I have always regarded it as a privilege and one which demands absolute integrity .
I respect taxpayers ' money .
Fraudsters have to be punished , with Parliament 's help .
On that I am more determined than ever .
Let me return to the idea of confidence , Mr President ,
Mixed reactions
you have nothing to lose by listening to me - the Commission needs that confidence in order to work and to succeed .
There is much to be done .
There are important things for us to complete successfully under a true contract of trust between our two institutions.The Union is gearing up for new challenges .
The birth of the euro is a success .
The whole world admires us for having made a reality of something which , a short time ago , seemed a distant dream .
Let us continue along this road together .
I think too that we should reflect together in the months to come on the institutional future of the Union .
We must draw the necessary conclusions from the high degree of integration we have reached and prepare for future enlargement .
I shall be putting our ideas and proposals on this matter to you before the elections to the new European Parliament .
In a few weeks ' time , at the end of March , we have an important date with each other !
I refer to the negotiations on Agenda 2000 .
Agreement will mean a new and decisive step forward for the Union .
This too is a question of confidence .
Nothing would be gained by a re-run of the experience of the early 1980s , when squabbles over the budget paralysed the life of the Union .
That was a serious matter then .
It would be a catastrophe now .
So we have to reach agreement .
Another major dossier awaits us in 1999 , justice and home affairs .
Over the years , this field has come into sharper focus .
Amsterdam was a valuable advance , on paper at least .
Action has to follow .
That is why I suggested to the Heads of State and Government that we hold a special summit on the area of freedom , security and justice , of the kind we held in Luxembourg on employment .
It will take place in Tampere , Finland .
It will need meticulous preparation , and we shall do that .
Mr President , the initiative of the ' Commission of tomorrow ' , which I have launched , is the last great ambition of my term of office .
It may be helpful to remind you of its broad lines .
Thorough reflection is needed on the Commission 's future role within a fast-changing Union .
That is our first line of thought .
The second concerns the future structures of the Commission , its internal organisation .
These have to be adapted to changes in the Union and society , the progress of the new treaty and the defining of the Union 's priorities for action .
Lastly , in the third line , I plan to continue and deepen the reform of our financial and personnel management .
The criticisms voiced by the European Parliament in connection with the debate on the discharge will serve as a further spur to us .
They challenge us , they prompt us to look critically at how we operate and how we manage things .
It is the Commission 's job to put its house in order .
Of course , the European Parliament as the body responsible for exercising political scrutiny has a legitimate interest to uphold .
And I am suggesting that we hold an in-depth dialogue on these matters over the next few months .
Today all the groups have asked oral questions on this matter .
I shall refer to paragraphs 26 and 27 of Mr Elles 's motion for a resolution on the 1996 discharge .
I am responding to this specifically by presenting an eight-point programme .
Firstly , I shall present the next president-designate with a full and reasoned proposal on the structure of portfolios and the organisation of departments .
At the end of 1997 , we began a comprehensive screening of the Commission 's activities and departments .
The results of this , currently nearing completion , will form the basis of my proposal . I shall make it public and will forward it to the European Parliament .
The structures of the Commission do in fact have implications for the other institutions .
I shall implement this new overall concept before the end of my term , in agreement with the new president-designate .
This will be very helpful for the hearings of future members of the Commission which Parliament will hold towards the end of the year .
My second point concerns priorities and the resources available to implement them .
For the last four years the Commission , with the support of the budgetary authority , has operated a policy of zero growth in personnel , apart from the requirements of enlargement .
This approach is part of the Member States ' efforts at stringency .
It has forced us to use our human resources more rationally and to concentrate more on priority tasks .
This effort has its limits unless it is shared by Parliament and the Council , whose demands largely shape the Commission 's programme of work .
I have to say , with the human resources which we have at present , we have reached the limits of what can be achieved .
If we have had management difficulties , it is partly because the Commission has too often taken on jobs for which it did not have enough staff .
From now on , the question of staff resources will have to be systematically reviewed .
Thirdly , I plan to introduce an overall set of rules governing the work of Commissioners and their private offices and departments .
It will comprise three codes of conduct .
Preparation of these is well in hand .
They will form the base for a true culture of European administration .
I will start at the political level with the Commissioners .
This Commission was the first , on 22 November 1995 , to lay down rules of conduct in interpretation of Article 157 of the Treaty .
For example , and I quote , ' members of the Commission may not ... engage in any other occupation , whether gainful or not . ' They may not accept any payment for speeches , lectures and other services of this kind ; they must declare all travel and accommodation expenses paid by the organisers of an event .
The members of this Commission were the first to make a declaration of their financial interests .
These declarations are available to the public .
I shall combine these various measures in an ambitious code of conduct , modelled on best practice , and this code of conduct will be given to the next president-designate .
The second code of conduct concerns relations between Commissioners and their private offices and departments .
It will clearly define the respective roles of all of them ; it will set transparent rules for the membership of private offices and for appointments made from within these .
I can tell you now that I shall be recommending a reduction in the number of staff in private offices , a greater mix of nationalities in them and a limitation of the number of temporary staff .
I shall pass this code to the new president-designate .
As regards officials , I gave instructions some months ago for work to begin on a code of conduct setting out clear rules of behaviour .
This code , which will be completed by the end of February , will have three parts : ethical and professional principles applicable to staff of the Commission ; rights and obligations of officials and penalties for non-compliance ; and rules of conduct in relations with the public .
Fourthly , regarding the ongoing process of reforming the management of personnel , I shall between now and the end of January 1999 be putting forward a timetable for modernising the administration .
Many measures have been taken or are currently under way .
I am planning radical reforms of recruitment , mobility , training , career management , incentives and penalties .
Some measures will require amendment of the Staff Regulations , others will not .
For this we have had , since 9 November last , an excellent report compiled by a think-tank headed by former Secretary-General David Williamson .
This report , which touches too on issues relevant to the other institutions , is the subject of close consultation with these other institutions , and Parliament in particular .
A timetable for reforming the Staff Regulations , with due regard for the social dialogue , will be drawn up by common agreement .
My fifth point deals more specifically with the question of appointments .
Concerning the delicate matter of appointments in grades A1 and A2 , I have always ensured that priority was given to internal promotions .
To clarify matters , however , I shall draw up clear rules of conduct for outside appointments .
In the meantime I shall not authorise any outside appointment made from within private offices .
I also intend , in a general manner , to introduce a probation period for appointments to supervisory posts .
I shall take care to ensure that every applicant for one of these posts possesses professional management experience .
Point six is budgetary management , which is the central theme of the Elles report .
I shall not go back here over the reforms already carried out in the context of SEM 2000 .
I have three additional things to announce : firstly , a formal proposal , before the end of the first half of 1999 , on recasting the Financial Regulation ; secondly , the swift preparation of clear and transparent rules on the use of outside staff ; and thirdly , on the subject of technical assistance offices , the famous TAOs , I welcome Parliament 's decision to clarify the situation concerning administrative appropriations chargeable to part B of the budget .
In the spring , we shall be presenting a general vade-mecum on these offices .
As regards the specific case of the technical assistance office for Leonardo , mentioned in a number of oral questions , a report by our financial controller was sent to the Committee on Budgetary Control before Christmas .
That report reveals a number of problems over the financial management and internal audit of this office , but does not deal with the management of Directorate-General XXII , which in any case refused to sanction some of the spending declared by this TAO .
Whether or not we continue cooperating with the technical assistance office in question will depend on a clear improvement in its management .
My seventh point : the combating of fraud has been one of the most controversial points in our relationship in recent times .
As I said earlier , we have significantly intensified our efforts against fraud .
Ten times in six years , we have referred cases of alleged fraud involving Commission employees to the judicial authorities .
We have increased the staff of UCLAF threefold .
Having said that , I agree with you : we have to practise zero tolerance here .
Good is not enough , we need to be above reproach .
We have to learn all the lessons which the experience of recent months has taught us , also as regards transparency vis-à-vis the European Parliament .
If there is one area where we have to work hand in hand , this is it .
On the subject of our proposal to create an independent interinstitutional office , I know that you are wondering about that .
Let us discuss it .
It is important to reach agreement as soon as possible , and I raised the question just this morning with the President of the European Council , Federal Chancellor Gerhard Schröder .
I welcome the Chancellor 's suggestion of a high-level group comprising representatives of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , to examine the Commission 's proposal and reach an agreement before the end of March .
I should add that I am willing to consider all possible variants , provided that efficiency is guaranteed and the mechanisms adopted eliminate any suspicion of interference in the independence of inquiries .
Still on the subject of anti-fraud measures , I should like to reply briefly to the questions on the suspension of a Commission official .
I will start by stressing that it is the right and even the duty of any official , whoever he may be , to inform his superiors or UCLAF of facts of malpractice or fraud which come to his notice .
The disciplinary proceedings against Mr Van Buitenen were not begun because he reported cases of fraud , but because the official in question disclosed documents which were confidential , on his own initiative and contrary to the terms of the Staff Regulations and administrative provisions .
I should add that some of these documents are the subject of criminal proceedings .
In acting as he did , he set himself up as judge , in place of his superiors , the supervisory authorities and the judicial authorities .
One final remark on this matter : I myself wrote to the President of the European Parliament on 9 December 1998 , confirming that the director of UCLAF and the financial controller were more than willing to provide Parliament with any clarification needed on these affairs .
The dossiers were also passed for immediate checking to our internal control bodies , and I will formally reiterate here that we are happy to answer any questions which the Committee on Budgetary Control might wish to ask .
My eighth and last point concerns the provision of information to Parliament by the Commission .
I am aware of your feeling that there are gaps , that you are not able to exercise your political and budgetary scrutiny to best effect .
Things must be clarified .
I repeat my offer to draw up an interinstitutional agreement on the practicalities of how we can provide information to Parliament .
We might very well include in this the suggestion I have heard made here that programmes of expenditure should be monitored regularly by the appropriate committees of Parliament .
Special attention should also be paid to sensitive dossiers concerning fraud and disciplinary matters .
That , Mr President , is my eight-point programme .
It is ambitious and seeks to accommodate your suggestions and criticisms .
For each of the points raised , I have set myself the timetable which the Elles report calls for , and which you have just called for in your speeches to the House .
I have also noted your demand for a role in monitoring these reforms .
It seems to me a legitimate one and I would make two very concrete proposals forthwith : one , I will come in person , at regular intervals , to give the Conference of Presidents a progress report on the programme ; two , as some of you have suggested , we will set up a committee of wise men to consider the whole issue of managing , monitoring and evaluating Community expenditure .
The independent experts on this select committee should be appointed by common agreement by our respective institutions , including the Council and Court of Auditors .
Lastly , I am altogether in favour of a plenary debate on the reforms , to be held in May .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have sought today to sketch a rapid picture of what we have achieved in the last four years , and to outline the broad objectives which I have set myself for the remainder of my term of office .
It is for you to decide , in all conscience , if you will give us the political confidence we need to complete our work .
The confidence to make Europe triumph , that is what we are asking of you today .
Applause
Mr President , Mr Santer , the second part of your speech puts me in mind of a German classical writer , Friedrich Schiller , who wrote in one of his plays ' you are late , but you have come at last ' !
But in contrast to Schiller 's sentiment , I have to say ' however far you have had to come , there is no excuse for being late ' .
I know it is hard to make anything much of that , but I had to get it off my chest .
Above all , one has to ask the very specific question : why are the things you propose in the second half of your statement not featured in the Commission 's programme for 1999 ?
Applause
Will you at least concede , Mr Santer - and I am putting it very politely - that it might have something to do with the pressure which Parliament has brought to bear in recent months ?
Applause
And I have to wonder if you would have said all this if we had not had this falling-out between Parliament and the Commission ?
But I want to show good will , because we all need a strong Commission .
No one in this House - including those who voted against the discharge in December - wants a weak Commission .
We want and we need a strong Commission !
Applause
Mr Santer , you said at a press conference this morning - in Bonn , presumably - that the Commission had become the victim of its own transparency .
I am sure you see it that way , but can we not think back to a few real scenarios , you too , please , and all your Commissioners ?
We had heated debates on mini-budgets , on BSE , and we have had heated arguments over individual shortcomings in the overall machinery of the Commission - which I think is the least of our problems , however harsh that may sound .
All of this came to light bit by bit in confrontations between the Commission and Parliament and the media .
Now I am not suggesting that the Commission has not investigated many things of its own accord , but it has always taken a lot of debate and pressure from us too to establish transparency vis-à-vis Parliament .
I just do not want you saying again self-righteously : of course Parliament is entitled to censure us , but unless there is a two-thirds majority to do that we do not need to worry about it .
In terms of the Treaty you are of course right , but is it wise to say something like that when feelings are running so high ?
Applause
That is an invitation , Mr Santer , to stop you from getting it wrong again .
I see it as an invitation to those who mean nothing good for Europe and the Commission if we say ' if they are not going to worry about it anyway , we can at least get a relative majority ' .
Did it not occur to you as you weighed the political implications that your doubtless well-intentioned letter of last December might have a counter-productive effect on a good many Members ?
I was pleased to hear you say you will accept your share of the responsibility .
I would like to hear rather more of that .
Might the Commission as a collegiate body not say yes , a lot of things have gone wrong , but Parliament too - and I would agree - has not always scrutinised things as well as it might have ?
Heckling
It must be said once and for all that , yes , we admit our responsibility for the things that have gone wrong .
Applause
And we need clear proposals for change .
You have put forward proposals now , but why did you not do it a little sooner ?
Every crisis brings the chance of a new beginning , that is true .
But the crisis is not always used to make a new beginning .
We have a chance now , but I think we can and must have quite a bit more before Thursday .
Applause
Mr President , Mr Santer , first I must thank you for the good words you have come up with , good words for which we have waited a very long time , perhaps - and here I agree with Mr Görlach - rather too long .
Because the confidence of which you spoke so much and on which we all count , that confidence has been put to a very severe test , and a number of questions remain unanswered .
Many people will find it very difficult to give a vote of confidence at this juncture .
But the Committee on Budgetary Control and certainly my own group have never wanted to resort to destructive means , but to use constructive means of reforming things which have been acknowledged as wrong and have to some degree shaken confidence .
I still believe that together we can achieve this .
Thus a vote of censure is not the right way ; we must rebuild that confidence together .
It is unfortunate that things reached the point where we postponed the discharge , setting you a deadline for giving us an explanation of how things stand in the Commission rather than just serving up half-truths to us .
We could not help but feel that way , and we did .
The problems which still remain must be cleared up , because it is equally unpleasant for us to hear and read every day that something else is not right somewhere else .
We are the supervisory body .
Our duties as Parliament have increased .
We have become more self-confident and rightly so , because we were directly elected by the citizens of this European Union to that end .
We accept that responsibility , but we need a strong Commission , because important challenges face us . You listed them just now .
Mr Santer , you promised us a number of things from the programme which the Committee on Budgetary Control put together and our rapporteur Mr Elles presented , although regrettably it was not voted upon .
To lend emphasis to this programme , I should like to ask you four test questions , which in my view you should be perfectly able to answer .
Can you give us a list of the 27 cases which UCLAF is investigating ?
We know of only five , and only a few details of those .
What is the position regarding the others ?
Can you tell us if we shall be getting a reply from Mrs Cresson to the letter which the Committee on Budgetary Control sent her in November following a very inconclusive joint meeting ?
In any case , there were questions which remained open .
Unfortunately , that letter has not yet been answered .
Applause
Other information has also reached us , albeit very late in the day .
Can you tell me if you are going to withdraw the OLAF proposal , as being incompatible with what we prepared and approved ?
You said we are to work together .
We understand this as an offer , since we do not think your proposal is feasible as it is , because it weakens our powers to combat fraud rather than strengthening them .
And finally , what is the position with the dossiers being forwarded to the justice authorities ?
Can you say if they have now been referred to the courts in line with the decision taken by Parliament on three occasions ?
I regard all this as a set of test questions .
I think it is fair to put them to you , Mr Santer .
Our response will depend on yours .
Applause
Mr President , on a point of order , I follow up a point made by Mrs Lalumière earlier this evening .
She said that one of the problems with this debate was that people were being accused without the opportunity to defend themselves .
Could you rule whether it would be possible , even within the framework of collegiality , for the two Commissioners who have been named in Mr Cox 's resolution , who have been pinpointed as to a great extent to blame for a lot of the problems that we are dealing with , to explain themselves to Parliament tonight ?
Applause
The eyes of the world are on us .
Now surely , if ever , is the time for Mrs Cresson and Mr Marin to say what went wrong , whether they knew about it , and why they did not do anything about it .
Applause
Mrs Jackson , as you must surely be aware , Commissioners may take the floor whenever they feel it is appropriate , and , of course , whenever they themselves request it .
Parliament cannot force them to speak .
I should also like to stress that we are not engaged in criminal proceedings of any sort . Rather , we are considering an issue of political responsibility , and it is up to the Commissioners to decide whether or not it is appropriate for them to speak .
I give the floor to Mr Cox for three minutes .
Mr President , I want to say firstly to the President of the Commission that my group will study the detail of what he has proposed to us here this evening .
I note that with some conviction and with much right on his side , he has recited for us many of the accomplishments of the College which , as President , he has the privilege of leading .
However , I am bound to say in respect of the issues under review to do with fraud , corruption and mismanagement that tonight 's contribution fell short of being a tour de force .
Ironically , Mr President of the Commission , you report - but with no sense of irony - the extra volume of work happening in respect of fraud under UCLAF .
You boast - and this is a positive thing - that we are looking at a matter of 950 cases .
I welcome that we are not leaving things aside as was done before .
But with no trace of embarrassment expressed , this represents an appalling level of suspected systemic fraud , mismanagement and corruption .
You tell us today how much the European Parliament encourages you and offers your Commission incentive to further your reform programme .
Why did you not tell it last March ?
Why did you not tell it between March and December ?
Why did you not tell it before the vote in December ?
Why do you always have to be dragged here as a College , as a President , before the bar of public accountability ?
Applause
In the context of this debate , Mr President of the Commission , as I said earlier my group believes this is a wider debate than merely the questions of the 1996 budget .
You chose the ground .
You insisted on the wider focus .
You insisted , as Commission , that we should proceed to a motion of censure .
I am staggered at the absence of a single , solitary word of reference to the ECHO programme .
You cannot be unaware of its significance to some people here tonight .
In the fight against fraud you proposed a new high-level group to do its work by the end of March .
Again , I ask why do we have to wait for a crisis to provoke action ?
You refer to the fact that gaps exist and you wish to address to them but the greatest gap is that in the willingness of your collegiate body to come before this House constantly in an open , transparent and clear way .
There is one point of detail I would like to finish on .
I should like to quote what you said about the technical assistance office for Leonardo : ' whether or not we continue cooperating with the technical assistance office in question will depend on a clear improvement in its management ' .
I should like to compare that with the audit report on the same TAO .
Given the overall results of this audit : ' The audit team proposes that DG XXII seriously reconsider the continuation of the TAO . ' How can President Santer be so bland !
Applause
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , these last three years the Court of Auditors has withheld its statement of assurance , considering that it could not be given because the Court had been unable to ascertain where part of the funds had finally ended up .
The refusal to grant a discharge was thus inevitable , and this happened three weeks ago .
Mr Santer , you have come here accompanied by all your Commissioners , whom I welcome , to demonstrate , it seems to me , that there is cohesion and solidarity within your team . At our group 's next meeting , we shall be looking carefully at the proposals you have just outlined and which have been distributed to us .
Mr Santer , I fear you did not understand the message this House sent you on 17 December .
The truth is that public opinion is no longer willing to accept what is diplomatically referred to as ' arrangements ' , as the Perilux affair has shown , and that the Commission , like Caesar 's wife , must be above reproach .
From the moment it transpired that senior officials had been guilty of malpractice , you should have immediately put in train a strong and powerful inquiry to quash the rumour before it reached credible proportions .
At the informal meeting between the coordinators of the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Commissioners accused in the press last September , I already said that the Commission had to take prompt and incisive action , and I must add that I find the method of feeding anonymous titbits to the press deplorable .
The presumption of innocence still exists in Europe , and the European Commissioners are entitled to have their professional integrity respected , just like any other citizen of Europe .
After the mission to Sarajevo on 21 February last headed by Tom Spencer , of which Edith Müller and myself were part , we sent you a severe reprimand in the critical report we drew up , and Commissioner van den Broek , who is present here , made some concessions , even though to our mind they are not enough .
A new system was proposed to us , an attempt was made to reduce the degree of concentration and a middle way was found between the status quo and what Parliament wanted .
Why did you not follow his example when the storm clouds began to gather , and at once suggest some concrete and forceful measures ?
Mr President , having listened to you , I have to say that we are disappointed .
Personally , I think that the censure motion is a premature weapon and out of proportion to the charges which may be levelled at you once everything becomes known , and that Mrs Green has done you no service at all in rushing to your defence .
Most of us want the Committee on Budgetary Control to continue its work ; we want Diemut Theato and James Elles to be truly in a position to exercise their authority in liaison with the Commission .
But given that the situation is exceptional , we expected exceptional measures from you and we have not heard them .
Our group will decide on Wednesday if it is satisfied with your explanations .
Madam President , I will be very brief .
Firstly , with regard to the proposals made by Mr Santer , I must say that these seem to virtually represent a new programme , which we regard as being extremely ill-timed and rather unprepared .
Why is this ?
We believe this firstly because , as already mentioned , this set of eight measures presented to us by Mr Santer is not part of his programme and therefore , as we know , it will not be this Commission and possibly not even this President who will present the next programme to this House .
This attitude therefore seems to me to be rather offhand .
Secondly , I would like to record the following . It is true that eight measures , or rather eight areas of intervention , have been presented .
However , if each of these areas or each of the measures proposed for each of these areas were analysed , we would find very little of substance in them - very little .
There are very broad intentions in eight fields but these consist of measures with very little substance to each one .
There is also another aspect that I must stress and that is cause for some disillusion on our part .
We would have hoped that , in addition to the basic measures presented by Mr Santer , concrete and objective answers could have been given to the concrete and objective problems facing us at the moment .
These involve very topical situations that have led to the refusal of discharge and that require a response . So we would like to know whether or not the Commission intends to provide answers to these problems other than those it gave previously , which this House considered insufficient , and based on which we decided to refuse discharge .
This is our question , and we naturally want an answer .
Mr President , I have to say that listening to what Mr Santer has had to say in the midst of this crisis , things seemed almost unreal at times .
Because here we are , in fact , not so much conducting a superficial debate in which understandings have to be reached , agreements reached on how things can be done better - we are actually looking at how the Commission itself analyses the situation in which it finds itself .
Who is in fact responsible for everything that has gone wrong ?
How is this to be clarified ?
I have not had any conclusive answer to that .
Mrs Theato is right in saying that only pressure , very powerful pressure , persuades the Commission to divulge information .
So we must indeed examine the texts closely .
But the fact remains that you never have the feeling that Parliament is really taken seriously as a partner with a share of the responsibility .
Secondly , as regards Mr Van Buitenen , I think it beggars belief to say that he is a whistle-blower by going to Parliament after all the avenues he tried .
I think Parliament expects a sign of goodwill towards someone who wants nothing more than a Commission which functions properly .
Lastly , I think that a committee of wise men , which will not produce its proposals until May , will work for the next Commission but not for this one .
So we are really going away empty-handed .
Mr Santer , you put us in a dilemma .
Having listened to you , I recognise your good intentions and that we share the same objective of restoring confidence , confidence in the Commission .
I see too that your statement - the successes in white and the inadequacies in grey , if not black - contains undertakings and promises too .
We shall study them with great care .
But the record of what has already been achieved in the last four years is not precise , and I can see that the members of my group are hesitant .
We shall in fact be choosing the least of a number of evils .
And I repeat what I said just now , we shall choose what we think is the best or the least bad way of restoring confidence and consolidating the position of your Commission , if it can be done .
It is very tempting to adopt a motion of censure , but that is doubtless not the best course today , given all the circumstances outlined earlier .
But what a pity , Mr Santer , that you waited so long .
We should not be in this position if the Commission had acted quickly , honestly and decisively .
Mr President , on Thursday we have an historic opportunity to take democracy within EU cooperation seriously .
Parliament has constantly struggled to gain more power , while at the same time it has failed in its supervisory function , which is the only function it should attend to .
It has not stinted on empty threats and sabre rattling .
Parliament has ' cried wolf ' so many times that it shares some of the blame for the fact that the Commission believed it could do whatever it liked .
I am not particularly impressed by Mr Santer 's concessions ; we have heard promises to turn over a new leaf every time there have been problems with the budget .
And in what Mr Santer has said there is still no question of accepting responsibility for what has happened in the past .
So , unless there is a much stronger signal from the Commission by Thursday , I still think that we should vote for a motion of censure .
Our electorate must be able to demand that of us .
Mr President , after the discharge was refused , I did not think there was any real prospect of a motion of censure .
Many honourable Members simply wanted to send the Commission a warning .
In the meantime , however , the Commission 's insensitive attitude plus other cases which have come to light have altered the picture , so that this censure vote has become more likely .
It is significant that the Commission President , in anticipation of the outcome of the vote , has deemed a vote of censure without a qualified majority to be a vote of confidence .
Significant too is the attitude of the Socialist Group , which by turning the machinery on its head is seeking to transform the vote of censure into a vote of confidence .
The European Parliament has to exercise its supervisory function conscientiously and be guided only by facts and realities , with no heed for party political considerations .
But in our view the facts are there for all to see .
They speak for themselves - even after today 's statement by the Commission President - and they require action accordingly .
If in this situation we do not give priority to the interests of our citizens , then their trust in the institutions of the Union will dwindle further still , and the European Parliament will lose its credibility and become even more remote from the electorate .
This situation reminds me somewhat of my former profession .
If circumstances allow , a criminal court judge shows conditional leniency .
But he very soon learns that he must be consistent in revoking that leniency if he is to retain his credibility .
The relationship between the European Parliament and the Commission can be compared to this .
Parliament , in a manner of speaking , sent a shot across the Commission 's bows , but the Commission did not take it seriously enough .
Parliament must therefore call its bluff !
The much-used argument that this cannot be done because we need a Commission capable of functioning is just so much nonsense .
In the first place , this problem is covered by Article 144 ( 2 ) of the Treaty , which says that the members of the Commission must continue to deal with current business until such time as their successors are appointed .
Moreover , if that argument were allowed , it would mean carte blanche for the Commission ; it would remove all democratic accountability and would thus upset the institutional balance as well .
For these reasons , we independents will not only support the motion of censure : we shall also inform our citizens - whose money we are talking about , after all - of the way in which those Members to whom the interests of the party and their party cronies are more important than the interests of the electorate cast their votes .
Parliament must not tolerate the growing number of cases of fraud , nepotism , greed and incompetence .
Anyone who is not seriously concerned to clear up each and every one of these irregularities has betrayed the trust put in him .
Mr President , Mr Santer , ladies and gentlemen , our group will of course consider the wide-ranging proposals and pledges you have made and decide on our position tomorrow .
You spoke about matters of substance , and I think that everyone of good faith must agree that these are important proposals .
So we shall determine in our group where we stand on them .
I have a question , however .
You said , Mr Santer , that you accepted your share of the responsibility .
I would like to ask whether other members of the Commission are also prepared to accept a share of the responsibility ?
And if they have reasons and arguments for not doing so , whether they are prepared to stand up here and defend themselves ?
That is the very specific question I am asking .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with you , Mr Santer , that the issue here is confidence , trust between our institutions , but in my view , trust presupposes the clear acceptance of responsibilities .
What is the story here ?
Two Commissioners are accused of serious dereliction of duty and find themselves in the firing line .
So what does the Commission do , what does the Commission President do ?
All of you sitting down there can find nothing better to do than close ranks !
But you forget how easily the mud thrown at a few of you may stick to all of you .
You , ladies and gentlemen of the Commission , are unnecessarily being forced into collective responsibility by one or two of your number who , in one case at least , have now come to symbolise nepotism in the EU .
Applause
Instead of closing ranks , you would have done better to pluck up courage and at last accept your political responsibility in this dispute .
Whilst it is right that the Commission should act as a collegiate body , it is wrong to cover up the misdeeds of individual Commissioners and deny their political responsibility .
That destroys the credibility of you all !
Yours too , Mr Santer !
Do what has to be done .
Persuade Mr Marín to accept the political consequences , whatever they may be .
Mr Marín , there are many ways of saying sorry - I feel guilty , I made a mistake or I accept responsibility .
Come clean about the irregularities in Commissioner Cresson 's area of responsibility .
Things which may be normal in an economy of preference and favouritism cannot go uninvestigated at European level .
Give a sign of good will in Paul Van Buitenen 's case .
His loyalty was to fair play and not to the hierarchy .
You have until Thursday .
Prove that you are willing to accept political responsibility at this eleventh hour !
Applause
Mr President , I speak on my own account and in some disappointment .
In the few months that I have been a Member of this House and of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I have seen how hard Parliament works to investigate when things go wrong .
As a result of that work , I and any other citizen of Europe can see that there are patterns .
These patterns are always the same .
Twilight zones are created in which practices are possible which would not be possible in any one of your countries .
But you always perform a cover-up .
When it comes out , it is because of an article in the press somewhere .
There is only one direct course of action which you take .
That is when you think you know the source of that article and that information .
You punish the person concerned as harshly as you can .
Let us talk about responsibility .
Today we are talking about yours , your collective responsibility as the Commission , because you have jointly accepted responsibility for everything which has gone wrong and for everything that Parliament has criticised and denounced .
I have the feeling , Mr Santer , that your fresh promises today will not satisfy any of our citizens .
We want more Europe .
We want a strong Europe , but it has to be a democratic Europe with a Commission which is democratically informed and accountable and with a Parliament which has the courage to ensure that it is so .
Mr President , I too am deeply disappointed by the Commission President 's reply .
His speech in the Commission 's defence totally ignores the point of our accusations .
We want measures against the Commissioners and senior officials who are primarily responsible for the financial mismanagement which has occurred within the Commission in a number of areas .
The ELDR resolution is quite clear on that .
I certainly do not deny that the European Commission has worked hard and has achieved results .
But we are not concerned with a political assessment here .
We are concerned to know whether the European Commission is prepared to eliminate the stench of corruption .
The suspicion of criminal acts , nepotism and mismanagement cannot be dismissed with references to political achievements .
The European Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control have uncovered enough things now to insist on clean-up measures .
If none are forthcoming , we shall have no option but to support the censure motion .
Mr President , the decision not to grant discharge was taken on very good grounds back in December .
I had expected that the Commission would come up with an ambitious and plausible programme .
It is a pity that it took action as drastic as a motion of censure to persuade the Commission to act .
Nevertheless , its proposals are somewhat lacking in substance - there is no mention of the main targets of our criticism , such as ECHO and nuclear safety .
I really would appreciate a reply regarding what action is to be taken .
Furthermore , I think Mr Santer 's explanation of the sacking of the civil servant is rather weak , namely that the Commission document was classified .
Does this mean that there are actually Commission documents which are public ?
No , everything is classified !
The root of the problem is that there is not enough openness .
I would have liked to see more concrete measures for achieving greater openness and providing Parliament with more information .
This is also a precondition for me to be able to support the Commission in Thursday 's vote of confidence .
I also hope that the Commissioners who have been singled out will give some explanation this evening of their role in what took place .
Mr President , I should like to reply to Mrs Theato , who asked me a question just now .
Some time ago , indeed , I appeared before the Committee on Budgetary Control to answer a series of questions about the Joint Research Centre and the letter to me from the committee arrived some time afterwards .
It contained numerous questions to which my departments prepared replies , and I signed the reply to Mrs Theato 's letter a short while ago .
She will be receiving it very soon .
Another question was put which I should like to answer , concerning the TAO for Leonardo .
What is a TAO ?
It is a technical assistance office , selected on the basis of a call for tenders .
The call for tenders for Leonardo was issued before I took office .
The TAO for Leonardo has worked so well that the Leonardo programme is generally regarded as a success , and the Council of Education Ministers has just substantially increased its budget .
The TAO for Leonardo has on several occasions been the subject of observations and checks by DG XXII on a number of proposals or payment requests from that office .
Those requests were refused by DG XXII , and we have looked at the very long list of comments made by officials of DG XXII .
I attended the Committee on Social Affairs recently , on 5 January .
I clarified a number of things for it and shall be appearing before it again tomorrow .
Heckling
Look , if you are not interested in hearing this , don 't ask me questions !
So I am attending the Committee on Social Affairs again tomorrow to examine in depth the substance of the Van Buitenen report on the TAO for Leonardo .
Hitherto , I should say that I have always had the support of Parliament , of the committees concerned , which are those on education and research , and that thanks to that support and that confidence , we have achieved good results compared with the Council , which is currently extremely reticent when it comes to expenditure .
We have moved things forward which are new in education , as it is only since Maastricht that the Commission has had responsibility for education .
We have set up second-chance schools and skills accreditation schemes .
We have launched the European Voluntary Service , with Parliament 's help , because I would never have got this from the Council without Parliament 's assistance , and I think that in all these instances we can take satisfaction from the cooperation which has existed , for me and for my colleagues too , between the Commission and Parliament .
I hope I have answered some of your questions .
For the rest , I am happy to attend any committee you like .
I attended the Committee on Budgetary Control just the other day .
I am happy to attend wherever you want , whenever you want , so that we can give a very thorough explanation of these dossiers .
On a point of order , Mr President .
Can we all remain seated in future , when you call us to speak ?
On this occasion , due to the lack of space , Mrs Cresson had to speak whilst seated .
As you must of course be aware , this is not our usual practice .
I give the floor to Mr Marín , also at his own request .
Thank you for giving me the floor , Mr President .
I shall make just a brief statement because it is of course up to Mr Santer , who speaks for the Commission , to reply to the various speakers and comment on the points which have been raised .
Nevertheless , I wish to respond to your invitation and I know that your invitation is honestly meant .
How , as the longest-serving Commissioner , could I fail to be aware of what is going on at the Commission ?
I do , of course , accept my share of responsibility , I say that quite openly .
But there is one thing I would like to point out .
Ladies and gentlemen , if I have , in my 14 years of management activity , done some good things , I have doubtless made some mistakes as well .
That is the way in politics , but I cannot accept Mrs Müller 's charge of covering up a case of fraud .
I have not covered up any case of fraud .
I may perhaps have made some wrong decisions , indeed that is quite probable .
As regards the first point - and Mrs Theato and Mr Fabra Vallés know this very well - when I was told that there was a conflict of interests I , Commissioner Marín , suspended all programme planning .
That is what I did . And at the time , you said you were convinced that in not renewing the existing contract and freezing the programme until a detailed examination had been completed , the Commission had taken the right decision .
I have made things absolutely clear about the two technical assistants , Mr Martens ; this is the real problem we have at the Commission .

Mr Santer has said that because of our staff shortages and the need to improvise over the last four years , a large part of our programmes has been implemented by outside consultants .
Does that mean that all outside consultants are crooks ?
No .
There are outside consultants who are very valuable , very sound and very professional , but within this system there are of course people who have cheated us .
I am sorry , Mrs Müller , obviously , but that is how things are .
One difference alone separates us , just one .
This was the question of whether or not we should refer the matter to the judicial authorities .
This is what separated us , Mrs Theato , because what I did at the time was considered by the European Parliament to be exactly the right thing .
I punished the outside consultants , I took them to court .
Tell your fellow Members that , Mrs Theato .
It is a fact .
The problem was deciding whether or not we should take our officials to court .
That is a tricky matter .
Personally , I do not want things to continue like this .
The President has suggested a formula .
Let us discuss it .
Let us study it .
But part of the work has been done .
Part of it still needs to be done .
But of course , Mr Martens , I assure you that I greatly regret the present situation .
I may be wrong , but I do not regard myself as a dishonest man .
You have known me for a long time .
I may have made a lot of mistakes .
I may have done things which in policy terms were wrong .
But be that as it may , as the longest-serving member and in all my work at the Commission I have to my knowledge never , never , condoned fraud of any kind .
Applause
Thank you , Mr Santer .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11 a.m.
The sitting was closed at 8 p.m.
German Presidency and the situation in Kosovo
The next item is the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the programme of the German Presidency and the situation in Kosovo .
I give the floor to the President-in-Office , Mr Fischer , whom I should like to welcome to the House this morning .
Applause
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office , I shall be very brief today because I already had an opportunity to highlight the main points of the German Presidency when I spoke yesterday .
Moreover , I agree entirely with the programme the President-in-Office has just set out for you .
Yesterday morning I was in Bonn with my whole team for the traditional meeting at the beginning of the presidency .
The work was carried out in a most constructive climate .
I was struck by the German Government 's determination to harness all its energy to the service of Europe .
Determination is certainly needed , because the Vienna strategy provides for a very heavy programme for the German Presidency .
In fact , the first six months of this year will represent a pivotal stage in the development of the Union .
At the same time , of course , Germany will also be presiding over the fortunes of the G7-G8 , the Western European Union and Schengen .
This is a very heavy burden , but it is also a unique opportunity to move forward on major issues such as the introduction of the euro , the incorporation of Schengen into the Treaty , and the definition of a genuine defence policy .
Mr President , Agenda 2000 will , of course , be the major challenge of the next six months .
Everything , or almost everything , has already been said on this subject .
Now we must negotiate , negotiate , negotiate !
Agenda 2000 will undoubtedly be decisive for the future of the Union , because without a serious reform of the common agricultural policy , we would be facing unmanageable surpluses again in a few years ' time .
Without a reform of the Structural Funds , the vital efforts made to achieve economic and social cohesion would gradually run out of steam , and without an agreement on the future financial framework , the Union would end up making all the old mistakes with endless quarrels about the budget , and acrimonious disputes that harm the development of the Union .
Of course , failure would seriously endanger the prospects of enlargement , which is undoubtedly the major goal of the beginning of the 21st century .
I am convinced that , together , the presidency , Parliament and the Commission will succeed in taking up the challenge .
The political will to do so exists in every country , as Mr Fischer has just mentioned .
Everyone knows there will have to be compromises .
That was clearly demonstrated in Vienna and was also confirmed by my own bilateral contacts .
The second major theme of the presidency , as I see it , is the whole issue of growth and employment .
The euro is here , of course , and now we must make it thrive .
Internally , that means strengthening economic coordination from all angles , including - and I would stress this - taxation .
Externally , be it in the context of the G7-G8 or that of the international financial organisations , the Union must speak with one voice , one single voice , and make its presence felt .
You know how much importance I have attached to the fight for jobs ever since the start of my mandate .
We have come a long way recently and I am delighted with the Vienna decision to move towards a proper pact , which is what I have been calling for since 1996 .
The Cologne meeting will be important in that respect .
During the German Presidency , the Amsterdam Treaty will come into force .
Its success will depend on very close contacts with the European Parliament to ensure that decisions are taken smoothly , especially on issues where procedures will change with the new Treaty .
Agenda 2000 is one of these .
A major innovation in the Treaty involves the creation of a real area of freedom , security and justice .
I know how important this is to the German Presidency , and it is becoming urgent to coordinate our responses on immigration and asylum , for example .
The fight against organised crime is a priority in all the Member States and we must tackle it together ; that is what our citizens expect .
Under the German Presidency , we must make in-depth preparations for the special summit in Tampere , which will be held under the Finnish Presidency .
And as Mr Fischer has just said , the next institutional reform is already taking shape , with the Amsterdam Treaty only just coming into force . Life is like that in the European Union .
Foreign affairs will occupy a special place during the German Presidency .
I have often said that if there is one area where progress still needs to be made and where Europe must become stronger , then it is certainly in the field of foreign affairs .
The political will to do so has sometimes been lacking in the past .
That is no longer tolerable given the high degree of integration we have achieved , with the launch of the euro and the arrival of a multipolar world .
Obviously I cannot go through the long list of our relations with all the world 's regions now , but I will just mention two or three examples .
Our relations with the United States have assumed unparalleled importance and intensity .
It is not unusual for differences to arise in such a relationship and the banana affair is one example . In fact , that issue has implications going well beyond the delicious fruit itself .
This problem must be resolved by following our rules , which in this case are also those of the World Trade Organisation .
Issues like these must not poison relations that do , after all , have another dimension .
I am thinking , amongst other things , of the area of defence , where we have worked hand-in-hand with our American partners for decades . It is up to Europeans to strengthen those relations in the mutual interest of bringing them closer together .
My second example is that of our relations with Russia , that great country which , despite its present difficulties , will always remain a great country .
Recently , we have moved to a new level in terms of relations between the Union and Russia , and I am sure the German Presidency will continue along that path .
Ladies and gentlemen , I will stop there because I fully agree with the picture Mr Fischer has painted .
Mr President , I think this very brief statement from me is enough to highlight the importance of the German Presidency for the Union .
I would like to strongly emphasise that over the next six months the Commission will be standing by the Presidency to fulfill its role under the Treaties and in time-honoured tradition .
Personally , I am sure that when we assess the outcome in June , the Union will have progressed to another stage , which will be a decisive stage in the unification of our Europe .
Applause
Mr President , the first speaker from my group today was supposed to have been Mr Görlach .
I understand that he has had an accident on the ice outside this building and has been taken to hospital with a head injury , which I hope is minor .
I ask for the indulgence of the House for the rearrangement of my group 's speaking list .
Mr President , although I very much regret the accident that has taken place , I am delighted to be the first to speak on behalf of the Socialist Group , and to extend a warm welcome to the new President-in-Office of the Council of the European Union .
At this juncture , Germany is taking on not just one but five presidencies . It is to preside over the European Council , the Council of the European Union , the Group of Eight , the Schengen Group and the Western European Union .
I wish the German Foreign Secretary health and strength as he discharges these many responsibilities over the next six months .
He can , of course , rely on the backing of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament . We shall offer him every support .
The President-in-Office referred to resources .
As he himself pointed out , Europe is being built in line with the vision of Jean Monnet and Robert Schuman , on the basis of concrete achievements and economic achievements .
In this Community , we certainly do emphasise the importance of economic matters .
Only yesterday , for instance , we spent a whole day discussing issues of this nature .
However , I must confess to feeling somewhat concerned : if we concentrate on analysing the resources , we may run the risk of becoming an accounting community . In other words , accounting may come to take precedence over economic realities .
Having studied the relationship between the resources available and the objectives , I am of the opinion that this Community represents a good investment .
We contribute a little over 1 % of GDP to the Community budget .
This contribution of a little over 1 % of GDP has enabled us , over the last 50 years , to put an end to the wars that had been ravaging Europe .
A single day of war between two European countries would absorb the whole Community budget .
We have also succeeded in turning Europe into an oasis of stability , progress , peace and democracy that is now the envy of the rest of the world .
In discussions on the resources , therefore , it will probably be necessary to study the relationship between the resources and the objectives , whilst not neglecting the importance of good accounting . An investigation should be carried out to establish the extent to which each of the Member States is receiving more from the Community than it apparently should .
It could be the case that , having invested a small amount , a particular Member State is in receipt of benefits out of all proportion to its initial investment .
As I see it , the key issue for the European Union at present is our cohesion . The Union is part of a dangerous and unstable world , yet we have important tasks to carry out .
As the President-in-Office himself pointed out , priority must be given to combating unemployment .
The fact that 10 % of our citizens are not currently in normal paid employment is a matter of concern . It has serious social and economic implications .
In my view , the kind of Europe we are trying to build must be united .
It needs to be both socially and territorially united .
Varying speeds of economic development should not be tolerated within it , nor should it be possible to accept different speeds of social development . I do not believe that the Europe we are trying to build should be a Europe that works for the rich and not for the poor .
It must not become a Europe in which a privileged few enjoy a high standard of living , as is the case in other major modern industrial societies . It must become a Europe which is well balanced socially and in all other respects .
The other speakers from my group will explore some of the issues I have raised in greater depth , but I believe these are the ideas that form socialist expectations of the German Presidency .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the German Presidency began on a historic day , 1 January 1999 , the day when European monetary union became a reality .
At first people derided this project as merely a vision , but thanks to resolute action it has become a reality .
Monetary union is the achievement of many people . But at the beginning of this German Presidency I would like to give thanks on behalf of the PPE Group to a figure who took Germany through three presidencies , in 1983 , 1988 and 1994 .
I want to thank Helmut Kohl , former Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany and freeman of Europe .
Applause
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we wish this German Presidency the same resolve , the same dynamism , the same courage that Helmut Kohl displayed for Germany and in Europe .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we hope that in your words and your actions you will manage not just to maintain but to further strengthen our European partners ' trust in Germany 's European policy .
We regret the fact - and this is not a question of party politics - that the use of the term realism has given the impression that the accession process is to be delayed .
Happily you expressed yourself in such a way today that we can endorse what you said ; nevertheless this impression has been created .
President Kwasniewski of Poland sounded the alarm when he spoke here in Parliament on 18 November of sending out a wrong signal that could discourage the people of Central Europe from pursuing their reform process .
Let us encourage the people of Central Europe !
We call on them to speed up the accession process !
We have a political and moral duty to do our utmost to ensure that the people of Central Europe can join the European Union 's community of values as quickly as possible .
That is also a question of trust .
What German policy accomplished over a period of 16 years , and of course before that too , must not come to nought !
But that also means that we must not engage in any foolhardy debate about a changed North Atlantic Alliance strategy .
That too is a question of the trust the people of Central Europe place in us .
Of course we know it is difficult for our own people to accept the need for rapid accession .
But politics is not about taking one 's cue from daily opinion surveys ; it is about doing the right thing and winning the people of Europe over to it .
Applause
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you said you want to submit proposals for institutional reform .
We welcome that and call on you to give the European Parliament an equal say with the Commission in these deliberations .
You want to adopt Agenda 2000 at the March summit .
We welcome that and wish you success in that endeavour !
You spoke of the German contribution .
Certainly everyone will have to make their contribution so that a fair solution can be reached .
Germany 's net contribution is certainly high .
This needs rectifying .
But we hope that during the internal German discussion the presidency of the Council and its highest representatives will also point out that in 1997 , for instance , Germany had a balance of trade surplus of DEM 81 billion with its other European Union partners .
That too is part of the truth and people must be told it !
Mixed reactions , heckling
High unemployment is a pressing problem for us too .
Here the European partners must learn from each other how to create more jobs .
But we would warn anyone against giving the impression that simply by elevating employment policy to European Union level this problem can be overcome , and then holding Europe responsible if unemployment cannot be dealt with at national level .
Europe must not be turned into a scapegoat !
We will not allow any political alibis in this regard .
Let me make a final remark .
The agreement reached by the Bonn coalition government - which is of European significance - provides that in the next European Commission both posts will be occupied by the government parties .
We want to make it quite clear : we hope that is not the federal government 's last word , but if this German example sets a precedent and if the next European Commission is appointed on a one-sided political basis , then the European People 's Party will not be able to give that Commission its vote of confidence .
We would ask you to take that into account !
Heckling
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we wish you success during your presidency , for your success is Europe 's success .
It is our common success in achieving a strong , democratic European Union which is capable of action , that will make it possible to secure peace and freedom in our old , constantly changing European continent in the 21st century .
Applause
Mr President , Mr Fischer , I fully agree with your basic programme statements and they largely address long-standing concerns of Parliament 's Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party .
Yet I must draw your attention to a discrepancy between what you have said today and the impression your Chancellor - who is after all a person of some importance to the European Union - is giving in all the debates in Germany and Europe , namely that the net contributor debate is the only real debate and that this is the crucial factor on which everything else depends !
I regret that because I believe that Europe is more than the sum of national interests and I felt a little nervous yesterday when on top of that your Chancellor emphasised that he would like to see a very open representation of German interests .
We all represent national interests too .
But I do not think that is a very suitable motto to choose for a presidency !
That is why I believe that we must take a very cautious approach to the net contributor debate .
It is quite clear that this debate is important .
But I would ask you not to put it at the beginning of our reform debates but to take it last .
First we must clarify the situation in regard to our aid systems .
Then we have to establish our financial requirements and then , at the end , we must determine how to achieve a fair burden-sharing .
During that concluding debate , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you will find that the liberals will speak very objectively and with all the necessary fairness .
Regarding the other points you made , I would highlight your statements on the Common Foreign and Security Policy , and especially what you said about human rights and the constitution of the European Union .
I wish you every success there .
But take care that your net contributor debate does not land you in the same boat as those who try to persuade us that the future lies in what would appear to be a Europe of Fatherlands !
Take care that you do not find yourselves landing back there !
Applause
Mr President , the German Government has assumed the presidency of the European Union at a challenging time .
Many key European policies are being re-evaluated in the context of the Agenda 2000 programme which is to be put into place to take account of the impending enlargement of the European Union itself .
The successful launch of the euro in recent days must clearly be an indication to the German Government that stability is the key to the success of European Union policies .
The success of the single European currency was brought about by careful , consistent planning which is now going to bring economic benefits to the 290 million people in the eleven participating countries .
I wish to emphasise that the German Government should approach the issues of the reform of the common agricultural policy and the reform of the Structural Funds as well as the future financing arrangements of the Union in a balanced and even-handed manner .
The partnership approach involving all European governments and all EU institutions in the formulation of key European Union policies must always be preserved .
Firstly , I would like to draw attention to the debate taking place in relation to the future financing of the European Union 's annual budget .
One option which must not be implemented is a possible renationalising of the financing of the common agricultural policy .
This policy is a uniform European-wide programme , and forcing national governments to contribute up to 25 % of the agricultural budget would clearly fragment and distort the workings of the CAP .
The recent BSE crisis , as well as the collapse of the Russian market for EU agricultural produce , has severely affected the workings of many individual agricultural operations , most notably the beef sector , and renationalising part of the CAP would introduce even more uncertainty into an already difficult situation .
Secondly , there cannot be a reform of the EU Structural Fund programmes unless there is a continued commitment to financially supporting the four Cohesion Fund countries .
The European Structural Funds have played a considerable role in helping less-developed and peripheral nations to prepare the completion of the Single Market , and in the introduction of the European single currency .
From an Irish perspective , while we are satisfied that economic progress has been made in recent years , there is need to underpin this progress .
More work needs to be done in order to improve the Irish transport and environmental protection infrastructure and bring them up to European standards .
It is in this way that the Irish economy can make a positive contribution towards generating growth in the euro zone .
Finally , the same situation applies in all of the peripheral countries and regions of the Union and it is vitally important for the success of both the euro and the single market that the good work of recent years should be consolidated through the continued availability of structural cohesion resources until these regions have reached European average levels .
Mr President , you raised many issues that our group is committed to , including democracy , fundamental human rights , peace , and a multipolar world .
But progress with the euro and integration cannot in themselves constitute the means , the only means , of achieving those aims .
At the very least , they call for new guidelines that are different from those adopted up to now , which have led to an obvious social and democratic deficit .
There can be no prosperous and peaceful Europe if unemployment and poverty continue to spread .
By giving priority to employment and growth , the Pörtschach Summit had marked a change in tone that we welcomed .
Unfortunately , this was not reflected in the Vienna documents .
The next summit in Cologne , which the German Presidency must prepare , must not end in further disappointment .
The fight against unemployment is our citizens ' primary concern , a concern sharpened by the predicted slowing down of growth , and it calls for substantial measures .
We say are in favour of the European employment pact , but a formula is not enough on its own .
It is firstly essential to loosen the stranglehold of the stability pact so that internal demand , the foundation of a healthy economy , can be consolidated .
The remit and powers of the European Central Bank must be reviewed because price stability cannot constitute the European Union 's main ideal , and because bankers must not have so much power whereby all that the democratically elected governments have left to do is heal the wounds of society .
Our group submitted 13 proposals to the Vienna Summit , on the basis of proposals from unions and associations , and I hope the German Presidency will take them into account .
Regarding the future financing of the Union , I think it is absolutely necessary to get away from narrow accounting assessments .
Europe can only be built on solidarity and generosity , not on selfishness and meanness .
Instead of planning a reduction in agricultural expenditure , which would be a blow to France and the southern countries , and which our group has opposed , why not look for new sources of financing , for example by taxing capital transactions ?
Finally , I want to raise two foreign policy issues .
The first is the Council 's role in supporting the Middle East peace process , which is running into so many difficulties . And the second is the Council 's commitment , at last , to the success of the peace plan for Western Sahara , where it is now putting pressure on the Moroccan Government to accept the proposals from the United Nations until a fair and free referendum on self-determination can be organised .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I am sure you will believe me when I say that for my group this is a big day which will go down in the History with a capital H of the Green movement and will even have a place in the continuing story of Europe .
Not ' from a jack to a king ' , but from a street protester to a minister is in itself a development which inspires the imagination .
If this same imagination is now brought to the exercising of your present position , we can consider ourselves fortunate indeed : Welcome , Joschka Fischer !
Your presence here today as a representative of the Council is of great symbolic value .
It is the highest point so far in the history of a generation which in 1968 embarked upon producing a radical upheaval in society , in Europe and in the world .
This generated a number of movements , giving rise , among others , to the existence of Europe 's Green parties .
Now here we are in the European institutions , a very different place , of course , exercising our powers to protest , to take decisions and to control .
From your long experience you will naturally know not to expect us to behave as dutiful choristers concerned solely with celebrating the advent of the German Presidency .
There will be water and fire , sun and storm , and they will make for an exciting debate .
Combating unemployment is a central concern of the presidency .
If we succeed in getting European governments to pursue joint and coordinated action , then mass unemployment can be successfully tackled .
After the Luxembourg summit it is absolutely vital to ensure a convincing follow-up , with no postponing by Vienna until Cologne or Helsinki .
We welcome the German initiative in an EU manifesto on basic rights as well as the commitment to an international strategy to combat human rights violations and their causes .
As regards asylum policy and Schengen we are much less enthusiastic , but the model of dual nationality included in the German coalition agreement is innovative and could have a certain impact as a new model in and for Europe .
It is significant that colleagues from the CDU find it necessary to lodge a petition in order to undermine this innovative initiative which grants political rights to fellow citizens .
This certainly plays into the hands of the far right .
Of course we hope that under your presidency steps can be taken towards introducing a European energy tax .
This is desirable in order to eliminate labour taxes which are having such a lethal effect on jobs .
But our greatest concern is for the future of Agenda 2000 .
Naturally the outmoded expenditure structure must be looked at and agricultural policy throughly reformed .
There can be no doubt about that .
It is fair to say that the European Parliament is also finding it difficult to arrive at a coherent solution for these agricultural reforms .
We have seen that this week .
But the main point is : How is the debate on net contributors to be conducted ?
You are quite right when you say that we must review the way the burden is shared .
But it would be nothing short of catastrophic if the Council allowed the debate on net contributors to overshadow the financing plans for enlargement .
Europe cannot have everything at once : stability , no migration problems , and enlargement put on the back burner and costing as little as possible .
But despite these critical comments , we wish you a very successful presidency and you can count on our critical but constructive cooperation .
Applause
Mr President-in-Office , I want to welcome you and your presidency on behalf of my group .
Your presidency , which is the last of our legislature , raises high hopes for many reasons and your excellent and constructive speech strengthens those hopes .
You raise these hopes firstly because Germany is a big country , with the largest population in Europe , and it is also the most powerful country economically .
This does not mean you should burden yourselves with excessive responsibilities , but this is a fact that is obvious to all .
You also inspire hope and curiosity because your government has come to power after the long reign of Chancellor Kohl .
Our group is obviously delighted with this new left-wing majority and we hope that social problems , employment , social justice and citizens ' rights - I am thinking , in particular , of the rules for acquiring German nationality - will receive more attention than before .
But we also know that the previous Chancellor 's record on Europe was quite remarkable and it will not be easy to take up the torch .
We have confidence in you , Mr President-in-Office . We know you have a very strong personal commitment to Europe .
We have just heard you speak .
But everyone knows that policies are judged by deeds and not words , and we are anxious to see , particularly at the coming European Councils , if you will be able to break the deadlock on issues that are pending .
I am thinking in particular of the whole financial and budgetary side of Agenda 2000 .
I am thinking of the future of the great policies of the Union , for instance , the common agricultural policy .
I am also thinking of the reform of the Union 's institutions , which is essential , as you said , if we want to make a success of the coming enlargement . We are all committed to this and it must be achieved , whatever the difficulties that need to be overcome .
Let me return to the financial aspect of Agenda 2000 .
We know what problems this raises in Germany .
German public opinion is increasingly expressing its discontent with a burden it considers excessive .
This even led the German press recently to fuel all the criticism of the Commission about wastefulness , poor management , and even fraud and embezzlement .
Little by little , concoctions are created , muddling up valid criticism with false accusations .
What worries me is that all this might result in Germany disengaging and withdrawing from the spirit of solidarity , from solidarity with the less favoured regions of the Union , solidarity with the developing countries , and solidarity with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
Mr President-in-Office , your remarks just now are reassuring , but I want to stress that Germany needs to maintain the image it has had since the Second World War , the image of an efficient , powerful , rich country and , above all , a country that shows solidarity .
Applause from various quarters
Mr President , Mr Fischer has just outlined the aim of a fully integrated Europe , where the nation states would be reduced to the status of large regions and all essential decisions taken by majority .
We would regard that integrated Europe as a fundamental mistake , because by giving less importance to the nation states , the soul of Europe would be destroyed .
My group will propose a more democratic alternative .
For the time being , the German Presidency 's top priority is to establish a new financial framework for the Union by 25 March , which will set the conditions for enlargement , but also encapsulate our vision of Europe for the years ahead .
As far as revenue is concerned , we think the idea of contributions from the states in proportion to GNP is the only simple , transparent and rational solution .
Above all , it is the only solution that clearly demonstrates the nature of the Union - an association of states receiving annual contributions from its members - and it is also the only one that will allow the states to control expenditure properly .
If we were to accept other forms of contributions that are less well controlled , for example , European taxes , we would be ignoring the possibility of future financial shifts .
As far as expenditure is concerned , we agree with the idea of a global ceiling on expenditure at current levels , which would lead to a reduction in real terms over time .
Today , some European funds are useless , some are wasted and some are embezzled .
To save what is left , we need more rigorous and honest management , and that can never be obtained unless we start by putting a ceiling on expenditure .
In particular , our group has always expressed doubts about the effectiveness of the Structural Funds at their current levels and severe reductions should start there .
Finally , in the coming years , Europe 's finances will be characterised by a major inconsistency .
The single currency will eliminate the automatic market-based adjustments between the national economies and they will eventually have to be replaced by financial redistributions centralised in Brussels .
So an adjustment mechanism that costs little in terms of taxes is going to be replaced by another that will cost a great deal in terms of taxes .
It is time for the governments to be honest and tell their citizens that this decision is going to lead to a snowballing of the Community budget .
Mr President , Mr Santer , Mr President-in-Office , under your presidency everything is now clear : we have a single currency , which Germany wanted , a central bank in Frankfurt , with senior executives straight from the Bundesbank , a foreign policy in the Balkans inspired by Germany , and an opening-up towards the East , which will benefit Germany in terms of geopolitics .
So it was quite natural for law to converge with fact and for Germany to preside over Europe !
Your presidency will therefore deal with employment , the CAP , and of course what interests Germany , namely , the financing of the European Union .
This financing is , in fact , causing a problem .
It is well-known that there are winners in Europe , the cohesion countries , which receive up to EUR 300 , even EUR 600 , per head of population per year .
Then there are the losers : the Netherlands and your country , Germany . And as a Frenchman , I understand exactly how you feel , because we have been losing up to EUR 4 billion a year , the equivalent of investing in a high-speed train link , like the Paris-Bordeaux train , in a single year .
Of course , I know Europe must be based on solidarity .
In fact , Mr Cohn-Bendit even shows solidarity with terrorists , being one himself .
However , the current inequalities are going to get worse and become very obvious .
How do you explain to the 6 million unemployed French people that they must make sacrifices for the Irish whose unemployment rate is proportionately lower ?
How do you explain that to the women and men who are victims of the budgetary rationing pact ? How do you explain to the poor that they must become even poorer in the name of solidarity , especially when this poverty and solidarity are going to increase with the cost of enlargement towards the East ?
I know that a compromise has to be found .
You are going to apply yourselves to that , by renationalising the CAP , by restricting expenditure , etcetera .
Perhaps your presidency could shed more light on this , given that Goethe 's last words were ' more light , more light ' .
Telling the truth would shed more light .
We will not keep the ceiling of 1.27 % of GNP .
And Mr Santer told the truth with great sincerity : you are thinking about a Community corporation tax , a Community income tax , and - in the context of your fiscal folly - why not a green tax ?
That is the truth . Europe has a cost and that cost will mean higher taxes .
Mr President , on the eve of the 21st century , a new German Presidency is trying to address the problems inherited from the past , the concerns felt today and the challenges of the future .
Unfortunately , however , in a world that is changing at the speed of light and in which interdependence is paramount , one factor remains constant .
Europe 's citizens are worried about peace , employment , about their security , and about a European Union which they still feel is somewhat remote .
The success of the euro is not enough to allay those concerns .
Political union must really become our lodestar , but perhaps what we need is a federal political euro if we are ever to get there .
How does the German Presidency 's programme propose to deal with these problems ?
Today , we heard a really fine speech , fine slogans and a lot said about the four key points and about the initiatives to be undertaken .
But how much substance ?
We are not motivated by prejudice , Mr President-in-Office , but we do feel the need to point out that major problems call for major policies and for the wherewithal to put them into effect .
They cannot be solved by words alone .
It seems a good idea in theory to make a pact on employment , but will that be enough to produce any significant reduction in unemployment , particularly among young people and women , which - though unemployment figures have recently fallen slightly - is still a scourge in Europe ?
We have serious doubts about that .
Would that we were proved wrong .
But we should not want the European Union also to become the scapegoat for that massive problem .
The European Union could really get closer to its citizens if , instead of announcing initiatives and manifestos - I am not referring her to its idea for a Charter of Rights which deserves applause - the German Presidency were to establish an honest and sincere dialogue with everyone , without contradictions and without hypocrisy .
But we cannot in the same breath speak about opening up Europe and on the other hand adopt as our prime aim the restriction of already meagre resources , expenditure and contributions .
Is that the great problem about whose solution the German and other governments are agonising ?
But , we are told , Germany provides 60 % of the contributions . We do not question that .
It is just that neither Germany nor the Commission has ever explained to us what the benefits are in exchange for those payments .
They could be calculated in macro-economic terms so that we could all see the complete picture , and then we would be able in good faith to examine the problem of distributing the burden fairly .
Of course , renationalising the Common Agricultural Policy is no solution .
That would not be a reform but a step backwards .
The same applies to enlargement towards the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and Cyprus , which was recently called upon to provide painful proof of its intention to facilitate that course .
How is it possible on the one hand to declare a lively interest in making very rapid progress towards enlargement and on the other hand to restrict the resources that would facilitate it ?
The programme we heard today contains many other contradictions too , and there are elements in it which have created much confusion .
Yet , despite our political disagreements , we are ready to cooperate with the German Presidency to further the common cause of Europe , to prepare the institutional reforms demanded by the times , and to begin to develop a common foreign and defence policy .
As we draw closer to the European elections in June , does the German Presidency not think it ought to accept Parliament 's proposals for a common electoral system ?
We heard nothing about that in Mr Fischer 's speech .
Mr President-in-Office , we sincerely wish you success in your task .
But we must also give due warning : after your initial vagueness , conflicting statements and contradictions , many people in Europe started to miss Chancellor Kohl .
Take care with your policies , so that by the end of your presidency there will not be far more people who miss Helmut Kohl .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I was asked to speak again , although not at this point to respond directly - which , as a member of parliament myself , I am itching to do - to many of the statements I have heard here .
I will do that at the end of the debate .
I was asked as the representative of the presidency to say something about Kosovo , because it is a topical issue .
Let me to start with the current situation .
We are watching developments with very , very great concern .
In fact , the interim political settlement in Kosovo should not only have been found long ago , it should have already been implemented , as had been agreed between Richard Holbrooke and the Belgrade government .
That agreement is of central , overwhelming significance to the future development of Kosovo , for without that interim agreement it will prove extremely difficult to move away from a process of non-peace and eventually achieve a lasting process of peaceful agreement and peace itself .
Regrettably the military confrontation is becoming more acute , with abductions , attacks and killings .
I hope that after yesterday 's serious degeneration of the situation , a solution will be found today , a solution that can be reached only through negotiation .
Working together with our partners , Germany is fully committed to that .
We are taking part both in the civil monitoring of the conflict under the OSCE and in the military unarmed airspace surveillance , which is a component not only of the general monitoring mission but also of the agreement between Mr Holbrooke and the Belgrade government and of the extraction force .
The role of the extraction force is not to conduct the process of conflict monitoring in the framework of the OSCE ; it is a genuine emergency force which will act in the event that the unarmed civilian OSCE personnel face a real emergency .
It is crucial to achieve an agreement that allows for peaceful development .
The purpose of the NATO threat was to avert a humanitarian disaster among the Albanian civilian population in Kosovo .
That proved successful , but now we have to make political headway , which is an infinitely difficult task .
For instance , the Albanian side finds it is difficult to form a joint negotiating delegation , which is one important aspect .
That is infinitely difficult , given also all the strategic differences between all the parties involved .
The Albanian side wants independence , the alliance of western states does not want it , for carefully considered reasons .
Nor does Belgrade want this independence , but the kind of approach it is taking , the serious violations of the human rights and minority rights of the majority in Kosovo , are unacceptable .
There are also conflicting approaches within the western community of states , which further complicates the situation .
And yet , the only alternatives I can see to a strategy of stabilisation - a strategy that must be based on the fulfilment of the agreement Mr Holbrooke reached with Belgrade - are quite terrible .
That is why we shall now take a firmer approach within the Contact Group , after William Hill unfortunately failed in his shuttle diplomacy to bring about the three-year interim political settlement before Christmas , as had in fact been provided in the agreement .
Let me add in parenthesis what the important aspect of this interim political settlement is : we need a civil , legitimate authority in Kosovo .
Without a civil , legitimate authority , that is to say a regional parliament , with an executive and a legislature , a police force , a judiciary , without this substantial , political , democratically legitimated authority in the province of Kosovo , there is simply no chance of establishing a sustainable peace process .
That is why it is so paramount to achieve and implement the political agreement .
I want to take this debate as an opportunity to appeal to all parties concerned , including the Albanians , not to shut themselves off from this process and above all to adhere strictly to the rules of non-violence .
Violence will not resolve the problems in Kosovo but would instead cause terrible harm .
We are now endeavouring to make progress through the Contact Group .
That is anything but easy .
Following the kidnapping of the Serbian soldiers we must prevent a military confrontation and I very much hope we will be able to prevent it by reaching an agreement .
By and large however , and I will conclude on that note , political agreement plays a central , a crucial role .
We must not forget one thing , and I want to say this quite plainly here in the European Parliament : Kosovo is part of Europe .
The problems there are our problems and the political solution of this conflict - which has considerably wider implications than the conflict in Kosovo alone - will do more to decide the development of a European foreign policy , a security and foreign policy identity , than any number of resolutions , of programmatic declarations and speeches .
That is why we as the presidency , but also as a member of the Contact Group , will do all in our power to ensure that this process advances .
But let me emphasise again : it will be anything but easy !
Applause
Mr President , in the past there have been many differences and even quarrels between the Council and Parliament on the subject of Kosovo .
The same will be true in future !
But you know and can rely on the fact that the European Parliament is on your side on the Kosovo question and in seeking ways to resolve the conflict , as it must be resolved !
Applause
To come back to Agenda 2000 .
First of all I am glad that rather than telling us about the book-keeping for the next six months you have put the decisions facing the German Presidency of the Council in the longer-term perspective of the development of the European Union .
Agenda 2000 is an overall concept and you called for the timetable to be met .
My group , as also , I am convinced , the majority in the European Parliament , wants the timetable for adopting Agenda 2000 to be met .
We have prepared for this and are in a position to take the necessary decisions in April-May .
But that also means that the Council must be prepared to discuss them , for a large part of the proposals you put forward at the March summit will also have to be endorsed by the European Parliament .
So it is advisable for the Council to discuss them with the European Parliament beforehand rather than afterwards , since that could lead to confrontations .
My second point is this . We regard the Agenda as a global package and I believe that the Commission 's proposals represent a good compromise that could be amended and perhaps even improved in some areas .
But the global package as such must stand .
That will have to be the basis on which Parliament and the Member States must reach agreement .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , let me say a few words in regard to the discussions in our Member States and to the internal political debate in our own country .
Here I am also addressing those Members who keep calling on Germany to show solidarity .
You cannot call for a reform of agricultural policy while at the same time declaring that in internal political terms everything will remain as it is .
That is simply not on !
Applause
You cannot propose to reform the Structural Funds , to concentrate on combating unemployment and at the same time demand that all those who used to profit from the Structural Funds , i.e. 51 % of the population , should continue to profit !
You cannot say we must keep to the financial framework while at the same time calling for more EU expenditure on eastern enlargement .
You cannot try to rally the Union partners to eastern enlargement and at the same time call not just for fair contributions but for a massive cut in net contributions to the European Union .
Much can be achieved , and much will still have to be achieved in the coming negotiations up to March .
But there is one thing that Brussels cannot do , and that is to suspend the Community 's basic accounting methods .
Not even someone familiar with dealing with fundamentalists could manage that .
We are prepared to adopt the global package in April-May .
And , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that means we are the only parliament that is taking the risk of adopting all the cruel decisions associated with Agenda 2000 before an election .
We would like to be given some credit for showing such courage !
So do give us a little help here .
We need the Agenda 2000 reforms , with a view also to the financial perspectives , if the European Union is to be able to enlarge to the east .
That is not the only reason for the reform , let us be clear about that !
The European Union would need to be reformed in any case ; but we also need this reform so as to make the Union capable of enlargement , which will be the great historical task following the introduction of the euro .
Agenda 2000 is only a part of the reform package .
I am very glad that you also referred to the institutional reforms that will be needed in addition to Agenda 2000 in order to make the Union capable of enlargement and that you sketched out the broad lines of a general concept .
Let me also say a few words on this institutional reform .
It is a mistake to believe that less Europe means a Europe closer to the people .
On the contrary !
A Union that is in a position to do the things the citizens expect of it is closer to the people than all the declarations by conferences of foreign ministers and all the declarations on subsidiarity in our Member States .
The more consolidated the Union is , the more flexible its decisions and its institutions can be .
The stronger the Union institutions are , the more firmly they must be anchored in democracy .
I am saying that also against the backdrop of the debate we will be holding this week .
The more credible the institutions are , the greater their ability also to act at European level .
What does the European idea mean ?
Yes , it is true that over the past 40 years we have built up Europe to prevent a return to the past .
That was right , it was a good thing and it also remains a constant task .
Against the background of a history spanning a thousand years of European wars , 50 years of peace in most of Europe is a very short time and there is no guarantee that it will continue if we do not make fresh efforts every day to seek agreement , to seek common institutions and common decisions in the European Union .
That is a difficult process .
I would like to see not only members of parliament and the European Parliament but also the Member State governments uphold the European policy they decide in Brussels during the working week - not just on Sundays , but on weekdays too .
In our Member States , the same ministers - I am not referring to you personally , Mr Fischer , but this does need to be said in this kind of debate - who adopt a whole range of regulations and directives in Brussels from Monday to Friday , announce the following Saturday or Sunday that once again Brussels has decided some sort of nonsense .
This has to stop !
Applause
You cannot go on like that !
You are leading the people , the citizens of Europe astray .
Do not misunderstand me : this applies to the governments of all the Member States and , incidentally , of every party-political persuasion .
So what do we mean by saying that we know that we must unite Europe not so much against a return to the past but far more to master the tasks of the future ?
It is not just a question of the success of the euro but also of mastering the consequences , the burdens , the risks facing the entire European Union as a result of the fact that we now have a common currency .
That involves a fundamental idea ; specifically it involves a charter of fundamental rights .
I would like to see the European Parliament play a very decisive role in future in formulating these fundamental rights .
That would be a real task for the newly elected Parliament !
Secondly the European idea - it exists , all we have to do is formulate and clarify it - means that Europe represents a balance , one that is constantly under threat and must constantly be renewed , between economic performance , which we need , and social justice , which is the foundation of economic performance and not just a social addendum .
Europe represents a balance that is constantly under threat and needs constant renewal between freedom for the individual , his search for truth and justice and his responsibility towards the whole , towards the community .
That is the meaning of the term European , those are the foundations on which we build and on which we can construct a European Union that is capable of external action , that makes it clear that Europe plays a role in the world , not just for the sake of playing a role but in order to disseminate our principles , our great tradition of human rights and social rights in the world and to help establish them .
It is a Europe that is able to win not just the minds but also the hearts of the people .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , play your part in ensuring that we do so and achieve our aim !
Applause
Mr President-in-Office , it most certainly has fallen to the German Presidency to steer us through a particularly demanding period .
I do earnestly hope that we shall be able to respond appropriately to the issue raised by the motion of censure .
I speak in all sincerity , as it is in no-one 's interest to complicate matters further , and certainly not , I imagine , in the interests of the current presidency .
I should begin by saying that I have no difficulty in agreeing with the priorities Mr Fischer set out this morning , namely , creating more jobs in a Europe which is a major competitor on the world market .
The process of coordinating employment policies that began in Luxembourg must be carried through . A proactive policy for employment creation at European level should be launched , and you yourself referred to a European employment pact .
With regard to strengthening the Union 's external relations , we unreservedly support the call for political union that you made this morning . We also support the accession of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and of Cyprus .
Beyond Europe , I should like to stress the importance of developing cooperation with Mediterranean countries and with Latin America . Important meetings on this issue are scheduled for the next few months .
As regards Agenda 2000 , we share your determination to conclude negotiations during the first half of this year , and trust this will prove possible . Nevertheless , certain guidelines must be borne in mind to ensure success .
First , all Member States must make a financial contribution to enlargement and to the costs involved . Second , the Union must pursue its efforts to provide itself with the necessary resources to develop its common policies .
This means meeting the financial demands agreed in connection with cohesion . Third , a determined effort must be made to put in place a system of contributions that is more in line with the ability of Member States to pay .
Fourth , arbitrary cuts in expenditure cannot be tolerated .
Fifth , it should be borne in mind that there are limits to the negotiations on Agenda 2000 , namely the provisions of the Treaty .
Aim at genuine convergence , Mr Fischer , as it represents a good investment for Europe .
I appreciate the spirit of your well-balanced speech and wish you wise judgement and every success .
Mr President , Europe is in the grip of winter , but nowhere is the cold as unbearable as in the mountains where tens of thousands , possibly even hundreds of thousands , of Kosovans have been forced to flee to escape from the supporters of Slobodan Milosevic .
The refugees who have sought shelter in the mountains have in many cases had their homes burned down and their wells poisoned .
There is also reason to believe that the fighting in Kosovo will intensify with the approach of spring .
Let us not forget the causes of the present situation : 90 % of the inhabitants of Kosovo have had to endure 20 years of Serb domination .
Europe remained silent while the Kosovans protested peacefully .
Now we are asking them to agree to a peace settlement based on continued Serb rule .
The Liberal Group is of the opinion that future peace talks should be unconditional .
We should like to see an agreement reached on a truce with all possible speed , but we would not wish to dictate what a final settlement of the conflict should entail for the future of Kosovo and its people .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , my warm congratulations on your election and on the general lines of your programme , which I agree with to a large extent .
I hope it gets off the ground and progresses well .
The Europe of yesteryear , of nationalism , division and anachronism has no geographical basis , it is not located just in certain countries , it is in the mind and in political acts all over Europe and the European Union , and that is where we must fight it by political means .
The Europe of the future , of integration , as you very rightly said , must be open and must offer prospects for all its citizens and for all Europe 's states and nations .
And when we speak of Kosovo and the Balkans more generally , let me say that this Europe of the future we are talking about offers no prospect , no proposal , no position to the states and nations of that area for the future .
The enlargement policy excludes that part of Europe , even in the long term .
It is precisely that omission which belongs to the Europe of the past , and I ask you to give it further consideration .
Mr President , on a point of order .
Other than yourself there appears to be scarcely a single member of the European People 's Party in the Chamber .
Are the Christian Democrats boycotting this debate ?
Mr Corbett , quite a few members of the European People 's Party have already participated in the debate .
So how can you draw such a conclusion ?
Mr President , the Christian-Democratic Group is currently engaged in discussions , because it has not yet sorted out its views on the behaviour patterns of two socialist Commissioners .
Laughter
Mr President , do I assume from the fact that Mr Brok is here that he approves the behaviour pattern of the two Socialist Commissioners ?
Laughter
Colleagues , I always welcome this kind of debate , but it should not go on for too long .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , let me turn first to our institution . Whether the Group of the European People 's Party is currently represented by two or three people or whether there are ten of us present here when the public sees pictures of this important debate - whatever excuses we make - there will be criticism of the European Parliament .
We are always good at criticising the Commission and others , but we should also question our own behaviour in plenary .
Let me just say that at the outset .
For the rest Mr Poettering , who says such clever things , could take the names Schmidhuber and Bangemann as examples of other Commission appointments .
I find it incredible that at a time like this , when there is so much discussion about the future of Europe , the Group of the European People 's Party and other groups are hardly present .
But that is their problem , not mine !
I would just like to offer the President-in-Office of the Council three small suggestions to help make the German Presidency as successful as he would wish .
First , the debate on finalities is an important one and should also give rise to a social debate .
But the European Union exists today and cannot just wait for the debate on finalities .
That is why we need a decision in Cologne , a resolution , so that when we have another intergovernmental conference , in 2001 , an EU charter of fundamental rights is adopted .
There cannot be a new intergovernmental conference without a new charter of fundamental rights , otherwise Europe cannot and will not be seen to be more open .
Secondly , it is dangerous for the German Presidency - for whatever reasons - to say not one word about Mediterranean policy .
For there are fears in Europe , however unjustified they may be , that Europe and Germany are only looking to the east now and forgetting the issue of relations with the south .
So I think it is important that in our relations with the south , with the Mediterranean , we also focus discussion on the human rights question with partners such as Algeria .
It is not just a question of combating terrorism but also of human rights , of how a state combats terrorism .
That is the future of democracy and it should also be discussed with our Mediterranean partners and particularly with Algeria .
Thirdly , there is the famous sixty-four thousand dollar question of net contributors and net contributions .
One cannot simply assign more tasks to a political institution , of whatever kind , while at the same time constantly reducing its scope for action by financial cutbacks . After all , we have seen what that leads to over the last few days in regard to the Commission .
The Commission said it did not have enough personnel to carry out its tasks .
Then we find the kind of problems arise that we have seen . So we must give careful thought to this .
What reforms are needed in agriculture ?
What problems from the past need dealing with ? How much more should the United Kingdom pay ?
More equality , more equal rights . Yes , but we also have to ask how much more the Union as a whole has to pay in order to carry out its tasks .
Applause
Mr President , I would first like to thank the President-in-Office very sincerely for his speech and his introduction of the German Presidency 's programme .
It had been a long time since we had heard a speech inspired by such federalist ambition in the European Parliament .
My group will certainly be making concrete proposals to him in the weeks ahead .
I do not have time to mention them all so I will restrict myself to just one .
In the international community today , there are over 100 countries which have de facto abolished the death penalty .
That is a majority .
So the conditions are there for the General Assembly of the United Nations to approve a universal moratorium on capital punishment this year .
If possible , I would like the German Presidency to tell us if it intends to take any measures in this respect in the course of the next few weeks to prevent a flop like last year and to ensure that we do not miss this opportunity to create conditions that favour the adoption of a universal moratorium on capital punishment by the United Nations General Assembly in the year 2000 .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you are the first President-in-Office of the Council whose political legitimacy is based on the eco-movement .
I would like to point out to you that any form of politics and any political action will fail and be meaningless from the outset if the question of principle , namely how to resolve the environmental issue , is not addressed .
We are nearing the end of the 20th century and standing on the threshold of the 21st century .
Consider for a moment : we cannot afford to repeat the 20th century in terms either of wasting resources or of destroying the environment .
I wonder whether you are still using your influence in order to create an environmental vision of the future .
I hope you have not thrown out these environmental visions that have taken you where you are today , together with your legendary trainers , and let them rot away together in some cellar room .
If that is the case , please at least bring your environmental visions up into the daylight again !
Mr President , the Luxembourg summit put an end to the virtually endless series of non-binding statements about employment .
Or at least seemed to put an end to them , because when we look at the results of the Vienna summit we see that , although page after page is devoted to employment - a field of great concern to us all - no concrete decisions were taken and a great many tasks were in fact assigned to the current presidency .
I naturally wish them every success in implementing them , and I hope that they are able to recapture the spirit of what was decided in Luxembourg .
This means setting specific targets , with the aid of benchmarking , and not just at national level but at European level too .
Luxembourg was a start , an important start , but a great deal remains to be done in order to broaden and deepen the process .
At present I detect a kind of weariness in which a bureaucratic process is being set in train to implement what was decided in Luxembourg , but with little regard for the innovation which was what Luxembourg was principally all about .
Of the many tasks which fall to this presidency I can of course touch on no more than a couple .
I think it is very important for the German Presidency to achieve effective coordination between economic and social policy .
When they took office in their own country they expressed what I consider to be many very refreshing views on this subject .
These were somewhat tempered as the presidency grew closer , but I hope that their policy is not solely for domestic consumption but also for European consumption .
I am convinced that coordination of economic and social policy solely at national level has no meaning if you do not now also succeed in getting this underway at European level .
In other words , I hope that your attempts at Bündnis für Arbeit - work or employment pacts - can also be pursued very energetically , and hopefully successfully , throughout Europe .
Although employment policy is a subject of deep concern to me , I am gradually getting the feeling that people believe social policy as a whole is covered by employment and by labour market policy .
But there is more to social policy than this .
Our call has always been not for a pact for employment , but a pact for employment , sustainability and solidarity .
This seems a little like searching for the third way , as if solidarity is taboo , but I would be very pleased if the German Government succeeded in putting solidarity firmly on the agenda .
Europe 's internal cohesion is one of the most important tasks with which we are faced .
In all the prattle about financial obligations , too little attention has also been paid , to my mind at least , to the subject of cohesion as a Union objective .
I believe this presidency has made an excellent contribution in this respect .
I am pleased that I am to be followed by Mr Brok and I hope that he points out in his speech that the limited presence of his group is not a problem in the way Mr Cohn-Bendit sees it , but a problem for Parliament as a whole .
It is a pity that a presidency is not viewed as representing Parliament as a whole rather than only one group .
Dear Daniel Cohn-Bendit , I am glad to have the pleasure of your company in the Chamber today .
Heckling
We find ourselves at present in a special situation .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I hope you will appreciate that the situation looks a little confused .
The opposition in Germany , the CDU / CSU , will urge Germany to show continuity in its European policy here in Parliament too .
I believe the statement you made today reflected that spirit of German continuity in its European policy and forms a basis for constructive cooperation on a number of issues in the coming months .
Of course we would also like to know whether you are the President of the Council for foreign affairs and the Chancellor is the Wilhelminian President of the Council for home affairs .
The differences that sometimes arise must , of course , be resolved .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you will find it more difficult to achieve the necessary compromises at European level if the mood within Germany is different .
I hope you will manage to sort all this out !
Let me thank you most particularly for your words on institutional reform .
The Cologne summit must act as a mandate for more majority decisions and more co-decisions , as also for the charter of fundamental rights .
I believe that these matters must be carefully defined , with the participation of the European Parliament , so that in the next two years we can take the necessary steps to make the European Union capable of enlargement .
During your presidency of the Council you will have to implement a range of policies , such as the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
I would ask you , when you appoint the High Representatives and set up the planning and analysis unit , to perhaps listen more closely to national parliaments and to the European Parliament than to your diplomats , so that this becomes an added value for Europe rather than a board of political directors .
Let me make a final remark . Everyone agrees that employment policy is an important issue .
That is why the former German Government approved and participated in the coordination of European employment policy in Amsterdam and in Luxembourg .
But we cannot go any further than coordination , than setting out objectives and benchmarking , because we do not have the instruments to do so .
This employment pact should not be used to give the impression that we can pursue a common wage scale policy from Finland to Portugal or embark on financing a labour market policy .
You spoke of labour market policy in your address .
We sometimes get the impression that a huge employment-policy show is to be put on shortly before the European elections in preparation for then producing an alibi for national elections , because Europe is held responsible for the failure of national employment policies .
Europe is too important to be wrongly blamed .
Mr President , the Social Democrats may well clap when Mr Kohl 's achievements are being lauded , but nevertheless we are happy to welcome the foreign minister of this government here today .
Applause
Mr Fischer , I have listened to you carefully and given the quality and scale of the debate we are holding here today it would be wrong of me to start off by advising you what limit values you should change and which individual environmental legislative acts urgently need renewing , even if I would like to do so and indeed could do so in detail .
Let me nevertheless make a few comments that are very relevant to the dimension of which you spoke .
When you talk about an enlarging Europe , an enlarging European Union and a more integrated Europe , which is something we all want , then a few things must be quite clear . It must be clear that there have to be and there are cross-sectional policy areas , which must also be regarded as such and treated differently .
Mr Wim van Velzen spoke of social policy .
That is certainly one example .
In this Parliament I speak for my group for environmental policy , consumer protection and health policy .
If we are serious about European integration we must also be serious about integrating these cross-sectional policies in other policy areas .
That means that environmental policy must become an integral part of transport policy , of energy policy and of economic policy - indeed it is also a motive force of employment policy .
We keep paying lip service to this - this German Government does the same .
However , I hope that it will become apparent after these six months that the earlier Cardiff summit and the forthcoming Cologne summit have produced more in this respect , that we actually see integral legislation that commits the Commission to integrating environmental policy in other areas too , including structural policy .
You spoke of transparency , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , and I cheekily interrupted , for which I apologise .
I know that the general public often do not know how legislation is made in the European Union .
In fact they are not quite sure how it is made in their own Member States either .
I do not approve of that , which is why I welcome your call for transparency .
But transparency also means that it must be clear what the Member States do with the EU legislation once they have approved it .
If it is the case , as was quite usual in Germany - and as can easily be proven - that Germany may well approve legislation , especially in the environmental area , but does not then transpose it into national law or does not check observance of the provisions , then that too is an offence against transparency and I would ask you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , to do something about that too .
If we want to do something for people all over Europe - and that includes people in the applicant countries - then we must take make sure they can live in an environment worth living in .
We have talked a lot about foreign policy today and about very major issues .
That always makes me feel very small and humble and I try not to say much ; but at the end of the day the issue is always the people who live in this world , this Europe .
These people breathe , these people have to eat and drink and exist in the environment .
If we do not manage to maintain an environment worth living in then we can no longer talk about foreign policy either .
That is why I urge you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , when you go home and when you go to Bonn , to remember that environmental policy must be a key component of German policy and also a key component of European integration .
Applause
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the German Presidency has opened under the best auspices .
In Europe and indeed around the world , opinion is virtually unanimous that the launch of the euro has been a success that will mark a truly historic stage in the long course of the construction of Europe .
Germany had spared no efforts and made every sacrifice to achieve this , and you will understand , Mr President , if I extend this tribute to Chancellor Kohl who held this course with such courage and determination .
Today , I want to express my warmest wishes for the success of the German Presidency .
It is a heavy responsibility because this presidency will be marked by strategic decisions that will determine the future shape of Europe .
It is a Europe that we naturally want to extend to those countries of Central and Eastern Europe seeking to join us , but it is a Europe that must now affirm its political dimension and therefore overhaul its institutions so that it can respond better to the expectations of our fellow citizens .
Mr President , after listening to you , my feeling is that the priorities of your presidency broadly meet these objectives .
But I would like to put some ideas to you on two areas of the work .
First , as regards Agenda 2000 , we applaud your determination to try to complete this , if possible , at the summit on 24 and 25 March .
That is a very pressing timetable if we want the European Parliament to be able to fully play its part . The timing will be very tight anyway , bearing in mind that we have elections in June .
I also agree with the idea that the future financial framework of the European Union , the reform of the structural policy and the reform of the common agricultural policy are inseparable parts of an overall package .
To reach the lasting solutions you want , there must be respect for everyone 's sensitivities .
You know and we know that some of the Member States are more concerned , and rightly so , about the problem of the financial contribution .
Others , in fact , who provided assurances for all these years , are more concerned about the cohesion of our Community .
And finally , others are more concerned about the common policies that formed the initial basis of our Union .
I am sure you know what I mean , Mr President . I personally want to talk about the agricultural policy and tell you simply how I feel .
The introduction of measures that would effectively lead to a renationalisation , even a partial one , of the common agricultural policy would be a political mistake that would ruin the European Union in the minds of many of our fellow citizens .
My dear Klaus Hänsch , of course no-one has ever said that nothing should change .
But it seems to me that the stakes are higher than anyone 's national interest because rural development is truly essential to the very balance of our European area .
Mr President , please be kind enough to give this some thought .
My second point relates to the institutions .
If we want a Europe that is naturally open but that is also strong and united , we need institutions that allow it to act ; otherwise , we risk an institutional collapse , as you have said .
You were very clear about the sensitive points we need to stress .
You stated that the Cologne Summit will launch a new intergovernmental conference , but I have a question .
Do you not feel that the limits of the intergovernmental conference system have been demonstrated ?
Mr President , I would be pleased if you could tell us if you think that there might be a more creative means of achieving the desired result .
Once again , I send my most sincere wishes for your presidency .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , let me just call out after Mr Brok , who is already fleeing to the group meeting room , that the SPD also differs from the PPE and its German members in that our party does not have a short memory .
That is why I am surprised that after 16 years in government in Germany they now seem to be prophesying that the current German Government will have to answer for the failure of employment policy .
That really is absurd , and basically everyone in Europe understands that .
What a number of people in Europe do not understand is rural development policy , agricultural policy .
Anyone who speaks of a reform of agricultural policy in connection with the need to change the shape of the European Union must realise two things : firstly , this reform is overdue and necessary in any case .
It has not been put on the agenda because of the imminent advent of the enlargement eastward that we hope to see .
Secondly , they must realise that this is not just a question of agricultural prices , export refunds and compensatory payments , important as they are .
Basically it is a question of the future of our rural areas , which account for 80 % of the European Union , and above all of how we will manage to protect jobs , to create new jobs and to maintain the environment in Europe both within the agricultural sector as such but also , independently of that , in the rural areas .
European public opinion does not dispute these aims .
What has been increasingly and rightly disputed are the ways and means by which the European Union 's financial resources are used for the rural areas .
A short while ago the President of the European Court of Auditors pointed out that the situation is still not tolerable , with 80 % of the European tax-payers ' contributions intended for the rural areas , for agriculture , going to only 20 % , i.e. to the most prosperous people .
No man or woman in Europe can understand that , and rightly so .
So it must be one of the priority aims of Agenda 2000 to make it clear that aid policy must largely be social policy in the agricultural sector too .
It is unacceptable to see a farmer in a rural area who earns millions , who has turned his well-situated farm into virtually a one-man business thanks to massive rationalisation , who has the best contacts with the world market and obtains the best prices on it , still being just as eligible for aid as a farmer in a disadvantaged area , who can often only survive by overworking .
We Social Democrats are not jealous of the European global player 's economic success .
But we do demand that the farmer in a disadvantaged region who can never become a global player , but who protects the rural area through his invaluable environmental services , that this farmer should also be given decent support - a more decent level of support than we have seen in the past - for the services he has performed .
That would close the circle .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you rightly said at the start that we must not show solidarity only with the weakest Member States but must also and always show solidarity with the weakest members of society , and naturally that includes those working in rural areas .
Applause
Mr President-in-Office , you have made some important points and have certainly set out some ambitious aims : a new intergovernmental conference , a new European constitution , an autonomous and independent common foreign defence policy , strengthening of the WEU , majority decisions in the Council and increased powers for Parliament .
These are without doubt significant statements , Mr President , but they are intentions and , as the old saying has it : ' the road to hell is paved with good intentions ' .
The problem lies elsewhere , namely in grasping how the coherent aims which you have announced tie in with the specific policies which the German Government seems determined to introduce .
Our former President , Mr Hänsch , raised this same question in an interview with Die Zeit .
The first signs are not promising : some of Chancellor Schröder 's pronouncements , the coolness of one of your ministers towards the euro , the call for a cut in your country 's contributions , and the threat to reduce resources for the southern Mediterranean countries .
You yourself have certainly allayed some of these doubts - you deserve credit for that - but our doubts are still justified !
I would remind you that this Europe of ours was largely built by leaders who came from a certain background , a Christian Democrat one .
Will the Socialist-led governments manage to complete the edifice ?
We hope so .
That is your goal : we only hope that you will carry others along with you .
The problem of unemployment , among others , can only be tackled in a European context .
But how should it be tackled ?
Just now I heard a Socialist colleague speak of putting pressure on the Central Bank and slackening the rigour of our healthy finances , calling for what smacks of modern-day dirigisme .
Is this the right approach ?
I think not .
I must confess , Mr President-in-Office , that - as Mr Cohn-Bendit said - I am astonished by your silence on the Mediterranean .
I thank you , incidentally , for what you said concerning Kosovo .
And now , if I may , I would make one final recommendation .
Given that our President speaks Greek , I shall take the liberty of saying this in Latin and translating it with a German proverb : ' laus nova nisi oritur etiam virtus amittitur ' .
The German proverb states : ' Wer nicht vorwärts geht , der kommt zurück ' .
I believe that Europe too could fall backwards unless it moves forwards .
I would just point out in passing that I myself and many other colleagues were obliged to learn Latin in order to study law .
We therefore had no difficulty in following you .
Mr President-in-Office , your speech was undoubtedly political , and in it you placed great emphasis on budgetary matters .
Allow me , therefore , to begin with a reminder . The Union 's major financial agreements have been achieved by the smaller countries .
The current financial perspective was not approved in Edinburgh , as some believe , but a year later in Brussels , under the Belgian Presidency .
The German Government - the new German Government - faces the challenge of bucking this trend and breaking with tradition .
As rapporteur for Agenda 2000 , I wish you good fortune and plenty of luck .
Let us hope for success .
I listened most carefully to the speech , because in your document on priorities you devote 12 lines to the Union 's financial and budgetary policy while the remainder deals with countless more policies , although there is a conspicuous absence of funds .
At the Vienna European Council it was agreed that Agenda 2000 should be approached in a spirit of solidarity and budgetary rigour should be guaranteed .
I made a careful note of your reference to an equitable solution that is not to the detriment of the weaker partners , and you also asked for Parliament 's cooperation .
In my opinion , the wrong question is being asked .
You can certainly rely on Parliament 's cooperation .
The question should instead be whether or not we can rely on the Council 's cooperation .
On 8 December , the Council had to issue a statement confirming that it intended to abide by the agreements it had reached with the Commission and the European Parliament that same morning , and not render them meaningless .
It is the Council that creates difficulties .
Rigour is not synonymous with saving .
What is does mean is strict and efficient management .
The meaning of the terms must be quite clear .
Moreover , without Parliament , no financial perspectives are in fact possible .
I should therefore like to draw your attention briefly to a number of issues Parliament considers to be particularly important , but which the Council does not seem to appreciate at times .
Parliament took a stand against national contributions and the principle of fair return in its resolution of 4 December 1997 .
You have quite rightly stated that the euro represents a step forward in the development of a new kind of sovereignty in Europe .
The Council should have the courage to take a further step forward in the spirit of this new European sovereignty and put forward a proposal for truly European own resources .
It should be recognised that the concept of national contributions is not really European . Rather , it amounts to a backward step in the construction of a political Europe .
The European Parliament has already come out in favour of the Cohesion Fund , as did the European Commission when it considered the matter . However , Parliament is against cofinancing of the CAP .
A greater degree of flexibility is called for .
Parliament has voiced its doubts concerning the financial consequences of the reforms proposed in Agenda 2000 .
The Court of Auditors ' opinion on Agenda 2000 from December , No 10 / 98 , is now available and is even more sceptical .
Clauses and instruments to ensure flexibility will be required .
The financial perspectives are at stake here .
Finally , enlargement is a major issue .
Those of us who were previously excluded from the construction of Europe because our country was under a dictatorship are ardent supporters of enlargement towards the East .
You referred to the consequences of failing to carry out enlargement , and I agree with you on that point .
However , do you really believe that we can prepare for enlargement with the meagre appropriations available in the financial framework , trimming Europe and the current budgets ?
An expansion of Europe 's territory cannot be achieved through a reduction in its budget .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to start by pointing out once again that nearly the entire PPE Group was present at the time when the President-in-Office of the Council spoke and that he received our full applause , as also the applause of the German Christian Democrats , because we too will support him in what he said - provided he also acts on it .
That is why the comment made from up there was not fair and when I look at the Socialist benches all I can say is there are four more of them here than of us , which is not such a great feat .
To return to our debate , I just want to go into one point , the question of Kosovo .
After the inglorious outcome of the negotiations between Holbrooke and Milosevic I said that the day is drawing near when the west will reproach the Kosovo Albanians for not finally giving in .
What are the facts of the situation in Kosovo now ?
The Serbian troops who were initially withdrawn have long since returned .
The Serbian police in Kosovo are armed to the hilt .
Attacks targeted at Albanian villages and civilians are commonplace .
The reactions to these Serbian acts of terrorism are the desperate and not always acceptable actions of the KLA , but they are above all a sign of the growing impotence of the Albanians and their cries for help .
Where is that step in a political direction you referred to a moment ago ?
Even in October 1998 it became clear that Milosevic did not want a political settlement .
He wants to ethnically cleanse Kosovo and change the balance of forces between Albanians and Serbs in favour of the Serbs .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , my dear Daniel Cohn-Bendit , he is pursuing that line with great success .
There are refugees wherever we look , not just in the forests , not just in Albania , not just in Macedonia .
There are refugees from Kosovo in Bosnia too , and they come to Germany and Italy in any case !
The OSCE observer mission is a joke and cannot be successful .
We should withdraw these observers , otherwise news about the mortal danger these gentlemen are facing will dominate the media , instead of the misery and distress of the Albanians , whose lives have been in danger for nine whole years .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , when you said that the extraction force in Macedonia is there to protect these OSCE observers , I noted that you are not entirely indifferent to the whole business .
For surely it must sound like a mockery to the people down there who have been suffering under the Serbian apartheid system for nine years .
These troops are not there to protect the Albanian civilians but to protect the few OSCE observers who would basically be better advised to go back where they came from , back home .
For there is nothing they can do where they are .
We know that a few Serbian soldiers have now been taken prisoner by the Albanians .
But what has world public opinion been doing for the past nine years ?
Did it cry out when Albanians were taken prisoner every day , when Albanians were tortured every day ?
I question the relative manner in which these matters are currently being discussed .
In the last few months the Contact Group has made no contact whatsoever .
So I do urge you to withdraw the OSCE observers and let an international force that includes Russian troops see to establishing peace in Kosovo , so as finally to give a chance to an interim political solution that can lead to a real solution in the region .
Otherwise we will have to go on and on hearing these same daily media reports .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I too want to speak on the subject of Kosovo .
Let me say first of all that I and my group can also congratulate you warmly on your statement .
I believe that the subjects you addressed , and especially the foreign policy aspects , were precisely those points and aspects we rightly expect and hope a German Presidency to address .
You said little in concrete terms about Kosovo .
I would like to prompt you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , to perhaps make a few more comments to clarify your position , especially after what Mrs Pack , whom I hold in very high esteem , has just said , because in this case I do not agree with the substance of it .
I believe that we must adhere to the position that we can only have a settlement in Kosovo that is a peaceful settlement and that is in the end reached through consensus - however difficult that may be .
We will have to be prepared for it to take years - it was a serious mistake to believe it could be achieved in Bosnia in just a few months . We will have to tell the Serbs that their aggression cannot be tolerated but also tell the KLA that their actions , which are indeed also directed against the Albanians and against Mr Rugova , cannot be accepted .
We have applauded Mr Rugova here in this Chamber but on the other hand - and this is a contradiction - we verbally support the actions of the KLA .
That can neither be tolerated nor accepted and the presidency must make its position clear .
Secondly , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you have stated quite unequivocally in many interviews that you do not regard organisations such as the OSCE as merely incidental , as something that can be pushed aside .
We are all aware of the weaknesses of the OSCE , but after all what we must do is strengthen this organisation rather than abandon it .
So I do not believe the OSCE mission should be withdrawn .
I do believe , however , that it needs protecting and that we must do our utmost to strengthen the troops who are in the region , especially in Macedonia , in FYROM , which will be a means of protecting the OSCE .
It would be a disaster if the OSCE mission out there fails partly because it is not being given adequate military protection .
Kosovo can serve as an example of cooperation between the EU , NATO and the OSCE with a view to finding a peaceful solution .
There is a third point where I also definitely support you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
You spoke of the dangerous trend away from multilateralism towards unilateralism .
I admit , as I once said about Kosovo too , that there can be exceptional situations where a different decision needs to be taken .
But I regard the trend in some quarters in America of turning the exception into the rule and the rule into the exception as very dangerous indeed .
A final word in connection with what you said about Russia .
One great task for the German Presidency would be to bring Russia back into partnership with the EU , as a partner willing and able to cooperate , and also to involve it more closely in NATO again , even after the current crisis .
We need Russia as a partner , I agree with you there .
But we cannot rely on that and expose ourselves to the vicissitudes of Russian decisions in individual cases . However , one important aim of the presidency of the Council must be to have Russia as a partner for a new peaceful order in Europe and beyond .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the determining event at the beginning of the German Presidency was certainly the introduction of the European currency .
That opened a new era for Europe .
Let me begin by saying , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that I personally would have been pleased if the German finance minister had also been present for that important event on 31 December last year , like the other finance ministers .
What is the most important task now facing us ?
It is to formulate a common economic policy for Europe , a common policy to combat unemployment .
The fight against unemployment involves many things that have to be done at national level .
But fighting unemployment also means securing future growth .
Here we find some concern being voiced .
The German Institute for Economics has forecast that growth could possibly fall to 1.4 % this year .
I do not think that is inconceivable .
But we do have to discuss the reasons why this is happening .
On the one hand , the world economic crisis is held responsible , the events in Asia , in America and elsewhere .
But I am convinced that these slowdowns in growth are partly homemade ; one of the great tasks for the new German Government is to make the real situation clear to our enterprises .
For I have found from talks with many business people that when they are asked : ' why do you not invest , when interest rates are so low and the framework conditions so favourable ? ' they increasingly often reply : ' so long as the framework conditions are not clear , so long as we keep reading different things in the papers every week , we will not invest . ' That is one of the main tasks for your government to tackle .
In conclusion , let me address another important point , where we need some kind of legislation in the next six months .
The introduction of the euro is more or less a fait accompli .
But there remains a question that has not really been resolved , in relation to the year 2002 . Will that be the appointed date for the changeover or will the two currencies continue to exist side by side ?
After many talks with retailers , with workers , with local authorities , I increasingly tend to think that to have a period during which the national currency is used side by side with the European currency would involve unnecessary costs , which those concerned cannot be expected to bear .
That is why we should jointly - meaning the Commission , the presidency of the Council and the European Parliament - take steps during these six months to ensure that 1 January 2002 is the appointed day for the introduction of euro notes and coins .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I was probably not the only one to greet your statement about the German Presidency 's objectives with mixed feelings .
You had many good and strong things to say about your visions - an integrated Europe versus the Europe of the past , human rights , institutional reforms , the need for majority decisions to become the rule in the Council , a strong Parliament .
But why - and there are two whys given the present situation - why did you say nothing about reforming the Commission , why did you say absolutely nothing on the most important question of comitology ?
Nor , for that matter , did you say very much about the operational aspects .
You spoke of a package deal in March on Agenda 2000 , of lower contributions , especially by net contributors , of reducing agricultural expenditure .
In my view your statement today gave the same increasingly ambivalent impression as your statements and those of other members of your government in recent months .
I can only hope that the same does not apply to another subject you addressed again today , namely enlargement .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you said there can be no alternative to enlargement .
In the past few months Mr Schröder has sent out very different signals I hope that what you have announced on behalf of the presidency as a whole will be the official programme and will be followed consistently .
The preceding presidency , the Austrian Presidency , sent out and followed very specific signals in regard to enlargement .
I hope that your presidency will also take very concrete political steps in this regard , for that is the only way we can achieve the objective we are all pursuing , namely to make the 21st century the age of integration and not the age of the past !
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you and the German Government rightly declared that fighting unemployment was the central aim of the German Presidency .
Obviously this cannot mean paying out billions on aid programmes .
That is not the way to combat structural unemployment .
The German Chancellor chose his words well when he wrote recently in a trade journal that the most important thing was to coordinate employment policies in the European Union .
I would say to coordinate them better , for we do not have to recreate the world all over again .
Under the last German Presidency in 1994 it was agreed to coordinate national measures .
At the Luxembourg special summit led by Jean-Claude Juncker the Essen procedure was improved by the establishment of guidelines and national action plans , which , my dear Wim van Velzen , must indeed become more verifiable !
In 1994 we achieved another success with the directive on European works councils .
This concerned the information and consultation of workers in European companies , which the then presidency declared a priority , and the much disputed question of economic co-determination .
Parliament recommended adopting the recipe for success of the European works councils as the procedural principle for European companies : flexibility , negotiations between the social partners on co-determination rights and , if that failed , European minimum standards .
By following this procedure , the Austrian compromise proposal took us very close to achieving that objective .
Now we finally need political agreement within the Council .
I wish Mr Riester , the Minister for Employment , the same success that his predecessor Mr Blum achieved with the European works councils in 1994 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin with the two statements on Kosovo .
I certainly do not agree with Mrs Pack 's position , much as I sympathise with her emotional involvement , because we have to think things through to the end and consider the consequences of that position .
And the consequences , which involve withdrawing the OSCE mission , would in my view be nothing other than war .
That is the crucial point ; it would be war , once again at the cost of a great many human lives .
Let me give you the historical background again .
Since 1989 / 1990 we have been seeing how unresolved conflicts , some of which date back to earlier times - I am thinking of the outcome of the Balkan conflict before the first world war - and borders drawn in earlier times , together with authoritarian regimes or even dictatorships that are responsible for extremely serious human rights violations , now lead to a situation in which , were we still living in the Europe of the past , we would virtually be in a state of war , in which new borders were drawn as a consequence of people being driven out , of the unspeakable sacrifice of innocent lives , of the destruction of intrinsic values .
Sadly we saw all that again in Bosnia .
But the battle would be fought to the bitter end .
That was the European logic of the past , which had fatal consequences .
For as a rule these wars are internationalised by the side that is in danger of losing .
As a rule civil wars logically tend to spread , with the result that the regional powers very quickly become involved and with the result that in the end quite different conflicts enter into play in the region and large and powerful states , which also have their own particular history and conflicts of interest that have not yet been resolved , border conflicts , become directly involved .
What that means is the threat of a major Balkan war .
Europe cannot allow that to happen .
It would be a reversion to the past and it is not just a question of the destruction of intrinsic values , not just of unspeakable misery , it is also a question of the destruction of the European security system and of integration .
We must not forget that .
That is why there is no alternative to a process of stabilisation .
I do however ask myself whether Europe is in fact strong enough even to settle its own internal affairs .
Quite obviously it is not strong enough yet .
These include conflict prevention , a most important aspect .
To put it in non-technical terms , what will the consequence of these Balkan wars actually be ?
In practice it will be that the European Union has to take on responsibility in some form for the entire region .
After all , that is what we are now seeing in Bosnia .
Without the detailed work done by the High Representative , without the presence of the allied troops , without the civilian activities , without the EU High Representative 's assumption of responsibility , we would be back in a situation of confrontation again there or even of bloody conflict .
But for us Europeans that means we must find answers - and that is something we must think through properly , not today but at some point .
A first very full , very open and , in my view , important discussion of precisely these questions was held at the foreign ministers ' dinner at the Vienna European Council .
What kind of long-term political strategy can be found to resolve these conflicts that will not lead to war , to expulsions , to mass violence and the trampling of human rights ?
We will have to find an answer to this quickly .
I am firmly in favour of our making greater efforts in relation to Russia in this connection .
I do not find Russia 's current attitude in the UN Security Council very constructive because basically it is still founded on the old fixed idea of a confrontation between one superpower and another superpower , America .
Russia would have a great opportunity before it today if it decided to play a constructive role ; but unfortunately it is not grasping it .
We are trying to make progress here through a constructive dialogue with Russia and an open discussion of all the issues .
But we consider it extremely important , and the foreign ministers agreed on this , to formulate a central strategy , which cannot , however , be regarded as the conventional kind of assistance , as Russia is too big to allow us to talk in terms of assistance ; it is a far too important , central partner in terms of European security , European stability .
But we do give absolute priority to developing a common strategy here .
That is not inconsistent - and I thank all those who pointed this out - with considering the problems arising in the Mediterranean .
I was recently visited by Foreign Minister Scharon ; President Arafat will come next .
The Commission will be visiting the Middle East in February .
That is the second visit and it will encompass not just the question of North Africa but indeed also the Middle East peace process .
This is after all the second neighbouring region , even if the European Union neither can nor wants to take over the role of the United States there .
But the more progress is made with the peace process - and I really cannot see any better alternative to this peace process - the more all the parties concerned in the Middle East will realise that as regions we are neighbours .
What role the European Union will then actually play , in regard to underpinning this process , is another aspect to which we will direct our attention when we continue the Barcelona process in Stuttgart .
Here too it would be damaging to posit any conflict between eastern enlargement and the issues of the south .
We want Europe !
And by its nature Europe will be looking at different interests than , for instance , Germany or Spain , to give examples of geographically different positions .
We have common interests .
The interests of Europe are common interests and as such they must be brought to bear .
Let me now give a very brief , summary reply to a number of points I find most interesting .
There is no doubt at all that Germany 's political approach is a European one .
The same is true of the new German Government 's political approach .
We are following a line of continuity with the preceding German governments and in the light of its national interests Germany would lose out a great deal if we changed that approach in any way .
If we still regard the concept of national interests as at all in keeping with the times , all I can say for the German Government is that the European integration process takes first place in our national interests .
So it was in the past , and so it is now , for the change in the political balance in the German Bundestag has not brought any change in our interests .
Under the new government , Germany will continue its commitment to Europe .
Applause
Let me make it quite clear : what I have presented here is the approach of the German Government and the German Chancellor .
Anyone who was present at the discussion between the German Chancellor and the Commission will emphatically confirm that .
There are no changes here .
The German Government is united in maintaining the same position .
This whole reform project we are about to embark on is not a question of bookkeeping .
So let me explain the German position to you once again in unequivocal terms .
We must make the Union capable of enlargement .
The next historic step after the introduction of the euro will be enlargement of the European Union .
Just consider the implications if the European Union remained a Union just for western Europe after the end of the cold war .
That would be a historical failure without parallel and the soul of Europe , the idea of integration , would atrophy .
Quite apart from that , it would be a historical injustice of the first order vis-à-vis the Central and Eastern European applicant states .
So we must now do our utmost to make progress with that step .
The second great historical challenge facing us is to make the European Union into a political entity .
Personally I do not believe that we can act as an economic and financial ' global player ' , as it is called in modern parlance , on the world stage if at the same time our political structures operate in a dimension that , compared to what we have now achieved in monetary policy , is - to put it rather bluntly - more reminiscent of a local stage .
Applause
That will not do Europe any good , nor for that matter will it do the stability of our currency any good .
That is why I am firmly convinced that our second important historical challenge is to strengthen the European institutions .
In my view democracy always also implies a strengthening of democracy .
That is a key point .
Consider this : much of what is now presented so to speak as German strategy - I will be coming back to that in a moment - is to do with the fact that our national public opinion feels there is a lack of legitimacy ; here I am only speaking for our national public opinion . We need to look at that very carefully if we want to develop the European institutions further , which means also to make them more democratic as institutions .
So we must now meet these two central challenges .
How can we do so ?
We can do so through the vision of Europe as a political entity . It can become a larger and stronger political entity if we get on with the homework that now awaits us .
After all , the Cardiff Council set March as the date for the special summit above all because of three added factors . The Amsterdam Treaty is to enter into force and will intensify the pressure for reform , not just the pressure to enhance the EU 's ability to act .
The European elections will be taking place in June .
But the European Parliament must also be able to play its part in implementing the Agenda 2000 reforms .
That also requires budgetary decisions before the end of the year , with the new approach to areas eligible for aid and suchlike .
In that respect , therefore , this date was set deliberately .
But within the context of this historical challenge , which is enlargement and at the same time the development of a political entity , we must also ensure that subsequent presidencies can tackle the institutional reforms , in order to use the window of time that we have .
Under what are for us very difficult conditions - we only recently came into office , which has some implications for the business of Europe - the German Government declared itself prepared to make Agenda 2000 the focus of our presidency and to reach agreement at the special summit in March .
I sometimes try to imagine what would happen if this failed .
Early in the morning on 26 / 27 March the Heads of State or Government would appear before the people and declare failure .
This time that would have immediate repercussions on stock market prices .
It would not simply be a decision , as it would have in the past when a summit happened to fail .
The date of 1 January 1999 has created a new dimension and thereby also a new responsibility .
I think we are all aware of that responsibility .
It can only succeed - and now I am coming to the age-old question of money - if everyone is prepared to look beyond their national interests , which are quite legitimate - in Germany too - and to set aside the conflicts between national interests in Europe for the sake of the compromise represented by integration .
So it can only succeed if everyone , on an even-handed basis , takes a substantial step away from their national interests .
We want an even-handed solution and , as I said in my earlier statement , we cannot allow the south , for instance , to have to pay for eastern enlargement .
That would be absurd .
Southern enlargement - as also the accession of Ireland - was and is a success story , economically , socially , but also in terms of democracy and security policy ; it is one that we will and must now repeat with enlargement to the east .
I am old enough to remember the military coup in Greece .
I remember the military dictatorships in Spain and Portugal .
I remember very well the discussions about whether or not there was a military coup in Italy in the 1970s .
That is all past history .
European integration is a success story , and we must repeat it , we must commit ourselves to that !
Applause
The role that Germany plays also reflects our economic strength , and that should be a cause to rejoice rather than complain .
We know what we owe to Europe , from many points of view , not just in material terms but also in political and cultural terms against the background of our history .
The new German Government knows that too and will therefore adhere to its commitment to Europe .
I have nothing to lose at all by saying that when I was in opposition I supported the major part of the policy pursued in these areas , especially Chancellor Kohl 's European policy , even if I criticised one or other aspect of it .
I consider that nothing unusual ; in my view , having convictions about something is part of the parliamentary process , especially when historic issues are at stake .
My group in the German Bundestag was the first in the last legislative term to call for the Europe of 11 , for the accession of Italy , at a time when others , like Chancellor Kohl , were far from prepared to do so .
The 3.0 debate and all that lay behind it were things we criticised too . So I will say quite openly that I have nothing to make up for here nor am I afraid to thank Helmut Kohl ; he was rightly appointed a freeman of Europe at the European Council in Vienna .
It is only that since Amsterdam Germany has no longer played the right role .
In Amsterdam the Federal Republic of Germany put on the brakes for the first time .
Heckling
We must not forget that .
And the coalition - here I am not talking about internal politics but about European politics - went into the elections with a position that was no longer entirely consistent , as you know better than I do .
That position was : eastern enlargement as quickly as possible , Germany wants to pay less , and the German farmers should get more .
That does not tally with the laws of logic in this world .
That is why we must now define a clear and consistent German position , and that is what I have done today on behalf of the German Government .
We certainly do not want to stop being a net contributor .
We have no quarrel with the fact that there are some countries that are ahead and then there are the poorer countries .
But it is obvious that imbalances have crept into the system and that they need correcting .
In terms of domestic politics , it is difficult for a German politician to explain why countries that obtain a higher per capita income thanks to their GNP than we do should pay little or even pay no net contribution at all .
These are of course all things that play a part in domestic politics .
I need not tell that to my German colleagues , but let me point out the following to other Members : because of the special situation in West Germany after the second world war , Germany 's European policy was basically unquestioned and was determined solely by the politicians - until Maastricht .
Maastricht changed all that .
In future , every German government will have to rally the people behind it , as in all your countries , in all your own democracies .
That used to be a matter of course and was not considered particularly noteworthy , as my German colleagues know only too well , but all that has changed since Maastricht .
That is why the net contributor debate does of course also have a domestic dimension , which must not be forgotten and which I regard as entirely legitimate .
But for us the crucial problem is how we can prepare the EU structures for enlargement .
I am less concerned about the actual situation , which clearly needs rectifying , than about the fact that if we leave the existing structures as they stand , we will of course come up against imbalances in the burden-sharing in regard to enlargement , which will quite simply no longer be acceptable or defensible .
Since I am in favour of enlargement , I believe we need this situation to be rectified too .
I think that is politically justified and certainly not a sign of anti-Europeanism or selfish nationalism ; quite the reverse .
This is a central aspect of the necessary structural reforms .
If we are to get through with Agenda 2000 , we will have to present it in all its aspects ; it encompasses five separate packages .
We will have to reach a compromise on the question of real constancy , budgetary constancy .
There are five different interpretations , but I believe we will find a compromise there .
Yesterday , the German finance minister said the EU budget must not grow faster than the national budgets .
That is a point that will certainly be taken seriously in the discussions .
Naturally we are also very concerned about the question of the budgetary structure .
As was pointed out earlier , although 80 % of the territory of the European Union is rural , we must not forget that it is not 80 % of our population that lives in these rural areas .
The second point that will arise in this connection is the common agricultural policy .
The Commission has submitted its CAP proposals .
Let me just add another word on the question of the renationalisation of agricultural policy . Cofinancing does not imply the renationalisation of agricultural policy .
If it did , the German Government would regard that as a mistake .
We do not want to see agricultural policy renationalised or even partly renationalised .
So , cofinancing is a question of the national contribution .
The political decision is taken at Brussels .
It is important to remember that .
That precludes any renationalisation .
In any case we only want it in relation to direct income supports .
That is the second important point .
And here we consider it urgently necessary to have national financial contributions , in view also of the future European Union , the enlarged European Union , and the future of the agricultural market .
Over and above that , let us please have no illusions . The WTO negotiations in the year 2002 will create an enormous pressure for adjustment , as every agricultural politician knows .
Without this reform , the current disputes about bananas or hormones in meat will seem nothing compared to what we will be faced with , for many of the agricultural subsidies we have now simply do not come within the scope of the WTO .
So there , too , we will face an enormous pressure for reform .
All three models that the Commission has proposed for the common agricultural policy must remain open to discussion .
We have to discuss them .
National preferences differ .
And then there are the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund .
I know how important and how productive these resources are , but I think that here too a contribution is needed and that special problems , such as those facing Portugal in relation to the Structural Funds , will need to be considered .
I also believe we will have to carefully assess and consider the Spanish situation .
We are looking towards an even-handed solution .
But there is no doubt that an even-handed solution also covers the rebate , the UK rebate , and , in the final analysis - and this is the fifth aspect involved , and one to which not only Germany but , as the presidency 's trip showed , the Netherlands and other net contributors also attach very great importance - this issue will also have to be resolved .
We want to produce a global package , which will be anything but easy .
At the European Council in Vienna , which took place at the historical site of the Vienna Congress in the Hofburg , the Portuguese prime minister pointed out that when Talleyrand was asked how long the Vienna Congress had lasted he replied ' the last fifteen minutes ' .
That will be equally true of the European Council , the special Council .
Unfortunately , the Member who quoted Goethe is no longer in the House . He quoted Goethe 's last words , on his death bed .
I am not sure this is a suitable Goethe quote and whether he knew that .
The words ' Mehr Licht , mehr Licht ' ( more light , more light ! ) can be interpreted in two ways .
Either this greatest of German poets felt that darkness was descending around him , or he was reverting to the dialect of Frankfurt in his final moments .
Some people seriously interpreted what he wanted to say as : ' mer licht so schlecht ' , ' I feel so bad ' . But if we want to quote Goethe , we really could do better , for Goethe was a European through and through and he was pro-Europe .
He would have no truck at all with nationalism .
I think that is the real Goethe whom we should quote .
Mr Hänsch , I warmly thank you for your support in regard to the settlement of the Kosovo conflict and would say to the European Parliament : it is important that we cooperate very closely .
The trilogue debate with Mr Verheugen will be continuing tomorrow .
During that debate a number of questions that you have raised will be considered in more depth .
We want a very close dialogue , in order to strengthen the European Parliament but also to ensure that it plays an active role in tackling the great tasks that face us .
The European Parliament must play a central role here .
Mr Brok , allow me to point out one thing , which is something I also want to say to certain colleagues . I know how difficult it is to be in opposition ; I myself was in that position long enough .
But to be in opposition also means to attack very intelligently and make it difficult for the government to find a reply .
To the accusation that all we have managed to do after 12 days of presidency is to make announcements , I would reply : yes , if I could do more than that after 12 days I would not be in politics , I would be a miracle worker and then I would be in the wrong job , I should be founding a church or something .
Laughter
But who indeed can perform miracles ?
So with the best will in the world , all one can do in 12 days is to state what one is prepared to do and then to be judged by it later .
And I can see that the opposition has a very high opinion of us and is expecting a great deal of us .

But for Mr Brok - who openly thanked Mr Kohl , as I too have done several times - to accuse us of trying to divert attention at the Cologne summit from our own national failures in employment market policy a few days before the European elections , means he is obviously unintentionally revealing a strategy of the preceding government , for we were not the ones to set all these deadlines .
It was not the new German Government that did this ; we were not able to do so and nor did the opposition hypnotise the previous government into doing so .
With the best will in the world , we were not able to do so .
It was the Luxembourg summit that decided this , it was Vienna , which followed , that was responsible for no progress being made . These are not accusations that can seriously be levelled at the new German Government , because we have not been in office nearly long enough .
In the interests of close cooperation we should refrain from transparent polemics of this kind , which , for the rest , do little to help solve the problems facing us .
The areas of general consensus are more important .
In conclusion let me emphasise once again what one Member said about Germany 's role .
I repeat that we know we will remain a net contributor .
There will be no German disengagement here .
That would be absurd and wrong given our interests .
It is in our interest to ensure that Europe develops into a stronger political entity .
The fact that the Deutschmark became integrated in the euro is not a matter of course , given its significance as a national currency , a significance that goes far beyond what a national currency normally signifies , and not just for the West Germans but also and in particular for our East German compatriots since unification in 1989 / 1990 .
It is a step that was taken with the broad assent of the German Bundestag , and it is also binding upon the new German Government .
We believe that during the German Presidency we have an obligation to make the European Union more capable of enlargement , to combat unemployment , to take a first step towards making progress with institutional reforms , to help strengthen democracy in Europe and , in general , to turn the European Union into a real political entity , with the ultimate aim of full integration .
Applause
I should like to thank you from the Chair and wish you every success .
Mr President-in-Office , you have of course spoken for 30 minutes , but I think that the Members , who have heard you speak for two hours , have been listening very carefully .
Mr President-in-Office , I assume that you missed some of what was said because Mr Cohn-Bendit was talking to you .
I forgive you !
But I would like to say that for you simply to dismiss what I said as emotional is male arrogance , and I am happy to return the insult .
I have been concerning myself with Kosovo for ten years - a little longer , perhaps , than you - and I do not reproach you for that , just as you should not reproach me for being emotional .
I simply believe that after I have been pleading for years for prevention in Kosovo and that has not been achieved , one cannot say after ten years : we must take preventive measures .
Secondly , I also believe that I did not say the OSCE must get out and nobody else must come in ; perhaps you did not hear me properly .
I said that as it stands it is not much use because there is nothing it can do .
Indeed it can achieve even less than the UN troops did in Bosnia .
In my view we need an international force there which incorporates the Russians , so as to prepare the ground for peaceful solutions .
Allow me to correct a few other words you said .
Mr Westendorp is not the representative of the European Union , he is the representative of the international community including the European Union .
Please do not misunderstand me next time !
Applause
Mr President , Mrs Pack , or rather my dear Doris , I think we are both being emotional , which is nothing specifically feminine but a quite legitimate position to take on this issue .
The point is quite simply that during the nine years when there was no preventive policy it was not this German government but another that kept denying the need for a policy of prevention .
You must admit that too !
Mrs Pack , I really think we do not need to quarrel so bitterly .
Let me stress again that in connection with Kosovo , as also with Bosnia , I was not using the term emotional in any gender-specific or even discriminatory fashion , for I too feel very emotionally affected whenever I look at this issue .
I believe nobody who is concerned with it can feel otherwise .
In that regard I can also understand people taking an emotional approach - and in the case of Bosnia emotion was not the worst counsellor , if I may point that out again - but nevertheless , we must think things through to the end .
After all there is no point , Mrs Pack , in saying that an international force has to be deployed against the will of the sovereign government of that state , unlike the sovereign government of Bosnia which created a definite international legal basis for these international troops .
That is an enormous problem .
So it would create a great problem for an international force to intervene for the first time on the territory of a state recognised by all EU Member States and by the international community against the will of that state 's government .
My second point concerns the participation of Russia .
At this moment in time the Russians in fact take the opposite view .
You will not get them to participate now .
Thirdly , what is the aim ?
Secession ?
But what does secession mean ?
What does it mean , when one third of the population of Macedonia is of Albanian origin ?
These are all just questions , in order to make it clear that it will do nothing for our common interests if we seem to be exchanging blows on this issue .
For these are questions which all the responsible parties ask themselves a hundred times a day .
In fact my group and also the German Government 's new human rights representative and former deputy , Mr Popper , really have spent years trying to persuade the EU to become more closely involved in Kosovo and to make progress with seeking solutions there .
At a time when the KLA did not yet exist we were calling for more support to be given to Rugova , among many other things .
Unfortunately things did not go as we wished .
Today the situation is different .
But we have tried .
We invited the Albanian interlocutors to Bonn and we are remaining in close contact .
But it is also apparent that the Albanian side is of course thinking it can use the West for its own strategic ends , for goals the West does not endorse .
You must realise that too .
The Western community of states is in favour of an autonomous status , which we consider urgently necessary .
Whether and to what extent there is any historical prospect of achieving that is a legitimate question , raised by freely elected Members of the European Parliament .
In view of the experiences we have had , I consider it only natural that it should be discussed , that these issues should also be aired publicly .
But when I think of the practical end results , Mrs Pack - and I beg you not to misunderstand my words as any unseemly criticism of your position , for which I have great sympathy - I believe there is no option other than a strategy of stabilisation , however imperfect it may be at present .
And in that context , the achievement followed by the implementation of an interim political settlement for Kosovo , endorsed by the Kosovar and the Yugoslav side , is of central importance .
In my view there are only worse alternatives to this strategy of stabilisation .
That is why I have explained to you that we must do our utmost to bring about a peaceful solution , working together with our partners in the Contact Group , but also in the European Union and in other institutions .
I am of course thinking just as much of Norway , which holds the presidency of the OSCE , as of all the others who are endeavouring to bring this about .
Thank you very much , Mr President-in-Office .
The debate is closed .
At this point I would like to wish a speedy recovery to our friend Willy Görlach , whom I saw after his accident coming in at least for the end of the debate .
Transparency in the European Union
The next item is the report ( A4-0476 / 98 ) by Mrs Lööw , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on transparency in the European Union .
Mr President , the background to this report stems from the fact that the Amsterdam Treaty represents a clear move towards establishing greater openness and transparency .
This has also been an important goal for the European Parliament both before and during its work on the new Treaty .
Since it is an issue which greatly affects the interests of our citizens and involves the democratic legitimacy of the EU , the Committee on Institutional Affairs felt that Parliament should produce an own-initiative report in which it would establish certain principles for promoting openness in the EU institutions before the Commission puts forward its initial proposal for , amongst other things , a code on general principles , as it is expected to do upon ratification of the Treaty .
This will also provide Parliament with another opportunity for raising the issue .
The committee has held a public hearing and a round table discussion , and the Directorate-General for Research carried out a comparative study on legislation in the Member States relating to public access to information .
It transpired that legislation varied considerably between individual countries .
It would perhaps be in order to point out here that neither my report nor the Amsterdam Treaty attempts to impose changes on individual Member States . The remit is to establish a new code on public access to EU documents , as well as a new culture of openness and transparency in the Commission , Council and Parliament .
However , the report points out that Members of the European Parliament would like such a principle to be applied to all EU institutions , regardless of the fact that it will be easier to achieve in some than in others .
For instance , it is a foregone conclusion that Europol is less likely than a number of other institutions to allow public access to its documents .
The Treaty of Amsterdam makes explicit reference to the public right of access to EU documents , and my report deals mainly with this principle .
I share the view that our citizens regard access to documents as the linchpin on which the principle of public access to information hinges .
Our citizens have a right to know what underlies decisions , so that they can form their own judgement as to whether they are appropriate .
In this way , openness prevents corruption , abuse of power and fraud .
Broadly speaking , the proposal means that all incoming and outgoing documents of importance in the EU institutions should be public .
Obviously , there are reasons for certain documents being classified , but these must be precisely defined in law .
They should not be vague and general ; and nor should the list of grounds for confidentiality be unduly long and detailed .
So that the public knows what documents are available , a public register should be set up and , of course , ways of tracing documents in the various institutions introduced .
New technology such as the Internet should make it possible for all European citizens to access the register .
Distance from Brussels need no longer be an obstacle to our citizens fully exercising their right to view documents .
The committee was overwhelmingly agreed , even though in the course of our work I detected a degree of scepticism about securing broad support for such radical changes , which after all go much further than current practice in many Member States .
I would also dare to hope that there will be broad support in the final vote , which would naturally put strong pressure on the Commission to come up with a proposal that meets Parliament 's requirements .
There was also some scepticism as to whether the Commission would really introduce a principle that allowed the public access to EU documents , since this would require a whole new culture .
I think I should warn you that a considerable effort will be required ; it will not be handed over on a plate .
It is not as simple as drawing up a new code .
It will require new working practices and probably new equipment , but above all resources for staff training .
I must say that in fact it all fits in very well with the much-needed reforms which the President of the Commission promised yesterday .
Having directed most of my remarks at the Commission , I should also point out that the same applies to all the EU institutions .
The Council in particular should concentrate on living up to it own proposal in the Treaty . Parliament also has a considerable way to go .
The report also deals with many other issues related to openness and transparency , such as more open meetings and greater use of the Internet for disseminating information and informing people about the issues under discussion .
However , we need not go any further into this , since it is all in the report .
I shall therefore devote the rest of my speaking time to some comments on the amendments .
The amendments were studied in committee and rejected by a large majority .
It is the duty of a rapporteur to be sensitive to the views of the committee as a whole , so I am not going to endorse them , even though I am sympathetic towards one or two , especially the two relating to the ' guaranteed freedom of speech for officials ' , which is a central and very special feature in the principle of public access to information in Sweden .
Under this , civil servants who pass on information to the media are afforded protection .
Such a law does not even exist in the other Scandinavian countries and , in my opinion , it would be futile to try to introduce similar legislation into the EU at the present time .
One amendment also says that EU legislation should not supersede national legislation .
It would be appropriate for me to end with a comment on this .
My aim with this report is to see that EU legislation on openness and transparency is shaped in a way that is acceptable to all Member States and does not conflict with national legislation , no matter how far reaching the latter may be .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we keep being accused of being remote from the citizens and aloof .
We can only defend ourselves against this accusation by ensuring greater transparency and democratic control .
The citizens of Europe have a right to that .
Transparency and democratic control will bring us closer to the people , something we should not just think about every five years just before the elections .
Much remains to be done .
That is apparent not just from Mrs Lööw 's report .
It is apparent also from the 20 conclusions set out in my opinion , which the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights approved unanimously .
What I consider most important of all is to make improved access of the citizens to information the focal point of transparency .
In this regard , Finland and Sweden have developed an enviable culture of transparency .
We should take a leaf out of their book throughout the European Union .
In fact , why should we deny the people the widest possible access to our files and documents ?
What actually prevents us from widening this right and also giving it to Parliament 's rapporteurs and others ?
Why can the Council not work just as openly as the European Parliament to a large extent does ?
Why do Council and Commission representatives have their own fixed seat in our committees , while Parliament does not in theirs , nor even its rapporteurs ?
But more transparency is not enough in itself if we want to come closer to the citizens .
In addition to making political procedures and decision-making processes transparent , we must give the citizens a say .
The European Union institutions must develop mechanisms to enable the citizens to bring their own ideas and thoughts into the decision-making process .
That is a basic requirement of democracy .
If we are to build the Europe of the future , we need the participation of all concerned , not least for the sake of our credibility .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it was with great pleasure that I listened to the statements by the new President-in-Office during the previous debate about the need for a European constitutional process and the announcement that a charter of fundamental rights would be drawn up .
Perhaps the members and colleagues in the Committee on Institutional Affairs will be able to judge for themselves just how pleased I am , given that I have been badgering them with this demand for four years , to which the reply tended to be that the time is not yet ripe .
Mr Herman , Mr Bourlanges , the time can become ripe very quickly , although perhaps it needed a green President-in-Office of the Council !
The subject of this report today also relates to this deep process of democratisation that we need .
This is a particularly backward area of democratisation that we are considering today , but perhaps that is partly due to a misunderstanding .
We usually refer to transparency , to public relations , to the information services here in Parliament and in the appropriate committees .
But in that way we tend to reveal rather than resolve the democratic crisis in the EU .
Transparency means clarity .
The corresponding democratic concept here is openness to the public .
It is this openness to the public to which the citizens of Europe have a right : open legislation ( not transparent legislation but legislation in public ) , the public justification by the administration of all its acts , rights of control and information for Parliament , in the second and third pillar too , public decisions and decision-making bases , in the area also of internal security and foreign policy , and the rights of the citizen to information ( not the information services ) , the press services , the public relations work of the European institutions .
It is not a question of transparency or of concepts that have no part in the democratic tradition but tend rather to be public relations exercises .
It is a question of the people 's right to openness as the foundation of democracy .
Mr President , it may be a coincidence that we are discussing a report about openness in the Union this week , but it really does make Mrs Lööw 's text a very topical one .
Had there been more transparency or more openness , then perhaps the Commission and the European Parliament would not have been in the situation of having to hold the debates we are holding this week .
But here too we need rules of play , for then openness really can provide the citizen with reliable information , which , God knows , we need .
After all , electoral campaigns always reveal the deficits in this area very clearly .
However , what we need is not market criers but precise information .
The Lööw report on openness within the European Union is a serious attempt to give just that precision to the relevant provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty .
An interinstitutionally agreed code of conduct is to be formulated to that end .
That is a difficult but a truly necessary task .
In any case the proposed provisions are likely to create considerably more openness .
I am sure further discussion will still be needed of some of the proposals , if they are also to apply to institutions such as the Court of Justice , the European Central Bank , the European Court of Auditors and the European Investment Bank .
It is certainly desirable - and here too we welcome the Lööw report - for Council and Coreper decisions to become more transparent by improved access to their documents , for the EU administration to provide the citizen with information more rapidly and courteously - which should really be a matter of course - and for multilingualism to be maintained precisely for the sake of transparency .
Today it is clear that modern electronic techniques have to be used .
Yet we should not go quite as far as most of the amendments , especially Amendment No 4 .
However , my group will endorse the broad lines of the report .
The report demands a great deal and of course the European Parliament must also realise that this would mean creating the appropriate financial and staffing conditions , to avoid being told afterwards by the Commission and all the other institutions that any lack of efficiency was simply due to a lack of the necessary resources .
That , after all , is the reason for the dilemma we now find ourselves in .
I really would wish to avoid that and I hope this report on openness within the Union will create the necessary bases for doing so .
Mr President , as we said , it is a rather interesting coincidence that the subject of yesterday 's debate was the administration , and here we are today discussing openness and how to improve the credibility of the Union .
A fundamental truth has emerged today : we need uniform practices in public administrations . We cannot go on living with 15 different cultures and 15 different concepts .
It only leads to rumours about a lack of transparency .
However , what I found disturbing in yesterday 's discussions was that the President of the Commission made absolutely no mention of a timetable for establishing a code on public access to EU documents , as described by the rapporteur .
When are we to see some action , and what principles will be included ?
It would seem to be Parliament 's responsibility .
I am afraid the President of the Commission is firmly of the opinion that ' il faut faire une profonde réflexion ' .
We should therefore all support the principles laid down by Mrs Lööw in her excellent report .
Mr Gebhardt 's intervention also contained some very good points .
We should have a code that includes clear rights for our citizens and obligations for the institutions .
It is vital that we dispel the current distrust in the EU institutions and restore their credibility .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Lööw has presented an excellent report , teaming prudence with boldness in an area where balance and moderation need to be maintained .
Yesterday 's debates demonstrated that very clearly .
The rapporteur points out that greater transparency is vital for the future of the European Union .
The citizens of the Union often perceive it as distant and bureaucratic .
Mrs Lööw also tells us that transparency can help prevent corruption and abuses of power .
There are thus two main aspects to this report : form and substance .
Form is not just about wording , it also has to do with attitude .
And I think that our rapporteur has defined it very well .
The second aspect is the substance .
Europe will never make progress until the European institutions , ourselves , but also the Commission - and this was debated at length yesterday - provide the necessary elements to facilitate understanding of their work , and this is true for all the information given to the citizens of the Union .
If we want the judgements made about European action and development to meet our hopes , then our duty as Members of the European Parliament is to improve the information the citizens receive .
Mr President , we think that this report is particularly well-balanced and the Union for Europe Group will be pleased to vote for it .
Mr President , more openness in law-making and administration is crucial for the democratisation of the EU .
Openness is the best remedy for corruption and poor administration , because it enables the public to identify the law-makers and hold them to account .
For that reason , I welcome the Lööw report .
I share most of the rapporteur 's views , even though I believe that the report could have gone further and been somewhat clearer on a number of crucial points .
It is obvious that the President of the Commission has not understood the meaning of real openness , as demonstrated by two actual examples .
First of all , the suspension of its official , Mr Van Buitenen , who revealed the truth about fraud to Parliament , shows the Commission 's authoritarian attitude .
There is consequently a need for guaranteed freedom of speech to protect the right of officials to make public statements without fear of retribution , and I have tabled an amendment to this effect .
Secondly , Mr Santer 's letter to the Swedish Prime Minster , Göran Persson , was a noteworthy incident .
It is totally unacceptable for the Commission to act like a thought police when an EU head of government criticises its actions .
The weak point in the Lööw report is the proposal relating to open meetings of the Council .
It is a fact of democratic life that all law-making should be public .
However , this is not what Mrs Lööw is demanding .
But why should European citizens be content with anything less than complete transparency in the decision-making and legislative processes ? After all , that is what normal democracy is all about .
There are two other areas where the report would be improved by the inclusion of the amendments tabled by the GUE / NGL Group .
It is important that the EU should not intrude on national rules relating to openness .
This can and does occur as a result of the excessive secrecy that exists within the EU , as for example when the Council appealed to the Court of Justice over the so-called Journalist Case .
The Council 's action directly called into question the rules on openness and constitutional law at national level .
That case , like many others , demonstrates the need for a quick and inexpensive way of appealing against decisions by the EU to withhold certain documents .
Greater openness is vital for the process of democratisation in the EU .
It is therefore regrettable that concern over this issue , both in committee and in the tabling of amendments , was shown above all by Members from the Nordic countries .
The Lööw report is an important and constructive piece of work , and is worthy of greater attention .
Mr President , the Amsterdam Treaty explicitly introduces the notion that Europe 's administrations must become more transparent ; indeed , it makes specific reference to public access to documents of the three institutions .
In our opinion this transparency should be extended to all European bodies and fostered by other means too , such as public access to meetings , open administration , the drafting of clearer and simpler texts , a solution to the problem of multilingualism , and so on .
We are convinced that such transparency must be a real aspiration , not just a verbal one , an expression of political intent , not just a bureaucratic act ultimately leading to confusion and away from the truth , in a deliberate bid to avoid clarity .
We ask ourselves this : how much can our citizens , today , feel part of an institutional Europe which is increasingly complex and muddled ?
How much can we encourage them to understand the workings of our institutions , now that these are more relevant than ever and now that decisions taken by the Community bodies affect our daily lives , if there are no means of involving the citizens themselves in the procedures and enabling them to understand the reasons for the decisions made ?
How much can we stress the remoteness of the institutions from the citizens , without running the risk of generating that disgust , that rejection of Europe which is unfortunately all too evident ?
How much strain can we place on public disaffection , without running the risk of alienating our citizens once and for all from the centres of decision-making ?
Although it is true that the sad affair of fraud and misappropriation of European taxpayers ' money , underlined by the refusal of this House to grant discharge for 1996 , is currently casting dark shadows over the Community 's whole executive , it must nevertheless be brought to public attention .
We are duty-bound to do so , having been elected by our citizens to represent them in this House .
The risk is , however , that those citizens will become increasingly disaffected .
Indeed , the numbers not voting at recent elections in various parts of Europe serve to trigger alarm bells , showing that people have lost confidence : instead of going to vote , they opt for a Sunday outing .
This attitude is becoming dangerous in that while on the one hand it leaves them at the mercy of decisions taken by others - generally active members of traditional political parties - on the other , it means that in the longer term they fall prey to the latest demagogues and populists .
A key feature of our contemporary society , based on the supremacy of law , is to involve the citizens in political decision-making , shaped until recently by national governments and now the prerogative of our Community institutions .
Thus the citizens are entitled not only to feel the effects of political decisions , but also to participate in taking them .
If transparency is to encompass all forms of public access to information and decision-making , democratic control implies that our citizens should not only participate but should also be allowed a supervisory role .
Mr President , the reports by Mrs Lööw and Mr Brok on the transparency of the European institutions and the way the Commission President is elected could not have been presented at a better time .
As far as transparency is concerned , Monday made it all the more clear that the closed bastion of European bureaucracy must be thrown open .
Parliament has tried to do this through the Amsterdam Treaty by calling for all documents used in preparing European legislation to have to be made open and open meetings of the Council when it is dealing with legislation .
These wishes have only been granted in part .
Yesterday 's tough debate once again makes it clear that further steps must be taken .
I should like to go further on this point .
I believe we need a law , a European directive , on transparency of government at European level so that the public and Parliament do not have to depend on random promises , but on clear European law .
As regards the Commission President , I should like to make one small comment .
I also support the Brok report , but I believe that the code which the Commission is now proposing should make it clearer that European Commissioners hold office on behalf of the European administration and on behalf of Europe , and not on behalf of their national Member States .
That is one of the points which has led to the degeneration we have seen , and it is something that needs to be laid down as soon as possible in an internal code for the Commission .
This is what I wanted to stress in connection with the Brok report .
This concludes my comments .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank Mrs Lööw for her fine report .
It is a good start , although it does not go far enough .
The proposals relating to guaranteed freedom of speech for officials , public access to Council meetings of a legislative nature and the right of appeal to the Court of Justice against decisions to withhold documents , without incurring costs , do give the report some muscle .
We now have evidence of what a lack of openness and public access to information can lead to .
It is very likely that this debate on a vote of confidence would never have taken place if we had had a comprehensive code on openness , guaranteed freedom of speech and so on , which are the subject of today 's discussion .
The best and probably the only way of pre-empting similar debates in future is to open up the administration by establishing a register of incoming documents , with clear rules about what should be public and what should be classified , and with freedom of speech and open Council meetings .
Three cheers for the report and the five amendments !
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur for two reasons : firstly , because she has raised an issue which reflects no credit on the European Union , and secondly , because she approaches it with very specific proposals .
I would like to give two examples .
The first is that the world over , all over the earth , only two bodies meet behind closed doors : one is the Council of Ministers of the European Union and the other is the People 's National Assembly in China .
And , ladies and gentlemen , I wonder why we pass resolutions about China and accuse it of a lack of democracy and transparency , when the Council of Ministers of the European Union is doing exactly the same thing .
The second example is the dismissal of a certain Commission staff member .
Do you know what message emerges from that dismissal ?
The message that the Commission pays its staff , and indeed pays them well , to work , see and hear , but not speak out .
They must not even say anything to the European Parliament , because it is not in our interests to hear what goes on in the Commission .
I therefore congratulate the rapporteurs .
My group will vote for their report .
Mr President , a democratic society is one where an ordinary citizen can ascertain the identity of administrators and the nature of their actions , and when , as a result of this knowledge , that citizen can attribute responsibility when appropriate and monitor the ends pursued through political action .
This is the only way of preventing the abuse of power .
However , the citizens of today 's European Union are still denied information on fundamental issues relating to justice and home affairs .
Regulatory documents are drafted in secret .
Decisions are taken without the reasons for them being made public , alleging that public order and internal security are at stake . In the past , therefore , institutions have been able to treat the principle of confidentiality in a cavalier fashion , and they continue to do so today .
There is much talk of working towards greater transparency and openness to bring the institutions of the European Union closer to the citizen . What is really at issue , however , is making the new Europe and its institutions democratically legitimate .
That is the real aim .
The Treaty of Amsterdam represented a step in this direction , but more is needed .
Administrators can still restrict information at their discretion , and that power must be done away with .
This report represents an effort to restrict the powers of discretion available to European administrators , and that is why we support it . We believe this is the way forward .
Applause
Mr President , I should first like to thank Mrs Lööw and the Committee on Institutional Affairs for drawing up this report . It will be very much at the forefront of our minds in the European Commission .
By virtue of the Treaty we have been entrusted with the task of presenting to Parliament and to the Council a legislative proposal aimed at increasing the transparency of our institutional system , particularly as regards access to documents .
The services within the various institutions are currently debating the matter . As for ourselves , we shall put forward our proposal as from the entry into force of the Treaty .
This issue is crucial to the future relationship between the European institutions and the citizens , who ought to be the key players in the system of integration .
The Amsterdam process resulted in a Treaty that is very explicit in this regard , referring as it does to a range of issues that directly affect the citizens and the population as a whole . These issues relate to our citizens ' rights , interests and legitimate aspirations .
Clearly , secrecy , the lack of clarity surrounding proceedings and decision-making in the institutions , and the suspicion - only the suspicion - that information is suppressed are not conducive to a positive relationship between the Union and its citizens . This is why the Treaty of Amsterdam refers to transparency .
The Commission will study this report very carefully .
It will help us to prepare our own proposal . We shall also bear in mind the report by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
I should like to refer to several key aspects of the resolution .
First , it has to be said that the text and , in particular , the context of the debates , has clearly demonstrated the extent to which the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam modify the present situation .
As far as access to documents is concerned , certain interinstitutional arrangements are currently in place , and each institution also has its own procedures .
However , these procedures depend heavily on the good will of each institution , with scant backing from Court decisions .
The Treaty lays down an absolute right to transparency , which must be enshrined in a legislative act and in internal provisions made by each of the institutions .
Secondly , we must remember that greater freedom of access to documents is not an aim in itself . Rather , it should lead to increased transparency of procedures and a clearer appreciation of political and institutional responsibilities .
Transparency should enable us to put across to the citizen a better picture of how each institution operates . We need to dispel the myth that decisions are taken by Brussels bureaucrats who are out of touch with reality .
In this regard , the interinstitutional agreement on the quality of legislation should be welcomed . It represents a significant step towards legislation the citizen will find easier to understand .
Thirdly , and in conclusion , I should like to refer to the issue of information , which was raised by a number of speakers .
Adequate information is obviously the most important aspect of transparency .
A transparent system cannot really come about without information , nor can progress be made along the course plotted by this Parliament .
Action has been taken in this regard .
A large number of documents are now available on the Internet and this means that all these documents , which are by definition public documents , are now actually accessible . Previously , access to them was fraught with complications .
Work along these lines must continue , bearing in mind of course that written information , oral information and direct contact with the citizens are nevertheless essential .
For all these reasons , I should once again like to congratulate the rapporteur on her significant report . We shall give it serious consideration when drafting our legislative proposal .
The debate is closed .
The vote will follow immediately .
VOTES
The Commission recommendation for a Council decision concerning exchange rate matters relating to agreements signed between France and certain African countries , for the management of the CFA franc and the Comorian franc , is a technical document that is highly revealing of the Brussels methods .
It shows how the CFA franc has been drawn in under Community authority in spite of the Treaty , how national prerogatives are violated , and how French interests are gradually going to be compromised .
First of all , these exchange rate agreements do not involve the Bank of France , because they relate to a fixed rate convertibility guarantee granted to the CFA franc by the French Treasury , that is , by our country 's national budget .
Under the circumstances , even when the franc is replaced by the euro , one might assume on reading the Treaty that these agreements would continue to be an entirely French responsibility , given that it is our financial guarantee that is involved , and that , a priori , the European Central Bank will have nothing to do with it .
That was certainly the interpretation of the French , at the time of Maastricht , of Article 109 ( 5 ) of the Treaty , which states that ' without prejudice to Community competence and Community agreements as regards economic and monetary union , Member States may negotiate in international bodies and conclude international agreements ' .
But that was reckoning without the appetite for power of the European institutions , notably the Commission .
Even though the management of the CFA franc will present no risk whatsoever to the stability of the euro , given the tiny sums involved , the Commission decided , against all likelihood and against any legal logic , not to apply Article 109 ( 5 ) , but to apply Article 109 ( 3 ) , which sets out the arrangements for approval of monetary agreements signed by the Community .
Thus , the first paragraph of the recommendation generously grants us the right to maintain the agreements relating to the CFA franc , despite the fact that this is our right anyway .
Added to this , we should inform the Commission and the Economic and Financial Committee of any plan to amend these agreements , and even in certain cases submit them to the Council for approval .
This all constitutes a flagrant violation of French national sovereignty .
This legal violation comes on top of the violation of French interests that will result from the euro replacing the franc in relations with the CFA franc .
In fact , the financial guarantee that France granted to the CFA franc involved an important commercial advantage for our country , since economic agents could organise their transactions more easily on the basis of fixed exchange rates .
In future , France will still grant its financial guarantee , but this will be of commercial benefit to every country in the euro zone .
Finally , the exchange rate agreements for the CFA franc used to be reasonably coherent , because the French Treasury 's guarantee could be activated by variations in the franc , which was itself managed by the Bank of France .
But in future , the French guarantee could be activated by variations in the euro , over which the French authorities will have virtually no control , except on the margin .
Part of the internal logic of the system has been broken .
This abandonment of French sovereignty , added to the loss of our commercial advantage , is bound to mean a gradual reduction of French influence in the African countries involved .
Mr President , we have now voted on the Lööw report , and I should like to offer my congratulations to the rapporteur .
It is a notable report which has come out at just the right moment , in view of the discussions that have been taking place both here and in the other EU institutions during recent months , weeks and days .
We began our work on openness and transparency in the Committee on Institutional Affairs long before the Treaty of Amsterdam .
At the time , Mr Bonde was responsible for the working document that was produced .
The report sets out the measures that are needed to increase the openness and transparency which form the basis of the democratic control that Parliament in particular should be exercising .
It covers public access to documents , the registering of documents , open meetings of the Council and , in particular , greater use of the Internet and a new and truly accountable administrative structure .
However , the need for openness and transparency is not confined to allowing the public access to documents ; it also applies to the entire decision-making process and to public-sector activities , as well as to how public money is spent .
Without openness and transparency in these areas , we shall never have democratic institutions that function effectively .
The report states that the Amsterdam Treaty can be regarded as a first step towards establishing a genuine principle of public access in the EU .
However , there is still a tremendously long way to go .
I only mention this so that we do not think that we have produced a report that is all-embracing .
In my view , it contains no definite proposal on guaranteed freedom of speech , and I believe that Mrs Lööw agrees with me on this .
Unfortunately , the House did not adopt the amendment tabled by Mr Sjöstedt and myself .
Guaranteed freedom of speech for officials , which is a freedom accorded in the Nordic countries , in other words the right to make information public without the risk of sanctions and the right to remain anonymous , must become the legally accepted practice .
I believe this is a basic element in any genuine principle of public access .
Parliament must see to it that the Amsterdam Treaty , or any future treaty , is amended to this effect .
Mrs Lööw 's report on transparency in the European Union is on the right lines , but it is still based overly on individual issues and suffers from a lack of overall perspective .
First of all , while it is true that the Amsterdam Treaty recognises the citizen 's right of access to the documents of the European institutions - this right should , of course , have been granted long ago - there are grounds for concern about the lack of symmetry in the treatment of the Council and the Commission .
A specific article - the newArticle 207 - defines the principal obligations of the Council in terms of transparency , but curiously the equivalent does not exist for the Commission .
The Commission should not take advantage of this omission to try to perpetuate the obscurity that surrounds the management of its dossiers . We now see the appalling consequences of that in the endless frauds and scandals that have come to light .
What is even more serious is that the Lööw report is careful not to broaden its perspective and does not raise the fundamental question , namely , is it not true that the entire policy on European integration that has been implemented in recent years is by its very nature based on non-transparency ?
There are two sides to the Monnet method , which was given so much praise by the German Presidency just this morning . There is a policy of integration based on small successive technical steps , but there is also , and we often forget to mention this , a policy whose final objective is never clearly expressed to the citizens , even if the strategic players are themselves completely in the know .
By its very nature , this method is undemocratic .
Perhaps it was of very little importance when the Community was in its early days , but now it has dramatic consequences in the shape of essential quasi-clandestine transfers of sovereignty and a complete sense of isolation from public opinion .
Democracy must be restored in Europe , and that means going against the Monnet method .
Of course , that may put the brakes on European federalism .
But today we have to prioritise between integration or democracy .
Today the Danish Social Democrats voted for the report on openness .
We are in favour of the public right of access to documents in the EU .
We also agree with the amendments which emphasise that national rules on openness should be respected and that it should be possible to appeal to the European Court of Justice if public right of access is denied .
However , we do not agree that all Council meetings should be public .
But that is not the same as saying that afterwards the Council can keep its decisions and minutes secret .
Similarly , we believe that civil servants should follow certain rules when speaking about internal matters , such as sensitive personal information , as in the Danish civil service .
This report comes at the right time , when scepticism about the European Union , indeed condemnation of it , seems to be the style in certain press circles and in a section of public opinion .
The anti-Europeans disparage the Amsterdam Treaty and yet it explicitly introduces the concept of transparency into the Treaty on European Union , by guaranteeing the public 's right of access to European Union documents and by stating that Community decisions are to be taken ' as openly as possible and as closely as possible to the citizen ' .
I am therefore grateful to the rapporteur for her work in preparing the way for the post-Amsterdam period by attempting to lay down the necessary requirements for improving transparency .
Her report calls for the new code of conduct to be applied not only to Commission , Council and Parliament documents , but also to those of all the other institutions of the Union . It also asks that the practice of holding Council meetings in public be extended considerably and that the practice of making secret declarations be ended .
In addition , the report calls for legislative proposals , comitology texts and other important documents to be put on the Internet , thereby making information more readily available to the citizens .
This is a whole range of measures that , in my view , are essential to improve the running of the European Union and to ensure that the citizens of Europe have a better understanding of what it does .
I will therefore vote in favour of this report and I urge Parliament to do the same .
A few weeks ago , when crossing Rue Wiertz , I was stopped by a person who asked me point-blank what she had to do to get access to the European Parliament library .
She was a German student researching a dissertation , and she had been able to consult Commission documents without difficulty . However , she found the door of our institution barred .
I naturally signed an authorisation pass and she was able to make contact with our librarians who did everything to help her with her research on Europe .
But I wondered then about the transparency of the European institutions in general and our own in particular .
Public access to documents is essential for transparency and has been provided for in the Amsterdam Treaty in Article 191 ( a ) ( 2 ) .
So the rapporteur is quite right to question our own system .
Who makes the rules ?
The Conference of Presidents takes these decisions without involving any committee .
I admit that the decision of 10 July 1997 on public access to European Parliament documents is certainly a step in the right direction .
More recently , on 17 April 1998 , the Bureau took a decision on the costs involved in forwarding documents . That is all very well .
But the question of access is so important that it actually concerns all Members , because it is closely linked to the citizens ' trust in the European Union and the image they have of it .
Are we trying hard enough to make our work public ?
I am struck by the contrast that exists between the mass of documents from the often excellent work of our committees and their impact on the media and on public opinion .
How can we improve that ?
The Dury / Maij-Weggen report ahead of the IGC wanted access to EU documents enshrined in the Treaty .
On that point our two colleagues won the day .
They also wanted the documents to be easy to read , they wanted the Treaties to be summarised , restructured and simplified , and they wanted the special comments and reservations of the Member States in relation to Union legislation to also be made public .
We need to make progress on all these points .
Finally , we must remember , too , that other reports must also follow on transparency .
It is not limited to access to documents , important though that may be .
When Maastricht was ratified , some states distributed the Treaty to each household .
They forgot that European jargon needs to be simplified and translated so that the citizens can understand what is at stake .
This simplification is just as necessary at the level of decision-making .
The closer Europe is to the democratic model of the states that form it , the more the citizen will relate to it .
The Amsterdam Treaty represents progress in that direction , but there is still a long road ahead of us to achieve transparency and democracy .
This is a problem linked to the construction of Europe , in transition between nation states and a federation .
But there is no doubt that the principle of transnational lists is likely to develop the sense of European awareness .
The construction of Europe is at a disadvantage due to a lack of public confidence , which is currently aggravated by the dreadful climate that has been poisoning the European atmosphere over the last few months .
The report we are considering today therefore comes at the right time .
Transparency is more necessary than ever if the construction of Europe is to make good progress .
I am delighted that our rapporteur does not restrict the idea of greater transparency merely to public access to Community documents , and extends this concept to include ensuring more open meetings of the Council when meeting in its legislative capacity , making fuller use of modern methods of rapid or real-time communication , drafting simpler texts , retaining the use of all languages within the institutions , and improving the quality of information campaigns about the European Union .
For my part , I would lay particular stress on the fact that current exceptions to transparency need to be better defined with more restrictions laid down . This must be the case although it is obvious to everyone that a certain level of confidentiality - and even absolute confidentiality - is sometimes not only desirable , but also highly essential in the management of difficult or critical issues .
More generally , I share the view that the drawing up of a new code of conduct and its extension to all the Community institutions will certainly provide necessary clarification and help them regain much-needed credibility .
Finally , I am glad that our rapporteur calls for agreement on ' improving the quality of the drafting of Community legislation , leading to clearer and simpler ... texts ' .
Unfortunately , incomprehensible legal documents and regulations are not the prerogative of the European institutions .
Indeed , many Member States would gain by consolidating and codifying their legislation .
This is another reason for the Union to set an example !
In the light of the recent accusations of fraud and deception in the Commission , I hope that the Lööw report on transparency in the EU will be approved by a large majority .
I am convinced that a genuine principle of public access to EU documents would be an effective instrument in combating deception and fraud in the EU institutions , and would help to overcome the justified suspicion and lack of confidence currently felt by EU citizens .
What is still lacking is the so-called guaranteed freedom of speech for officials , without which , in reality , openness and the principle of public access cannot function properly .
The recent suspension of the official who informed Parliament of certain notable occurrences in the Commission demonstrates with admirable clarity the need for guaranteed freedom of speech .
I therefore hope that this freedom of speech will be introduced in the EU with all possible speed .
That concludes the vote .
The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.

Approval by Parliament of Commission President
The next item is the report ( A4-0488 / 98 ) by Mr Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on institutional implications of European Parliament approval of the President of the Commission and the independence of Members of the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with the implementation of the Amsterdam Treaty , the European Parliament has new powers of determining relations between the institutions .
If we summarise the provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty in the usual terms , it must be said that the European Council only has the right to propose the President of the Commission and that the European Parliament has the real right to elect him .
This adds a new dimension to their relations and so we will also have to agree the procedures that need to be introduced in the course of this summer and autumn .
The political groups must grasp this new opportunity from the outset , which is why both the Committee on Institutional Affairs and I myself consider it right that in the long term we should adopt Jacques Delors 's proposal that the major political movements should nominate their candidates for the office of President of the Commission during the European election campaign .
I believe that is extremely important because it personalises European policy and can thus also stimulate greater interest among the people in the European idea .
But I believe it is also important for the European Council and the governments to accept the results of the European elections as a determining factor in the nominations .
That is why we think it is wrong for the presidency to propose nominating the Council 's candidate nine days before the European elections , for the European Council cannot know the outcome of those elections at that point .
So it could make a proposal that was not compatible with the outcome of those elections .
A special summit must therefore be held after the European elections , so that , in line with the parliamentary majorities that emerge from them , a candidate can be proposed who is likely to win Parliament 's confidence .
Here we will probably have to follow a new direction if we are to make the necessary headway .
So we will attach great importance to negotiations with the European Council 's nominee , so that we can vote on the basis of the nominated president 's undertakings with regard to his political guidelines , the quality of interinstitutional relations , but also of the criteria which he and the governments will follow in the nomination of the other members of the Commission .
Here , too , the nominated President of the Commission elected by the European Parliament has new opportunities , for the Member State governments can only submit a proposal in common accord with him .
That means this President of the Commission is also responsible for meeting another demand made by the European Parliament , namely to ensure a reasonable balance between the sexes and between the main political tendencies in the European Union within that Commission , so that it can act impartially .
In our view that is also a real criterion for the conduct of the hearings of nominees .
In that respect a number of improvements are still needed after the experiences of 1995 .
It is also extremely important to make it clear that the Commission will become more independent because any conflicts of interest will be prevented by the declaration of external interests , by the obligation to refrain from taking part in certain discussions and other aspects addressed in the report .
I believe that will help us avoid some of those situations that are currently the subject of criticism .
This also offers new opportunities to hold Commissioners more politically accountable - as we tend to do in the case of national ministers - so as to make provision for their compulsory retirement and enable the President of the Commission to withdraw the portfolios of Commissioners who have failed politically , as laid down in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Much of what we are discussing at present would not even have arisen if such instruments existed , because there would be more means of resolving the situation .
If possible , the President of the Commission should submit his proposals even before the summer break , after the European elections , and they should be voted on as early as possible so that the procedures for appointing the individual Commissioners can be initiated .
I believe that on the basis of the timetable submitted to us we could find a solution that the Council and the future Commission could also come to support , so that in this way we can create the basis for new relations between the institutions , which would bring a new dimension to Europe .


Mr President , the report that our esteemed German colleague Mr Brok is finally presenting to Parliament today is in essence the follow-up to and completion of a draft report presented earlier by another esteemed colleague , Mr Giampaolo d 'Andrea , who has since become a deputy minister in the Italian Government and has therefore left us rather earlier than expected .
It is a report which I think Parliament could comfortably adopt without any real reservations about its basic principles , because Mr Brok , encouraged of course by the favourable opinion of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , has drafted it in a way that takes into account most of the points about which we in this House feel strongly .
And this is another demonstration that Parliament , at least in some cases - and fortunately there are quite a lot of them - can make timely headway and make even more rapid progress than the Treaties and anything that is likely to be drawn up in the future .
We are debating the approval of the nomination of the President of the European Commission by the European Parliament , which is a most important change instituted by the Treaty of Amsterdam and which legitimises at least one of the two authorities that make up the European Union , if we accept the definition that the European Union is an association of peoples and states .
In that case , through the MEPs , the Members of the European Parliament , it confers popular legitimacy upon the proposal by the states , the Heads of State and Government , for the nomination of the President of the Commission .
This is a very important institutional step and if , as we hope , the ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam has been completed by the French Presidency by the end of March , it will come into effect in May and immediately after the election of the Members of the European Parliament this very important new provision will be implemented for the first time .
I am in complete agreement with Mr Brok 's observation that the scheduling of the European Council in Cologne one week before the Euro-elections is unfortunate .
I cannot believe that the result of the Euro-elections will not influence the proposals by the Member States for the President of the Commission .
We must insist and fight for this to change .
After all , it is already January and we must do that .
I do not have much to add . My view , and that of the Legal Affairs Committee which I represent , is that Parliament must always interpret the Treaties imaginatively while not departing too far from the letter , because that might create more problems than it solves .
The Treaties have loopholes , and these must be made good , but for the moment what is important is to implement the Treaty of Amsterdam correctly in July .
Mr President , I too congratulate the rapporteur on his report . This report is about the future - which makes a change from the debates we were having earlier - and , in particular , about relations between the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament with a view to greater democratisation of our institutions .
Who is this report aimed at ? I think it is aimed first and foremost at us , at the European Parliament .
It is an internal discussion document , and I would also congratulate the Committee on Institutional Affairs on having initiated this process . It is then also aimed at the other institutions with which we need to find a balance .
The report deals with three groups of issues : the new features of the Amsterdam Treaty ; the elements to revitalise the election campaign , namely , the Delors proposals ; and finally , a clearer , fairer , and more transparent model of democracy .
As regards the Amsterdam Treaty , three new features have taken advantage , without admitting it , of universal suffrage , and , among these features - as Mr Brok has already mentioned - is the issue of assent , which is binding on all parties .
The first matter of assent relates to the nomination for the President of the Commission , who will then chose the Commissioners jointly with the governments . A second assent relates to the whole of the College consisting of President and Commissioners , and the fact that this Commission will work to the political guidelines defined by the President .
This shows the importance of the role to be played by the European Parliament and the need to secure a majority . The outline is emerging of a European Union where an executive - the Commission - will be appointed by two legislative institutions , that is , the European Parliament , representing the citizens , and the Council , representing the Member States .
This is a fragile tripolar structure and many concessions will be needed to achieve this balance .
But it is clear that the aim of the Amsterdam Treaty is that neither the Council nor the European Parliament should be in a position to alone appoint the executive without taking account of the position of the other institution .
They are thus condemned , or at least invited , to work together and negotiate the composition , political guidelines and working methods of the Commission .
Parliament is now in a position , therefore , to play a distinctly stronger role in the appointment of the College of Commissioners .
That is new and I think we need to get used to it , which may not be so simple .
The second issue involves adding vitality to the election campaign .
As everyone knows , for a campaign to be successful , it needs to be about people and that was the appeal of the Delors plan .
The problem is that our structures , especially the political parties , are not entirely ready for that yet .
So it is unlikely to come into operation for these elections , but it probably will for the next ones and we must adapt to it .
In any case , I do not think that the process of nominating someone for the presidency can begin until the voters have had their say , if only out of respect for the citizen in his role as a voter and for the European Parliament .
After all , Parliament represents a breeding ground that Member States can draw from when forming their own governments , be it for ministers or for secretaries of state , and it may be surprising that the European structures cannot do more , particularly in terms of the composition of the Commission .
And finally , I would like to say that I was very pleasantly surprised when the Council representative said in his statement this morning that the Amsterdam Treaty had given the European Parliament important new rights and powers , and when he added that he could see the next IGC granting the European Parliament an even more important role in the appointment of the Commission than is provided for in the Amsterdam Treaty .
We have therefore probably been too modest up until now .
Mr President , this report concerns a most important aspect of the European Union 's constitution ; if its proposals become reality , the European Union will become far more parliamentary and therefore also democratic in nature .
We must remember that for a very long time EU policy was purely a matter for governments .
Now the European Union is gradually moving closer towards fulfilling certain of the criteria of a parliamentary democracy , a most important and positive move .
I believe it is very important that this also gives considerably more political weight to the elections to the European Parliament .
If the people 's representation within the European Union now acquires the right to have a determining say in the appointments to the highest offices of the executive of the European Union , it will also acquire considerably greater influence on Commission policy .
I believe it is most important to follow on with the next step now and to enshrine in the political order of the EU the accountability of the Commission and its individual members to Parliament .
After all , we have discovered the need for that very clearly in the current debates .
The basic idea is surely as follows : we want a strong European Union , a Union that can also assert itself vis-à-vis national interests .
But a European Union that has this kind of power and influence needs a twin brother or sister .
Its name is democracy .
This report shows us that we can progress along this road to a democratic European Union in a crucial area , if the proposals it makes are implemented .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is still present in the House and is today taking part in our debate , which I feel is right .
Politics , in its most noble sense , is action , and I , in my own modest way , can contribute to this debate .
In this respect , I must say that I have no desire to repeat here the statements I made in the competent committee regarding my disagreement with some of the solutions contained in Mr Brok 's report .
The emphasis on the Commission 's vocation of government is one of these aspects , together with the indication during the European elections of the name of the candidate for Commission President and the obligation to nominate a substantial number of Members of the European Parliament as Members of the Commission .
However , I must say that I applaud and welcome the rule giving greater political responsibility to the Commission President .
This rule , which results from the Amsterdam Treaty , means that the governments of the Member States must , by common consensus , nominate someone for Commission President . This therefore implies that the Member States must give more thought to the name of the person to nominate .
The European Parliament has a vital role in considering and voting for both the President and the Members of the Commission .
The greater political responsibility and authority of the Commission President is a principle to be applauded and is today , more than ever , a factor we should all welcome .
If only one of my proposals had been adopted in the competent committee , this would have allowed some time between the nomination of the President and the latter 's programme and the respective vote for negotiating , settling interests and deciding on a strong personality with political credibility and authority over the Commission .
Europe needs this rule .
Mr President , I broadly agree with this report , apart from one central point with which I do not agree , namely the attempt to link the nomination of the Commission President to the elections to the European Parliament , as Mr Delors had also once proposed .
I do not agree with it because the institutional consequences of this proposal have not been thought through and because it makes the dilemma of our method of integration quite glaringly obvious .
The President-in-Office of the Council praised the Jean Monnet method today , the pragmatism of integration policy .
That was the method of discreet projects that cleared the way and created momentum .
I believe the situation today is quite different , which is why I am extremely pleased that the President-in-Office has now for the first time announced the need for a constitutional process .
For the pragmatic method will certainly not take us forward any more .
What is the point of this kind of election of a President of the Commission if it is not a real election ?
How can a parliament downgrade its own election into the quasi-election of an executive ?
Where does this quasi-election of the Commission President take us ?
Towards a presidential democracy ?
Towards a federal system ?
Or does the President of the Commission have to be a Member of Parliament , and , if so , why ?
On the basis of what kind of constitutional vision ?
I think the time has passed for trying to turn the accumulation of power that is the EU into a democracy by means of those kinds of pragmatic , individual advances .
The only way to turn this Union into a democracy now is through a constitutional process .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this morning the President-in-Office made a splendid , very important speech , which was certainly extremely well received .
However , on Tuesday afternoon , the slot devoted to relations with the Council , while we are discussing a text concerning relations between the European Council and Parliament in such a sensitive area - one where , post-Amsterdam , Parliament now possesses the powers which led to Mr Brok 's excellent report - well , the Council is absent .
I do not see a Council representative , and quite frankly , if I may say so , given that Mr Brok , the rapporteur , was the European Parliament 's spokesman in the working group which negotiated Amsterdam , this strikes me as conduct unworthy of a new presidency .
Surely it could have paid a little more attention to such an important report .
So , Mr Oreja , we shall say to the Commission what is meant for the ears of the Council , and then we shall send the minutes to the German Presidency .
I wholeheartedly endorse Mr Brok 's report which , if adopted as it stands , without the amendments aiming to make it more lightweight , will I believe be an excellent starting-point for the next five years , with a Commission that is equal to the challenges lying ahead of the European Union .
I hope that the House will adopt my amendment on the European Council , drawing the Council 's attention to the fact that holding the European Council on 3 and 4 June will jeopardise the whole scenario established at Amsterdam .
I call on the German Presidency to acknowledge the need to move either the Council or the date on which the president-designate is selected .
I hope that my request will be noted in the Minutes .
Mr President , there are awful coincidences in parliamentary life .
That is what has happened with the Brok report .
Just as everyone is realising that the European Commission is rotten to the core with corruption , Parliament 's Committee on Institutional Affairs comes up with a proposal for us to act like a government of Europe by exploiting in advance the Amsterdam Treaty .
Once again , the old theory of the independence of the Commission is trotted out . The federalists seem to regard it as a central pillar of their doctrine , but personally I see it as a clear cause of the evil that is eating away at the European institutions .
The resolution you are to vote on actually proposes strengthening the idea of the independence of the Commission , so as , and I quote ' to safeguard the Commission as the motor that promotes the Community interest , the guardian of the Treaties and the exclusive holder of the right of legislative initiative ' .
That amounts to virtual deification of the Commission : it is pure and virtuous , it defends the general interest and it is worthy of being granted essential powers .
Of course , the honourable Member who drafted those lines was no doubt thinking of strengthening the Commission 's independence with regard to the Council and the Member States , but not with regard to the European Parliament .
Unfortunately , things are very different in practice and it is revealing that the most serious punishment recently meted out by the Commission against one of its officials was taken against Mr Van Buitenen , who made the mistake of passing compromising documents specifically to this Parliament .
In fact , the doctrine of independence has led to a sense of superiority and impunity on the part of the Commission and this has encouraged lax behaviour to a much worse degree than we can probably even imagine today .
So we are combating this doctrine in order to get to the root of the evil .
We want the Commission to be subject to thorough control on the part of Parliament and the Member States meeting in the Council . And in this respect , I would remind you , ladies and gentlemen , of how vital it is to vote on Thursday in favour of the motion of censure tabled on the initiative of my group , but now signed by Members from each of Parliament 's groups .
Mr President , the rapporteur has taken on a difficult legacy with this report .
But he has successfully got it through committee with very skilful compromise amendments .
He is to be congratulated on that , even if he is not present .
In connection with this report , and besides the qualifications and criticisms Mr Voggenhuber has already made , I would like to raise another subject that is not considered in the report itself and cannot indeed be considered given the Treaties as they stand .
I have repeatedly pointed out that I regard the nomination of Commissioners by the Member States as an inherent mistake in the EU 's institutional system .
It inevitably gives rise to conflicts between what the citizens of the nominating Member State expect of their Commissioner and the latter 's obligation to give priority to EU interests .
I think this is at least partly responsible for the current difficulties and believe that this aspect also needs to be considered during the discussions on reforming the institutions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , during this unusual week the European Parliament is taking a twofold position on its executive .
Firstly , we are deciding on the destructive vote of censure - as it is called - against the Commission , and secondly we are establishing how our rights of assent can be used constructively in relation to future Commissions .
It is a question of becoming stronger as a parliament .
That is the main message of the Amsterdam Treaty .
But a stronger parliament also implies equal legislative rights , full budgetary rights and the right both to elect and to control the executive .
We have concrete demands to make in that respect .
The new President of the Commission must be voted in by the European Parliament , so the candidate must not be nominated before the elections .
Furthermore , for the future I hope that the main political parties will fight the campaign for the election of the European Parliament with a supranational top candidate who also aspires to the office of President of the Commission .
A substantial number of MEPs should form part of the college of Commissioners .
Today , as we know , there are seven already .
The proportion of women , currently 25 % , needs to be increased .
Moreover , the composition of the Commission should reflect the spectrum of political tendencies that make up the European constitutional consensus .
Last but not least , the individual members should also be held politically accountable in person for their sphere of responsibility .
During the 1994 appointment of the Commission , the European Parliament demonstrated that it was exercising its rights in regard both to hearings of individuals and to the vote to approve the college as a whole .
Much has happened since then .
The new relations between the European Parliament and the Commission must also be based on a code of conduct and on interinstitutional agreements .
The Brok report reflects our growing self-confidence and our common responsibility for the European Union .
Mr President , the Treaty of Amsterdam contains among its innovations the fact that Parliament would henceforth elect the President of the Commission on a proposal from the national governments , just as Maastricht already provided that the college of Commissioners would be subject to a vote of confidence by the European Parliament .
This is very important for the democratisation of the European Union .
It emphasises the fact that the Commissioners are not civil servants ; they are a political executive accountable to the directly elected Parliament .
In my country in particular , where the press often misportrays that reality , this step forward is important in underlining that democratic accountability .
The question that now begins to arise in the debate is whether we should go one stage further .
Instead of Parliament electing at least the President of the Commission on a proposal of the national governments , should it not simply elect whoever it likes as President of the Commission ?
What would follow from that would inevitably be that the different party groups , and then the different political party structures in Europe generally , would then have to come up with candidates before the European elections .
Different party federations would say : ' So-and-so is our candidate ' or ' Somebody else is our candidate ' .
That would add something to the European elections .
If you think about it , the big difference at the moment between European and national elections is that , when we vote in national elections , we go out to vote for or against a government , not for a parliament in isolation .
Suddenly , every five years , the European electorate has to go out and vote not for a government , not to change or keep a government , but for a parliament in isolation .
There is no visible consequence of the vote on the executive .
To go that one stage further would add a new dimension to the European elections , make them more understandable to the public and have a visible effect , at least on the chief executive .
The proposal would also have disadvantages which I do not have time to go into .
It needs to be examined carefully .
The danger is that a majority in Parliament feels bound to support everything that the Commission it has elected wants to do - just as many of our national parliaments feel bound to support their executive , come what may .
We must find the balance .
But the Brok report is a step in the right direction .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for the reasons already indicated , I consider that the Amsterdam Treaty implies the need to strengthen the democratic legitimacy and political responsibility of the Commission and also therefore of its President .
I must say that I support Jacques Delors ' proposal , which is backed by some very important figures on the political scene , to organise the European election campaign around not just a political programme but also the choice of Commission President , with the European political parties having to publicly present their candidate for this post to the electorate .
The main positive effect of this would be the personalisation of the campaign , which would lead to increased visibility of the institutions , better understanding of the rationale and greater emotional identification of the citizens with the European Union itself and its objectives and policies .
I believe that the European Union would surely gain in terms of greater prestige , proximity to the people and democratic responsibility .
I also feel that the Brok report is heading in the right direction towards these objectives . However , the requirements of realpolitik , which aims to preserve the power of the prime ministers to negotiate and choose the person to be proposed to the European Parliament , have dulled the clarity of the report in favour of forms of compromise that allow room for both sides of the argument .
In any case , it was the motion for a resolution that contained the proposal - and I am pleased to have contributed to this - for the European Council to choose the person to be nominated as Commission President bearing in mind the election results .
It is therefore not right for the German Government to claim that it will start the process of nominating the Commission President at the Cologne European Council set for 3 June , before the European elections .
I believe that this would negate the debate we are having and it would negate the innovation introduced by the Amsterdam Treaty .
What is happening with the Santer Commission - due to the way in which it was nominated - and with the motion of censure - due to the way in which this was conducted - demonstrates that it is essential to clearly move in the direction recommended by the Delors proposal , which , despite everything , has been accepted by the Brok report , and it is to be congratulated in this respect .
Mr President , one of the main objectives of this report is to establish links between the will of the people , as expressed in the European elections , and the President of the European Commission .
In my opinion , when this is achieved , it will result in a much better situation both for the institution and for the President of the Commission himself . The President will be given a mandate by the citizens of Europe , which will strengthen democracy in Europe , and we shall move closer to political union .
I feel all this represents a definite improvement and , therefore , the quicker it is put in place , the better .
It must come about as soon as possible .
This excellent report also offers further significant recommendations .
It suggests , for instance , a greater role for ideological political options , sidelining that vision of a merely bureaucratic Europe , which we hope to confine to history .
The report is important for this reason , and also for the way in which it envisages European elections as transcending narrow nationalism and promoting a common idea of Europe .
Joint and balanced action by the three European institutions - the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament - is also to be commended , Mr Brok .
So too , in my view , is the target of fair representation of the sexes on the Commission . Those photos of European Councils showing 99.99 % males are a serious affront to the democratic representation of the citizens of Europe .
Mr President , Mr Brok 's report tackles an issue of extreme importance , namely , the relationship of trust between the European Parliament and the Commission .
This fundamental concept was only introduced into the Treaties in 1992 , through the Maastricht Treaty . Nevertheless , prior to that date , the European Parliament had regularly been confirming the investiture of the Commission for some time .
For its part , the Commission took great account of Parliament 's view on the matter .
The experience of 1995 , that is , the approval of the College of Commissioners by Parliament , made it possible for a full debate to take place between the Commission - the President and each of its members - and Parliament .
I have the experience of having served as a member of the previous Commission , and therefore of being appointed under the old arrangements . I certainly believe that Parliament 's amendment of the Rules of Procedure to allow for the approval of the Commission was a step in the right direction .
I recall those appearances in January 1995 very clearly . They provided an opportunity to exchange ideas , and enabled the members of parliamentary committees to find out about the views and programme of each of the Commissioners who were to be invested in the near future .
Since then , the Treaty of Amsterdam has led to improvements in the procedure .
There is no question about that .
I believe that one of the major steps forward , though one that has not been given sufficient emphasis , concerns what one might refer to as the legitimacy of the Commission . Mr Brok 's report does highlight it , however .
The Treaty of Amsterdam allows Parliament to approve the President of the Commission personally and specifically , rather than Parliament merely being consulted prior to the appointment .
My own view on this - as the Commission has not set out its position on the matter - is that the arrangements outlined , particularly those referred to by Mr Brok and other speakers , are steps in the right direction .
I am referring to the arrangements that allow the political groups to put candidates forward , though the European Council would remain free to make its own decision .
I do not think that this is a matter of modifying the Treaty , but is instead a matter of implementing the Treaty . The Treaty allows for various possible arrangements .
One of these would be for the political groups to put candidates forward to the European Council . The Council would then make the necessary decision quite independently .
In any case , adhering strictly to the terms of the Treaty , I feel it is a positive move for Parliament to be empowered to put such a proposal to the Council .
Indeed , many speakers have drawn attention to Mr Fischer 's words this morning , when he said that more powers could be granted to Parliament . Any further means of enabling Parliament to legitimise the Commission must be helpful .
Such an arrangement will allow the President of the Commission to go on to discuss the composition of the College of Commissioners with the various governments .
I believe that this step taken in the Treaty of Amsterdam is of the greatest significance .
All this results in something that is made quite clear in the Treaty of Amsterdam : the function of political guidance ascribed to the President of the Commission . This too represents an improvement on the present situation .
It is imperative to guarantee at least the political coherence of the College of Commissioners in an institutional system in which the notion of governmental structure is becoming less and less clear and in which the resulting responsibilities are widely distributed .
We find ourselves at a crucial stage in the construction of Europe . In my view , it is essential to ensure that the basic pillars of the system of integration enable us to promote European interests more effectively , through the development of the Community method .
I am referring to the pillars representing the Union 's interest , common interests rather than national interests . This will also contribute to the development of an effective relationship .
As might be expected , the Community method will need to be strengthened in view of the forthcoming reforms .
History has shown how this method is much more efficient when compared with the poor results of the intergovernmental method .
A good understanding between the Commission and the European Parliament will help to ensure the smooth running of the institutions .
I hope I have made it clear that I believe Mr Brok 's report is very significant , and must be given serious consideration . All these ideas and initiatives are paving the way for the future modification of the Treaty , but I feel that , prior to any modification of the Treaty , we can now implement a range of measures designed to strengthen the relationship of trust between the Commission and Parliament .
It would be nice to conclude at this point , but I feel obliged to make one last remark .
I have to say to Mr Berthu that I utterly and absolutely reject his attack on the Commission .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
European Capital of Culture ( 2005 to 2019 )
The next item is the proposal ( A4-0509 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , for a declaration of intended rejection of the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0493 / 98-97 / 0290 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Decision establishing a Community action for the ' European Capital of Culture ' event for the years 2005 to 2019 ( Rapporteur : Mr Monfils ) .
Why are we tabling this proposal for a declaration of intended rejection ?
We are tabling it because we are concerned about safeguarding our parliamentary prerogatives and the interinstitutional balance laid down in the Treaty .
I would remind you that the Commission 's original text provided for a procedure to designate cities of culture based essentially on the quality of the projects put forward .
Parliament had amended that text to strengthen the quality requirement even further , particularly by giving the jury greater independence and laying down more precise criteria .
It thereby demonstrated its interest in the designation of European cities of culture .
Instead of working on this basis at second reading , the Council radically changed the original text , providing for the nomination of the European city , for the period from 2005 to 2019 , by each country in turn when it assumes the presidency of the Union .
The entire procedure set out in the original text is replaced by a rigid system , where the choice of towns is no longer based on project quality but on a mere political decision taken by each state in turn .
This system is all the more ridiculous because who knows what Europe will be like in 2015 , when Belgium will be able to nominate its European city , or in 2019 , when it will be Italy 's turn ?
The Council has even forgotten that the enlargement of Europe should presumably take place before 2019 and that , under the system it has decided on , the new members would have no chance of nominating their city unless , pursuing this brilliant line of thought , the Council meets again to organise a rota of the future 11 countries of the European Union from 2020 to 2031 .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is becoming totally surreal .
However , by declaring that a text fundamentally different from the original draft is the common position , the Council is hijacking parliamentary procedure .
It is preventing Parliament from holding two readings of the text and it is also forcing Parliament to obtain a majority not of the Members present , but of all the Members of Parliament , in other words , a minimum of 314 votes , to adopt any amendments tabled .
The Council justifies its attitude on the grounds that , in its view , this was the only way it could obtain unanimity .
If that is the case , ladies and gentlemen , it might have realised this much earlier and , if necessary , discussed the problem with the Commission .
But the main point is that the Council 's difficulties in reaching agreement on a text cannot be used as an excuse for hijacking an institutional procedure .
Otherwise , the Council could act in the same way on other issues in the future , allowing a text from first reading that does not correspond to its views to be submitted and then coming up with a totally different common position .
In this way , it could bypass Parliament 's second reading and make it impossible for Parliament to properly do its job as co-legislator .
That temptation is obvious . Clearly , we believe it to be unacceptable .
We are therefore tabling this declaration of intended rejection to make the Council negotiate in the Conciliation Committee , as provided for by Article 189b ( 2 ) ( c ) of the Treaty .
I would like to end , Mr President , with two important comments .
The first is that the declaration of intended rejection is not aimed at the designation of European cities of culture for the period 2001 to 2004 , as those cities were selected through a simple intergovernmental decision .
Anyone who makes out that the declaration would affect those cities has not even read the Council 's text .
Under the proposed system we have no power as Parliament to discuss the intergovernmental decision .
The declaration is only aimed at the common position setting the procedure for choosing from 2005 to 2019 , which is the only text we are looking at .
The second comment is that we believe that the European cities are an essential element in the Union 's cultural policy .
That is why we believe the cities chosen should receive a sizeable European subsidy .
We would like to see an allocation of EUR 2 million per city .
Finally , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope Parliament will vote for this declaration of intended rejection , thereby demonstrating that it puts the accent on the cultural quality of the projects and that it intends to safeguard the institutional powers it is granted by the Treaty .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at the end of 1997 the European Commission submitted a proposal to designate European cultural capitals on the basis of an assessment by an independent selection panel , with the Council taking the final decision by qualified majority , after consulting Parliament .
Within the space of six months Parliament had an opinion ready on the Commission 's proposal , an opinion that can be summarised as follows : more quality for the cultural programme , greater transparency in the selection of candidate cities and , finally , more money for those cities which are finally designated , with Parliament doing more in its role as co-decision-maker at every stage .
Then , shortly afterwards , the ministers came up with what is described as a proposal for a common position , a proposal , Commissioner , which took no account either of your initial proposal or of the European Parliament amendments , and under which cities were designated for the period 2001 to 2004 .
After that , as is well described by the rapporteur , Mr Monfils , we have a kind of rota situation in which cities are designated from 2005 to 2019 each in turn .
It is only to be expected that we should distance ourselves from this today , if only because this common position totally excludes both the Commission and Parliament from what nevertheless remains a co-decision procedure .
But at the same time we also have problems with a proposal which contains absolutely no guarantee of quality , assumes that all countries in Europe are culturally comparable when , let us be honest about this , some countries probably have more candidates for city of culture than others .
As has been said , it also takes no account of Union enlargement or of possible Treaty amendments over the next 20 years , as a result of which Council decisions on cultural matters will no longer have to be unanimous .
We intend to reject the common position , but on the understanding that we approve the towns selected for the period 2001 to 2004 .
Bruges , Salamanca , Oporto , Rotterdam , Graz , Genoa and Lille must not suffer as a result of a protracted debate between the institutions because the Ministers of Culture have acted so unilaterally .
We also want to increase the reference amount to EUR 2 million per designated town , but from 2005 we want to see another system , decided through conciliation .
What we want to see - and that is the objective - is a greater guarantee of quality .
We want a genuine European dimension , we want large sections of the population to be involved in projects and we want more money for the most appealing cultural project .
Let us now work together to reach a genuine compromise which is to everyone 's benefit .
Mr President , as has already been said , the subject of ' Cultural capital ' is an important one for cultural policy and is also very important to our citizens .
This is why we must be very careful in the way we deal with it .
The rapporteur , Mr Monfils , has submitted an excellent report as a basis for the discussion of the Commission 's proposal and I am also pleased that it has been accepted by Parliament .
But I find it a great pity to see how the Council has dealt with the subject .
Just now when discussing the previous report by Mr Brok , the Commissioner addressed us on the benefits of the Community approach and the disadvantages of the intergovernmental approach .
We can add to this the benefits of decision by qualified majority , as the Commission proposed for this subject , as opposed to the unanimity procedure currently being applied by the Council .
I should like to state emphatically that this is a matter of law and of principle , and - as Mr Monfils has just said - a very important one at that .
That is why I wholeheartedly agree with the proposal he just presented .
But I stress that I should also like to limit my remarks on the common position to the period 2005-2019 and , like previous speakers , that I agree with the candidates for cultural capital for the years 2001-2004 , although the intergovernmental method applied is of course regrettable .
I am also pleased that the Committee on Culture unanimously decided to call for a doubling of the budget , which is also a logical consequence of designating two towns in the stated years .
It is important that we enter conciliation with the Council as soon as possible , so that we can use this period in order to try and repair the damage to some extent .

Following on from what Mr De Coene said , it must be possible to persuade the Council to accept the key points in Mr Monfils 's proposal and then arrive at an acceptable common position .
I hope that this can be done quickly in order to avoid confusion among all those , and there are many of them , who are involved in the ' Cultural capital ' project .
Mr President , Mr Monfils , the rapporteur , has given very clear and strong justifications for rejecting the notion of a common position , so that I will not touch on that issue any further .
Instead , I wish to raise a few points concerning the programme itself , a programme I wish every success in the future with the proper level of funding it truly deserves .
The development of the Capital of Culture programme as part of the European Union 's new culture framework programme is a very important and prominent area of common cultural activity , as it inspires and underlines the diverse nature of European cultures .
The experience of previous years can teach us a great deal and we also derive enormous benefit from the many successful projects that have taken place .
I believe it is most important to achieve a lasting , positive social effect even after the year of the Capital of Culture has ended , and that is why as many of the public as possible should be actively participating in the event , and be given the inspiration to do so .
The success of the Year of Culture will be mainly based on cities ' own resources as well as their own particular features , history , and the challenges of change .
I believe that this will be the best way of providing a basis for an enriching , international , reciprocal programme .
Creating permanent cultural cooperation projects in this way is one of our central aims .
Although partnership projects among different cities may add to what is on offer during the year of the Capital of Culture , it is very important that clear responsibility for a project is only that of one city at a time .
In years gone by the choice of Capital of Culture has been the task - and an agonisingly difficult one - of the Council .
Unfortunately , the solution adopted from the year 2000 onwards has been to appoint all nine applicant cities as Capitals of Culture , and thus none will really stand out as ' the ' Capital of Culture .
Of all the Member States in the group , only Finland will not have its own Capital of Culture year .
Under the new proposal each country will have its turn in future , according to a given order .
Finland 's turn will come in 2011 . The Council will therefore no longer have to do this difficult job .
Obviously , the cities themselves must act as proper applicants and take responsibility for their programmes , to ensure a high cultural level .
Mr President , my group of course supports the report by Mr Monfils , so it also supports the intention to reject the common position on the European Capital of Culture .
It has already been said that the Council , ostentatiously ignoring the procedure under way for the adoption of the relevant decision , reached its common position not only without taking Parliament 's views into account but also producing a text which differs markedly from the Commission 's amended proposal .
Furthermore - and this is the height of arrogance and hypocrisy ; perhaps that is a harsh thing to say , but that is the way it is - the Council has laid down a list of countries which will be hosting the cultural capital as far ahead as 2019 .
This grossly undermines the interinstitutional process and shows gross contempt for the European Parliament .
That needs no explanation , it is self-evident , and I think everyone who has spoken so far has said as much in one way or another .
With today 's proposal the European Parliament 's aim is to compel the Council to convene the Conciliation Committee and re-establish interinstitutional balance .
We do not wish to quarrel with the list as decided up to 2004 , despite the fact that here too the procedures were rather problematic .
But to decide in the same way right up to 2019 ? That is a period of time as long as the arrogance that led to it is great !
The European Parliament insists on playing its proper role .
Our group welcomes the fact that these procedures will restore the dialogue rejected unilaterally by the Council on 28 May , so that we can adopt a position either by amending the common position that exists at the moment to redefine the desired criteria of quality and transparency , or indeed by rejecting the common position .
Mr President , a great deal has already been said , and I will not go over everything again .
I just want to say this : when European culture is so badly in need of support , how can we possibly allow the Council to sell off , as it were , the institution of the European city of culture ?
And this is especially of concern when it is doing so as much out of blindness as out of a desire for hegemony .
I therefore entirely agree with our rapporteur 's view and I want to congratulate him both on the quality of his work and on his determination in defending the method of designating this European city , which is a symbol of our cultural vitality .
I know his position is not entirely understood by all the cities that have already been designated and that are afraid that their project may be forgotten .
But I would like them to understand - and I am thinking particularly of the cities of Bruges and Avignon - that they are not involved and , above all , that by defending a genuine interinstitutional balance in the codecision procedure , we are fighting for them as well in order to encourage appreciation of a rich and creative culture .
That is also the aim that we are pursuing in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , and we do not intend to abandon it .
Mr President , in the discussion about the European capital of culture all the participants seem to have forgotten that in the final analysis it is a question of culture .
It is surely a question of whether the city that is awarded the honorary title of European capital of culture can indeed live up to that title .
The Council is hiding behind formal arguments and provisions that seem to allow for no other options .
The report submitted here is based on substantive arguments that we do not find in the Council 's statements .
In procedural terms the Council may be right , but that does not produce the best solutions .
Since in the final analysis it is a question of culture and therefore of Europe 's reputation , all those involved should agree a procedure that guarantees the right choice of capital of culture .
Mr President , Parliament 's rejection is not directed against the cities that have already between designated for 2001-2004 but against the way the Council is proceeding , in taking account neither of Parliament 's amendments nor of the sensible proposal made by the Commission to introduce a Community procedure to designate one European capital of culture a year from 2002 , selected by a high-level independent selection panel and after consulting Parliament .
We cannot accept the fact that on the one hand applicants for accession are often forgotten and on the other hand Parliament 's codecision right is disregarded .
That would create a dangerous precedent .
Unfortunately the Council of Ministers for Culture could not reach agreement on the funding of the new cultural programmes , although it agreed in a flash on the designation of capitals of culture , in disregard of the European Parliament 's rights .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall briefly outline the Commission 's position on Parliament 's intended rejection of the Council 's common position on the European City of Culture .
The Commission 's views on this common position are well known . The common position represents a departure from our original proposal and it has introduced a system of rotation throughout the Member States .
Nevertheless , given the importance of this event , what we are now seeking is the application of the codecision procedure , leading , we hope , to agreement between the institutions , so that this action will be viable as soon as possible and have the backing of the whole Community .
The Commission did not consider it appropriate to withdraw its initial proposal , even though the basis of the common position certainly does nothing to strengthen the European character of the event . According to our relevant services , the Council 's proposal did not meet the criteria for withdrawal from a legal point of view .
Our initiative aims to establish a major European cultural event and to ensure it becomes well known . We hope to make the people of Europe better aware of the richness and diversity of each other 's cultural heritage .
The introduction of a system of rotation by presidency represents a significant modification to the Commission 's proposal , as the jury of senior independent personalities called to adjudicate on the cultural content of the candidate cities is done away with . Nor is recognition given to Parliament 's role as outlined in the Commission 's proposal .
With all due respect for the positions put forward , the Commission has now come to believe that in view of the restrictions imposed by the unanimity rule which we are bound by , the common position adopted by the Council seems the best way forward . It represents the only chance of reaching an agreement and going ahead , on the basis of Community consensus , with an event whose cultural value and importance are readily appreciated by all the citizens of Europe .
The important thing at this juncture is for Parliament and the Council to engage in open and constructive dialogue , making a final effort to come closer together and reach an agreement guaranteeing the future of this event .
This is exactly how I put it to the presidency of the Council yesterday .
In the course of yesterday 's meeting between the Commission as a whole and the German Government , I met with Mr Naumann , the Culture Minister , and put this view to him .
I believe it is a matter of extreme urgency for the various parties to find a solution as soon as possible , by means of a three-way dialogue between the Council , Parliament , and , if it would be helpful , the Commission . A way out of the present impasse must be found .
These are the thoughts I wished to put to you today , though I quite understand your motives for wishing to reject the Council 's common position on the European City of Culture . I strongly encourage you to seek a formula for conciliation , leading to a solution acceptable to all .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Europe Agreements
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :






A4-0437 / 98 by Mr Elchlepp , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council and Commission Decision on the position to be taken by the Community within the Association Council established by the Europe Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States of the one part , and the Republic of Lithuania , of the other part , with regard to the adoption of the rules for the implementation of Article 64 ( 1 ) ( i ) & ( ii ) and ( 2 ) of the Europe Agreement ( 4216 / 98 - COM ( 98 ) 0119 - C4-0592 / 98-98 / 0075 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0443 / 98 by Mr Seppänen , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council and Commission Decision on the position to be taken by the Community within the Association Council established by the Europe Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States of the one part , and the Republic of Latvia , of the other part , with regard to the adoption of the rules for the implementation of Article 64 ( 1 ) ( i ) & ( ii ) and ( 2 ) of the Europe Agreement ( 4215 / 98 - COM ( 98 ) 0068 - C4-0593 / 98-98 / 0076 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0472 / 98 by Mr van Dam , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council and Commission Decision on the position to be taken by the Community within the Association Council established by the Europe Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States of the one part , and the Republic of Estonia , of the other part , with regard to the adoption of the rules for the implementation of Article 63 ( 1 ) ( i ) & ( ii ) and ( 2 ) of the Europe Agreement ( 4214 / 98 - COM ( 98 ) 0118 - C4-0594 / 98-98 / 0077 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0419 / 98 by Mr Schwaiger , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council and Commission Decision on the position to be taken by the Community within the Association Council established by the Europe Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States of the one part , and Romania of the other part , with regard to the adoption of the rules for the implementation of Article 64 ( 1 ) ( i ) , ( 1 ) ( ii ) and ( 2 ) of the Europe Agreement and for the implementation of Article 9 ( 1 ) ( 1 ) , ( 1 ) ( 2 ) and ( 2 ) of Protocol 2 on ECSC products to the Europe Agreement ( COM ( 98 ) 0236 - C4-0275 / 98-98 / 0139 ( CNS ) ) .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the subject of my report is the transposition of EU competition law by the Republic of Lithuania under Article 64 of the 1995 Europe Agreement between the EU and Lithuania .
I would recommend that the European Parliament approve the Community 's position on this in the EU-Lithuania Association Council .
The subject we are concerned with here may appear rather technical , but in the context of pre-accession relations with Lithuania it is of extreme political importance .
After all , competition policy is an important instrument for ensuring free trade and for turning the Lithuanian economy into a viable social market economy that can hold its own in the single market .
Of course the introduction of the complex EU competition rules represents an enormous challenge for all applicant countries .
After all , in the transition to a market economy , they must first develop their own national competition law .
I would urge the Commission to take greater account of that when it evaluates the extent to which these countries have adjusted .
So we will still need to show some flexibility in the coming years in regard to the implementation of EU competition rules .
Setting conditions that are too rigid is more likely to prove counter-productive .
In particular , we must always look at the social implications of adjustment if we want to ensure that the citizens of the applicant state give their broad support to democracy and the social market economy .
That is very important to the stability of Europe as a whole .
Many Lithuanian economic sectors will not be able to do without state aid for some time at least , in the course of adjusting to the EU acquis in competition law .
In view of the aggressive market strategies of western competitors , we should not judge individual defence mechanisms and supports in certain sectors too harshly .
But , all in all , Lithuania has made substantial progress in approximating its laws to EU legislation and is endeavouring to establish the requisite implementing structures .
The Lithuanian Government submitted new draft competition legislation in 1998 .
The Lithuanian Parliament passed much of it last December .
The competition rules for undertakings are generally consistent with Community law and in 1997 the Lithuanian Government also submitted a decision on monitoring state aid .
Meanwhile Lithuania has endeavoured to facilitate free trade with the EU , for instance by ambitious tariff reductions .
That is to be welcomed .
My conclusions are as follows : we should not pursue too rigorous a policy of approximation to Western competition rules , for it could be damaging to the long-term process of transformation to ask too much .
Secondly , Lithuania evidently needs greater support for the training and further training of the officials of its State Competition and Consumer Protection Office .
Furthermore , a targeted information policy must be pursued to promote acceptance in the private economic sector of the new competition rules and economic liberalisation and restructuring measures .
Account must also be taken of social and environmental aspects during the adjustment process .
Let me conclude with two points . Since the Lithuanian economy , like for that matter all the Central and Eastern European economies , is undercapitalised , the EU should consider providing direct capital aid for setting up and modernising undertakings , over and above the existing structural aid measures , where appropriate through the European Investment Bank or the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development .
Secondly , it is certainly regrettable that Lithuania is not at present among the first wave of applicants .
While appreciating all the obstacles that still remain , I believe that the accession negotiations between the EU and Lithuania should begin before the scheduled date , which is not until the end of 1999 , if possible even during the German Presidency of the Council , for that is the only way to sustain the optimism and willingness to adjust that have developed in that country .
Mr President , in July 1997 the Commission was in favour of accession negotiations with Latvia beginning as soon as that country had made sufficient headway in fulfilling the pre-conditions laid down by the European Council at Copenhagen .
It was the Commission 's opinion that not one applicant country at that time had entirely fulfilled all these pre-conditions .
Despite this , the countries involved were put in a certain order to have their applications dealt with , so that , for example , Latvia had to wait longer than Estonia .
There is no justification for that , at least as far as the enforcement of the regulations governing competition are concerned .
The EU strives to ensure that there is a high level internal market that renounces the notion of restrictions on competition .
We cannot take for granted that countries that have attained membership will thrive in such a market .
According to an assessment by the Commission , Latvia at present would have difficulty in coping with the pressures of competition in the single market , and EU integration will mean immense economic structural change for it .
Latvia has a new law on competition which is largely in line with EU regulations .
Some amendments to it are still needed , as certain subsidies are tied to exports and it sanctions certain special and sole rights which do not comply with Community regulations .
The EU is shaping the harmonisation of legislation by making demands on Latvian society to its own satisfaction , and Latvia has no alternative but to comply .
Because of quality problems Latvia 's manufactured products find it difficult to enter the EU 's western markets .
The country 's economic competitiveness is based solely on low wages , and this is where the problem lies .
In order for Latvia to be competitive , its levels of pay have to remain low .
If Latvia has low rates of pay it would , as an EU member , be a country of cheap production , and a sort of flag-of-convenience state in the EU .
When the restrictions on goods between the EU countries and Latvia are lifted , a free labour market will come into existence .
Because of differences in pay and living standards , it will be worth Latvians leaving the country to work in the older EU countries , where rates of pay are higher .
For Latvia that would mean a trained workforce leaving the country , and for the EU it would mean a problem of cheap labour .
This will be a widespread problem with a rapid enlargement programme , and it will affect not just Latvia but all the applicant countries .
The countries in front of Latvia in the queue will cause exactly the same problem for the EU .
The economic structure in all the applicant countries is entirely different from that in the EU single market .
I would still remind everyone of the Commission 's assessment that Latvia fulfils the democracy pre-conditions relating to stable institutions , the rule of law , human rights and the protection of minority groups , but measures need to be introduced to speed up the granting of citizenship to people other than those who already have Latvian citizenship .
These are serious problems , and they are serious in Estonia too .
I can see no justification for Latvia having inferior status in comparison with some other applicant countries when it comes to EU membership .
The country is ready to pay a high price for EU membership by preparing its economy for EU market forces and competition .
Mr President , Estonia occupies a rather special place amongst the three Baltic States .
There is already a direct EU-Estonia free-trade area , which is not the case for Latvia and Lithuania where we are seeing an asymmetric and phased establishment of a free-trade area .
In another respect too , Estonia occupies a rather special place .
It is the only Baltic country to have been included in the first round of accession negotiations .
This certainly does not mean to say that Latvia and Lithuania are performing any worse in economic and political terms .
Indeed recently these countries seem to have embarked on a race to catch up .
But the starting position of Latvia and Lithuania was different to that of Estonia .
The free-trade area is only of any economic benefit if the legal framework is based on uniform principles .
This also applies to competition policy .
The Europe Agreement with Estonia states that competition legislation must be completed no later than the end of 1997 .
This date is now long past .
The Committee on External Economic Relations is therefore hurrying to approve the Commission 's proposal .
It is important in the context of Estonia 's future accession , on which negotiations began last year , that applicant countries should be able to cope with the market mechanisms as they apply in the Union .
This is why Estonian companies must become more competitive .
The present proposal is to adjust the rules for the implementation of the Community 's competition policy for Estonia .
This relates to Articles 85 , 86 and 96 of the EC Treaty which concern , respectively , the prohibition of restrictive practices , the prohibition of the abuse of dominant positions and discipline as regards state aid .
The principal purpose in drawing up the implementing regulations for those articles is to improve trade between the European Union and Estonia .
Yet both parties reserve the right to apply anti-dumping and protection measures on the basis of the association agreement .
The reason these measures still apply is that there are still great differences in the provisions regarding state aid on the two sides .
These measures must also be brought into line by the end of 1999 .
In the meantime it is not of course the Commission 's intention to refuse entry to the European market for Estonian products under the guise of anti-dumping legislation .
This would not help the competitiveness of Estonian companies and could therefore be an obstacle to the European Union 's rapid enlargement .
In a recent report on Estonian state aid we read that the Estonian competition act , applicable from October 1998 , provides better conditions for monitoring state aid and collecting related data .
State aid is essential during the transition to a modern market economy , but it must be organised in a way which makes it possible to assess to what extent Estonian companies have sufficient competitive strength .
Mr President , as rapporteur I thank the Committee on External Economic Relations for its effective cooperation and I would like to present my conclusions . I have made it clear that competition legislation in Estonia needs to be implemented properly , especially as Estonia can expect to be among the first to enter negotiations .
This does not mean that I want to create an extra accession criterion .
The direct criteria for accession are clearly stated in the Europe Agreements .
Estonia has made huge efforts over recent years to prepare for accession to the European Union .
I am not just referring here to the economic growth it has achieved and its undertaking , in signing the IMF 's economic memorandum , to strive for economic growth without overheating .
In political terms too Estonia has made the necessary effort to satisfy the entry criteria .
Although major steps must still be taken , such as in reforming the judiciary , before we can really talk about a truly democratic political culture , there have been a great many positive political developments .
One such example is the cooperation between the government and opposition and the efforts to promote the integration of Estonia 's Russian minority .
These efforts by the Estonian Government must encourage us to speed up the process leading to Estonia 's accession to the European Union .
When we call for reforms , we must also be prepared to provide the correct response to these reforms .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the case of Romania too the Committee on External Economic Relations is pleased to note that the necessary approximation of Romanian competition provisions to EU rules and the cooperation between competition authorities can develop satisfactorily .
As you know from the other reports , this relates to the implementation of the basic principles of competition policy , the responsible authorities , the consultation procedure in cross-border cases and administrative cooperation .
For the rest , the Commission 's position on Romania 's application for accession shows that , on the whole , Romania 's competition rules are compatible with the EU rules .
So from the point of view of the Committee on External Economic Relations I can therefore propose that we approve the Council 's common position in the case of Romania too .
One particularly positive aspect is that , as in other areas , the Romanian administration is cooperating very closely with EU authorities in regard to the competition provisions and is taking the corresponding legislative steps .
However , these should include modernisation of the public administration , where there is still some room for improvement .
The task of the Romanian administration is simplified by the fact that Romanian executive officials have already received intensive training under the PHARE programme .
But I would like also to look today at the efforts made by Romania and the need for Romania to come closer to the European Union economically and to gradually adopt the acquis communautaire .
The majority of economic reforms still remain to be undertaken by the Romanian Government .
It must focus on the further and long-delayed privatisation of large state enterprises and on improving the framework conditions for founding small and medium-sized enterprises .
To date , only some 20 % of firms have gone into private ownership .
That is the only way the competition rules , which will then become rules common to Romania and to the European Union , have a chance to really apply and to function .
The events of the last few days show that the Romanian Government is making serious efforts to make up the deficit in regard to public enterprises and to close down the least profitable banks and telecommunications companies .
At the same time , it must give greater support than before to the establishment of small and medium-sized enterprises by providing state financing incentives , drawing also on the European Union 's programmes .
Another ray of hope is the fact that Romania and the European Union are cooperating increasingly closely on the joint plans for the use of the Trans-Caucasian mineral resources , especially those in Azerbaijan and the Central Asian Republics , for the benefit of the European market .
Romania can play a key role both in the transport and in the further processing of oil from the Caspian Sea , as I pointed out very specifically in my report early in 1997 on economic cooperation between the EU and Azerbaijan .
If they were properly modernised , the plant in Constanza , the largest Black Sea port , and the refineries in Ploesti on the lower Danube could put Romania in a position to establish a new transport route , process a wide spectrum of oil products and thus become one of the top suppliers to the European market .
The more active the role Romania plays in the joint projects between the EU and the Trans-Caucasian republics , especially Georgia and Azerbaijan , in relation for instance to transport networks including energy transport networks , the sooner it can realise its potential in a European market that will soon become larger with the accession of Hungary , Poland and Slovakia and thus improve its balance of trade and balance of payments .
The products in question can then be transported via the Danube and the Rhine-Main-Danube Canal to the centre of Europe and then onwards to the Benelux countries and to France .
Romania must gear its geographical , industrial and also technological potential , including the Danube transport infrastructure , much more closely to the European market and fully exploit its Danube waterway and rail service capacities .
The planned high-speed TGV-ICE train link from Paris via Strasbourg , Karlsruhe , Munich and Vienna to Budapest is to be extended in a few years ' time via Timisoara-Arat to Bucharest .
So on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations - and here I agree with Mr Bernard-Reymond 's conclusions on Romania 's accession prospects - I would like to encourage Romania resolutely to pursue the road to Europe , following the example of other Eastern European countries , to overcome its temporary weaknesses and to make full use of its development potential as a great Eastern European country .
We certainly urge the Romanian people , its parliament and government , not to give up in spite of the current difficulties and to do their utmost to achieve closer economic cooperation with the EU .
They have our support in that endeavour .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think we have a brief opportunity to discuss what is happening here in more detail .
We could say - and that would be half the story and would also be quite true - that internally the European Union 's competition policy is a success story .
It is the motive force of European integration and the completion of the single market .
That is indisputable and it is well and good .
But in relations with the applicant countries we also have the problem of unequal economic structures .
Under these circumstances we must consider whether we can simply take the same approach to all of them .
We now have the further risk - and I believe there is some indication of this in all three countries - that simply because in a sense these countries are each resolved for political reasons to achieve a perfect market economy they will apply a synthetic system of competition rules that are purer than those the Union itself could apply .
That would create an inequality which , in my view , would not be acceptable .
Let me also point out that we are already faced with the problem that the introduction of competition rules on market domination and the introduction of those on state aid were driven forward under different timetables .
But that is not the only problem ; another is that other aspects that in fact play a part in strengthening or creating markets have not advanced at the same pace .
These include the question of public infrastructures , the question , which was raised earlier , of strengthening the capital resources of enterprises , and the question - which I believe we all consider most important - of strengthening the articulation and assertion of interests other than the enterprises ' immediate profits in the economic process .
For to engage in economic activity does not just mean making profits , it also means reproducing the natural basic principles of society .
Under these circumstances we must keep asking ourselves in all seriousness whether we really are promoting this process in such a way as to ensure that equal rights are not just enshrined in abstract words but really are guaranteed , that for the first time in their history these countries bordering the Baltic Sea are no longer in a colonial position in relation to western Europe ; I am speaking here as a citizen of Kiel , which has its own particular historical background .
I believe that is the task we have to undertake .
I know it is anything but easy .
I believe , firstly , that we must formulate a broader and more political pre-accession strategy , meaning that we must also promote aspects other than competition policy .
So I welcome the fact that some Members have addressed not only the political progress but also the differing problems of individual Baltic states .
They too need to be discussed .
We also have to consider giving specific signs of solidarity to these countries and consider whether these should not go beyond what has quite rightly been proposed here , namely the flexible application of the rules of competition .
That is the minimum .
What I mean is that it would be quite absurd to apply the rules more rigorously in these cases than we can apply them in Bavaria or Saxony , in other words at home .
But we also have to ask what more we can do .
I think here we must consider - as has been said by others - what instruments we can use for structural development and how we can ensure that they are used as effectively as possible .
We must also make sure we do not create any new hierarchies between the countries .
Once the decision , which I criticise , had been taken to create a starting line and begin negotiations with all the countries at the same time , under the procedure that was then applied I think it was quite justified for Estonia to be taken first .
Estonia is indeed ahead of the other countries in some respects .
But this situation could become consolidated if only because that is how it was in the past .
We must not allow that to happen .
The other countries must be given a fair chance to catch up .
And they must be helped to do so .
Nor must those countries that need least support be given most just because the immediate effect may be greatest there .
That is why I urge you to take a very careful look at our policy .
I have deliberately not discussed the individual countries , although it would be easy to comment on this or that aspect .
But as a Member of the European Parliament it is not my job to tell the Estonians , Latvians or Lithuanians what they must do first ; instead I have concentrated on what we should do .
I believe there is an urgent need for us to address this question in detail , with careful consideration and in that context .
Mr President , after having listened to Mr Wolf , I should like to begin by recounting a practical experience which I had at a wood products plant at Tartu in Estonia .
At the time I was chairman of the delegation for relations with Estonia , which was visiting this plant .
The head of the plant said to me : ' Why do I have to label all my furniture for Ikea in Germany with some strange ' E 's ?
Why does my paint have to be inspected ?
Why do my standards have to be inspected ?
You can just sell any goods you like to us here in Estonia , but I have to be inspected because I am selling to you . ' You see , that is how it appears in practice .
That is the dialogue we have when we visit our new Member States .
These agreements which we are going to adopt are a signal to the populations of the countries concerned that we have not forgotten them and that we are continuing to work on precisely the problems which I encountered in Tartu .
But sometimes there is a big difference between politics and everyday life .
The trade which is also sought by Mr Wolf does not just come of itself .
The question is whether we need a common set of rules in the area of competition to make some countries suitable to participate in cooperation in the future .
I am thinking in particular of the country for which I am currently responsible , Lithuania , which plays a key role as a transit country for trade with Russia and Belarus .
If the country has its competition policy in order and has harmonised its standards and rules in this area , then it is qualified to increase its trade and take on whatever competitors there may be .
But we should not look at competition policy in isolation .
We should also look at environmental and social policy and , when we talk of progress for these countries , it is important that we do not simply measure , as the Commission often does , growth in foreign investment and the economy , but that we also look at how far the countries are able to incorporate aspects of the working environment and social policy into their competition policy .
Mr President , Parliament is being urged in four separate reports to approve the Europe agreements with the relevant countries , and this is clearly happening , thus creating a firm basis for the future enlargement of the Union .
The road ahead , however , is still a long one .
Much work and time is required of these countries for economic and political harmonisation .
According to the Commission 's assessments both Lithuania and Latvia have recently caught up with Estonia , which had had a head start .
Latvia 's strong economic growth and both Latvia 's and Lithuania 's active commitment to modernise their laws on citizenship , on which Mr Seppänen 's report certainly contains conflicting information , are important steps on the way to realising conditions for EU membership .
For this reason it seems very likely that in the medium term all the Baltic countries will be able to join the European Union simultaneously .
Although all applicant countries must be assessed according to their own merits , it is important to emphasise that for the Baltic countries to accede simultaneously would have positive repercussions for security policy , for example .
While the applicant countries are preparing themselves for membership , it is vital to stress the importance of cooperation , for example , between police forces and customs in combating international crime .
It is not enough to enact laws and sanction cooperation agreements .
The most important , and perhaps the most difficult , issue for the applicant countries is putting these agreements into practice .
We in Finland had a regrettable example of this last year , when a criminal gang which had entered the country from Estonia emptied bank cash dispensers in Helsinki , and the Estonian police refused to cooperate with the police in Finland .
These small but important issues have yet to be put right .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to congratulate the various rapporteurs on their reports .
At the start of his mandate in 1995 , Mr Santer described Union enlargement as one of the two principal objectives of the newly appointed European Commission .
He described enlargement as a historic opportunity .
I should like to support this view .
My group also believes enlargement to be a historic opportunity .
But may I just make one point .
It is a historic opportunity , but it could also prove to be a historic blunder if accession is not properly prepared .
In this respect it is crucially important for the present Union to put its own house in order , as the enlargement the Union is now facing - and today 's reports are another small step in this direction - is totally unlike any previous enlargement .
On this occasion the applicant countries are countries with a fairly limited market economy .
Moreover , their competition and legal systems are not yet ready to incorporate the acquis communautaire fully .
It is not only the applicant countries which need an efficient government apparatus .
Above all the Union itself needs a balanced and effective apparatus in order to cope with the problems of accession .
It is therefore distressing to have to conclude that with such important decisions before us we are still a long way from having achieved this goal .
I hope that the Council , as Mr Fischer announced this morning , will indeed use a new IGC in around the year 2000 in order to put our own house in order .
Mr President , all three Baltic countries have striven and at this very moment are striving hard to fulfil the criteria laid down for them for membership of the European Union .
This will require big sacrifices and changes in their societies .
Over the last few days I have been following , with some concern , the news that among the three Baltic countries , to quote the headlines , a ' pigmeat war ' is starting .
This has even led to an exchange of notes among these countries .
This year Latvia intends to restrict pigmeat imports from Estonia and Lithuania for a year .
Certainly no good will come of these reciprocal reproaches and exchanges of notes for any one of the Baltic countries .
We must just hope that this problem is resolved swiftly so that developments towards EU membership for the Baltic countries do not deteriorate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the competition rules certainly are an important component of the acquis communautaire , but to date the competition provisions of the Europe Agreements have not prevented the EU from applying anti-dumping and trade protection measures to the applicant states , with the result that the Central and Eastern European countries face a growing trade deficit . This is exactly the opposite of what the real task of a European Union should be , namely to promote their successful accession and economic stabilisation .
Then there are also the high export subsidies for EU agricultural products , which severely disturb the domestic markets of the applicant countries .
The real question here is : who has what homework to do ?
It is not just the applicant countries ; what we need is a qualitative change of direction of EU competition and trade policy towards these countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as I have been allocated so little time , I am not going to comment on the technical aspects , however interesting , of the reports before us .
Perhaps it is the effect of the snow that has fallen , but I just want to recall a situation I found myself in a few years ago .
Actually , I was in a dreadful situation , at Vilnius headquarters with President Landsbergis , guarded , if I can call it that , by the Lithuanian National Guard , and the Red Army had just crushed the Lithuanian resistance under its tank tracks .
What I mean is that I regard the Baltic countries as an integral part of our European civilisation and they have paid a very high price for their freedom .
Lithuania alone saw a quarter of its sons and daughters perish in the gulags .
What I also mean is that we would be in favour of the enlargement of our European Community to include the Baltic countries , but for the fact that Lithuania is , alas , increasingly a blend of the Soviet Union and the United States , and has nothing to offer beyond an increasingly bureaucratic yoke .
That is why we advise our friends in the Baltic countries , and indeed Poland , to be very careful . Their joining a confederal Europe would certainly be a good thing , but they would do well to hesitate before joining this increasingly bureaucratic Europe , which keeps piling on the weight of its decrees and regulations .
I do not think that this would be good for them .
We do not want to shut the door of the Community to them but we , for our part , want a different Europe : the one we are fighting for .
I would like to take this opportunity to send that message today to our friends in the Baltic countries .
Mr President , others have spoken about the Baltic so I will restrict my remarks to Romania , to Mr Schwaiger 's report .
This agreement which we are debating between the EU and Romania is now four years old .
In this period of time Romania has made tremendous progress , great strides have been taken to move the country towards a position that more equates with the west .
It can be no coincidence , however , that countries with EU borders have moved faster towards EU membership than others further away .
By comparison with its neighbour Hungary , for example , Romania , which does not have a border with one of the 15 current Member States , is way behind .
In the past under Ceaucescu Romania was a country ill-at-ease with itself , a nation distorted by unrealistic ideals and legislation .
Any visitor to the country today will notice the progress which has been made towards a market economy .
Further progress is needed , but at a speed that is realistic and allows time for people to adjust and for realignments where necessary .
Mr Schwaiger has referred to competition development , reforms to state companies , the banks and so on .
In addition , the Romanian Government must recognise the reforms that it needs to make itself : reforms to the police , to the Constitution , for example Article 200 .
It must address the reluctance of some of its politicians to accept that tomorrow 's politics will be very different from those in Romania prior to the revolution .
Having said all that , Romania is a very different country today , a very difference place from the Romania of ten years ago .
Some things however remain constant : its geographical position is important , as Mr Schwaiger emphasised , and a major plus for its own future development .
Romania is of course and will remain European by its culture , by its language , by its history and by its people .
I very much welcome this report and I for one look forward to being here when we welcome to the European Parliament Romanian Members as colleagues .
Mr President , I too wish to stress that those four reports can have a positive effect .
It is important for there to be commonly accepted rules for cooperation and relations in the business sector between the European Union and these four countries , and for there to be some security in relation to the ability of businesses to move into and cooperate with these countries .
On the other hand , of course , we must bear in mind that they are in a difficult stage of transition which , besides the necessity for certain principles and legal provisions , will certainly require the European Union to show solidarity , support and an understanding of their individual characteristics .
I wish to stress the importance of cooperation and the development of relations with Romania , which is one of the largest Balkan countries , in an important geographical position , which is perhaps a long way behind other eastern European countries , but which offers great potential for participation in the major networks of the European Union and Europe in general , as Mr Schwaiger in any event described very well in his explanatory statement .
Mr President , the Baltic countries have accomplished a mammoth feat in a short time .
In ten years , they have moved from dictatorship and a Soviet-style planned economy to democracy and a market economy .
On top of that , there are now the EU adjustments - changes which have imposed heavy demands on people and politicians alike which it has been difficult to meet .
There is consequently a need for great flexibility and economic support on the part of the EU to facilitate their continued development .
The EU should also be making reciprocal adjustments .
The political and economic pressures on these countries are enormous .
It is disturbing that last week one of the Baltic countries introduced a protective duty on pigmeat , thereby opening up a rift between the emerging free-market countries . However , such a move was not totally unexpected .
From the start , the Green Group has maintained that accession negotiations should be held with all three Baltic countries simultaneously in order to promote harmonious political and economic development in the area and to avoid endangering the fragile cooperation process .
We very much regret that this was not done .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should very much like to start by sincerely thanking the rapporteurs for their work and also by congratulating them on the quality of the reports presented here today .
I should also like to thank Mr Wolf in particular for his comments .
I believe that such comments are necessary in a debate such as we are now having .
Of course you will understand that I do not want to specifically discuss the more global accession problems , which are the responsibility of my fellow Commissioners , but the issue raised here is certainly an important element of these problems .
The question here is whether or not the countries concerned can make adequate and effective preparations to be able to perform sufficiently well from the time of their accession .
If that is not the case , then accidents could happen .
You will recall , and German Members in particular , how the pace of events at the time virtually wiped out whole sectors and entire companies in the former East Germany , as people were not given enough time to prepare .
Once you join the European Community you are subject to the logic of the single market .
This is why it is so important for these countries to proceed step by step .
We must be realistic .
This was what happened within the European Union itself .
Our countries , the present Member States , took quite some time before they assimilated the policy of competition rules and respect for state aid .
As you all well know , even today there remain a great many problems within the European Union .
On the one hand we must remain realistic about this issue , but at the same time we must clearly say to all these countries : look , this has to be done , otherwise you will be running a great risk on the day you join .
We need to be open and frank with these countries , which is why we have these implementing regulations that we are discussing today .
The basic rules have already been agreed under the Europe Agreements , what we are now discussing is their implementation .
I will come back to the subject of state aid , which some of you talked about .
What we are essentially discussing here are the rules on restrictive practices , Articles 85 and 86 in particular , what we might call relations between companies .
We are not in fact talking about state aid here , although I shall be coming back to this shortly .
We already have rules for five Central and Eastern European countries , and now there will be a few more .
I must say , ladies and gentlemen , that overall I believe the trend to be quite positive .
All these countries have now introduced competition rules , not necessarily identical to the rules we have in the European Union , but then again they are not at present always the same within the Union itself .
Some countries are adapting , such as the Netherlands , which has made strenuous efforts over recent years and whose competition policy is now largely in line with that of Europe .
In the United Kingdom it is being discussed .
This is what is known as soft harmonisation , a harmonisation which is progressively achieved .
We do not impose identical rules .
We ask the states in question to pursue a policy which is similar to that of the European Community and the European Commission in particular , and thus to set up the necessary authorities - as they have done in most cases - which also have the powers and instruments to implement that policy .
There are sometimes problems with this , because it takes time before you can develop this culture , before you have sufficient independent authorities which are able to apply these rules and overcome any resistance - and I do not need to tell you how difficult that often is in the European Union , even now .
So we should show some understanding for the fact that these countries need time in order to achieve this .
But we must of course repeatedly stress just how necessary it remains , and if need be utter a word of criticism , which is what we do .
A word of warning , because if it is not done in time it leads to major difficulties , primarily for the countries themselves .
I repeat , in general I believe things are going quite well in this area , but we must be realistic and accept that it will be some years yet before the situation in these countries is more or less comparable to that which now exists in the Member States .
Finally , I should like to make a point about state aid .
It is here that the question becomes most problematic , including within the European Union .
Governments grant state aid , and when they do they always believe it is with good reason .
You know that it is our duty in the Union to ensure a response when the situation is unacceptable .
But the situation in these countries is very unusual .
The authority which grants the aid will itself be responsible for checking that it is granted in accordance with the rules in force within the Union .
This is a very special situation , which is why it is causing so many problems .
Most countries still have no rules on this , and when they do they are very difficult to apply or else they are certainly not applied sufficiently independently .
I openly admit that this is also going to be the biggest problem in the future .
The more time passes the more problems we have with it .
I recently visited Poland , the Czech Republic and Hungary .
I will also try to visit the other countries .
But we have realised that the situation in this respect is not at all satisfactory .
Take Poland for example , where a whole series of tax-free areas have been set up close to or on the border with Germany , the neue Bundesländer .
Of course there is bound to be a reaction to this .
Let me take the example of the steel sector .
Countries like Poland and a few others are going to have to reorganise their steel sectors .
We also had to do this .
It takes time and money .
We should take a realistic view of this and say to these countries : do it , but in a way which is socially acceptable as happened in the European Union .
So you see there is still a great deal to be done , but I agree with the view expressed by most of the speakers : it must be done , it takes time and we must do it with Augenmaß , as they say in German .
I believe this is precisely the policy we are trying to pursue , but the countries in question must realise that it is a job that has to be done , in their own interests for the day they join the European Union .
I should like to make just one further point and then I will finish .
One of the speakers referred to anti-dumping measures .
As long as these countries have no rules for monitoring state aid and we cannot reasonably assume that this discipline exists , anti-dumping measures will also be applied .
The countries know this .
The measures can be phased out gradually from the time that these countries adopt a credible policy for supervising state aid .
One final word on this , ladies and gentlemen . There is at present still a great need for more transparency .
By this I mean that governments themselves must take a critical look at what they grant as state aid .
I recall a conversation with a finance minister , I will not say from what country , who seemed to believe that fiscal aid should be allowed .
In other words , he thought that it was perfectly alright if he gave a company tax exemption .
I said no , as this is also a form of state aid , and you need to be very careful about this .
I mention this example in order to illustrate that we also need first to draw up a detailed inventory of what government rules exist and second to promote greater awareness of what is and is not allowed .
That said , you of course know that all these countries are so-called A-regions where state aid is allowed .
That is clear .
The point is that this state aid must also respect certain rules and be sufficiently transparent .
Once again , I thank the rapporteurs and all those who have taken part in today 's constructive debate on this subject .
Mr President , may I put another small question to Mr Van Miert ?
I pointed out earlier that the Romanian refineries in Ploesti are due to be modernised and that Romania plays a key role as a link between the Trans-Caucasian oil-producing countries such as Kazakhstan , but also and in particular Azerbaijan .
Is the Commission prepared , firstly , to step up this cooperation and , secondly , to point out to Romania that modernisation should take account of environmental requirements ?
For if exceptional provisions were allowed in the framework of state aid , then far more emphasis should be placed on environmental aspects in regard to state aid and private investment , which , incidentally , would also be very necessary in the case of the Czech Republic .
Could you perhaps give me a brief answer ?
Mr President , this is a most important matter and , as you know , in this sort of context problems are of course resolved bilaterally .
We have to proceed through the normal diplomatic channels in regard to environmental questions too .
We do not have any direct responsibility here .
We have to talk to each other , even when it is a question of aid .
If there are any grounds for complaint , the matter is usually settled confidentially , but settled it is .
If you want any further details , we can discuss this either bilaterally or with other colleagues .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
EC Trade and Cooperation Agreement with Korea
The next item is the report ( A4-0445 / 98 ) by Mr Porto , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council Decision concerning the conclusion of the Framework Agreement for Trade and Cooperation between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Korea , of the other part ( COM ( 96 ) 0141 - C4-0073 / 97-96 / 0098 ( CNS ) ) .
The vote in this House on the Framework Agreement for Trade and Cooperation between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Korea , of the other part , is to be congratulated .
Having been devastated by a fratricidal war just over 40 years ago , Korea is now experiencing impressive growth and is one of the main economic powers in the world , having earned the right to be the first Asian country to join the OECD .
As far as the European Union is concerned , Korea is an important partner which accounts for nearly 2 % of our total trade , thus forming our fourth main partner outside the European continent , after the United States , Japan and China , while we are Korea 's third main trading partner after the United States and Japan , but before China .
This trade has doubled in 15 years , reaching ECU 27.5 billion in 1997 . The EU was in a position of surplus until 1997 .
The deficit which has occurred since then was caused by the Asian crisis : Korea 's imports fell from ECU 11.7 bn in November 1997 to ECU 7.7 bn in April 1998 . This situation is in contrast to that of Japan and China which have deficits that are not likely to disappear in the near future .
With regard to direct foreign investment , the European Union is the leader , having overtaken the United States and Japan in 1998 , and with the accumulated investments of South Korea in the EU being greater than our investment there : ECU 2.3 bn and ECU 1.5 bn respectively .
Despite the importance of Korea and our economic relations with the country , this House , through the competent committees , started to indicate reservations at the time of the vote on the agreement signed on 29 October 1996 .
These reservations were in the areas of protectionism - specifically relating to national preferences under the guise of the ' frugality plan ' or to problems in channels of commerce - intellectual property , respect for human rights and , above all , the failure to comply with minimum labour rules .
Following the suggestion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , the rapporteur and the committee responsible for the basic issue , the Committee on External Economic Relations , accepted the postponement of the agreement 's assessment .
The changes observed in the last two years have been very marked .
They have involved internal and external liberalisation and the restructuring of the economy , with all sectors being forced to accept a rationale which will prevent , for example , overinvestment in shipbuilding . This is now leading to assumptions on our part of having to compete with Korea in a process that started before the Asian crisis became more pressing .
In addition to this , we must welcome the openness in the political and labour fields that have been evident to a large extent since the election of the current Korean President , Kim Dae Jung .
The support which may be provided by this agreement has become particularly relevant in view of the crisis South Korea is experiencing , the results of which include significant falls in production and large increases in unemployment , from 2.6 % in November 1997 to 6.7 % in April 1998 .
However , these consequences are also contributing , in a transitional phase , to the liberalisation and restructuring measures which , with our backing , are being implemented .
Even in the area of trade unions , the main target of our concerns , we must undoubtedly welcome the agreement of the Tripartite Commission , which was reached on 6 February 1998 , and the specific liberalisation measures that were implemented , such as the recognition of the KCTU ( the Korean Confederation of Trade Unions ) , the authorisation of multiple trade unions at company level or even the right of sacked workers to belong to a trade union .
It is particularly symbolic that , just a few days ago , on 6 January , trade union freedom for teachers was approved .
But we should realise that some of the measures , while undoubtedly desirable , are likely to cause transitional problems for company managers and politicians .
We therefore have a special responsibility to support an agreement which , in a very delicate external and internal context , may help to strengthen and revive the South Korean economy and alleviate the problems of its inhabitants .
I must stress that there are clearly points open to criticism in all these areas , for example , the failure of Korea to sign up to international agreements on respect for intellectual property , as underlined in the opinion by Mr Pompidou .
However , the conclusion of an agreement promoting improved trade and economic cooperation will give us greater moral and political legitimacy in terms of the demands to be made of a country which , at a time of crisis , could not fail to have major problems with regard to social and political transparency and the restructuring of its economy .
We will all benefit from the commitment of a strong Korea to the support announced at the Millennium Round of the World Trade Organisation .
Mr President , the Framework Agreementfor Trade and Cooperation with the Republic of Korea was initialled on 29 October 1996 , in other words prior to the serious financial crisis which afflicted certain countries in eastern Asia and curbed the extraordinary economic growth of Korea , a country which - before the crisis - was increasingly becoming an economic and commercial heavyweight on the international scene ; one need only think that its shipbuilding industry had a 25 % share of the world market and that its automobile industry produced 5 % of world output .

Article 7 of the agreement on maritime transport establishes the goal of securing unrestricted access to the maritime market and to international maritime traffic on a commercial basis and in accordance with the principles of fair competition .
Article 8 establishes cooperation in the shipbuilding sector in order to create a fair , competitive market , in view of the current structural imbalance between supply and demand within the international shipbuilding industry . The parties also undertake to observe the principles of the OECD Agreement on Shipbuilding .
While we welcome the conclusion of this agreement , we should not overlook the problems created by Korea 's trade practices and the obstacles it has hitherto put in the way of EU products in the shipbuilding and automobile sectors , which are deemed sensitive under the agreement .
Although Europe 's shipbuilding industry is currently experiencing a revival , it is affected by considerable overcapacity , due in particular to the Koreans ' irresponsible doubling of their plant capacity over the past four or five years , to such an extent that Korea alone can now produce more vessels than all Europe 's shipyards put together .
The fact that supply greatly exceeds demand is beyond question , given that prices for new vessels of all types have fallen or at least stagnated .
This alarming structural imbalance has been compounded by the devaluation of the Korean won , leading to a situation which could have particularly grave consequences for Community shipyards and for employment in Europe .
Indeed , estimates show that the Koreans could reduce the cost of their vessels by as much as 30 % without altering their margins .
Therefore the Korean authorities must not use international financial assistance in support of their shipbuilding industry , and the European Union must take care to ensure that the commitments made by the Korean authorities in this regard are in fact met .
Mr President , I wish to thank the trade union organisations , the Commission and , indeed , the ambassador for their help with my research .
I found that South Korea had not complied with the undertaking it had given on becoming a member of the OECD in 1996 to bring its labour laws into line with internationally binding labour standards .
I also found that there were certain human rights problems .
The operation of the national security law was certainly a problem and there was a serious problem concerning long-term political prisoners .
There has been some progress to the extent that , as previous speakers have said , even as late as last week there were moves to legalise the teachers ' trade union .
There have been other very welcome moves because there were restrictions on trade union pluralism , a total ban on freedom of association and collective bargaining for government employees and teachers and the illegality of one of the two major Korean union confederations - the KCTU .
Furthermore , the leadership of the KCTU 's union was made illegal through removing the status of union membership from dismissed workers .
There have been all sorts of problems .
They are being worked through but I would like to see the conclusions in my opinion which , I am glad to say , have been carried forward by Mr Porto in his very excellent report , being looked at very carefully and taken up by the Korean Government .
I wish to draw your attention to some of these conclusions .
One is that the Korean Government should immediately implement the OECD undertaking to amend its labour legislation to incorporate internationally binding standards .
I also wish you to note a clause in relation to the abolition of the death penalty .
I should like Commissioner Leon Brittan , when he sums up , to tell us whether he will undertake , on our behalf and on behalf of the Commission , to follow up the three points made to the Commission in the conclusions in my opinion and also in Mr Porto 's report .
Mr President , it is worth emphasising the extent to which the framework agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Korea serves to promote freedom . It protects the legal right to political pluralism and recognises the right to form trade unions , together with the right to engage in union activity .
Previously , such activity carried a prison sentence in the Republic of Korea .
Other aspects of the agreement such as those relating to intellectual property , patents and trademarks also deserve a mention .
I should like to refer too to the recent meeting between European Union and Korean ministers , chaired by Sir Leon Brittan , who is with us here today . At that meeting , a cautious welcome was given to the initial measures on economic reform adopted by the Korean Government .
These measures alone will not be sufficient , but could set the country on the right course for the future .
It is also worth noting the commitment made by the Korean authorities on the subject of unfair competition with the European Union in sensitive sectors such as shipbuilding and the automobile industry .
This commitment was made after high-level consultations between the European Union and Korea , and we must carefully monitor the situation to ensure that it is adhered to .
Nonetheless , the present social situation in Korea regrettably leaves much to be desired . Not only is this quite unacceptable as we approach the twenty-first century , but it also results in global dumping affecting countries like ours which do observe the regulations on labour and social standards .
This must be made quite clear in the Committee on External Economic Relations .
In conclusion , we recognise the progress mentioned earlier , and encourage the Korean Government to redouble its efforts to attain the social standards the citizens of today require . Finally , it is our most earnest hope that human rights will be recognised in Korea .
Mr President , the rapporteur and Mrs Malone quite rightly drew attention to the issue of labour and human rights .
While I believe we should give every encouragement to progress in these areas , I would , nevertheless , submit that we have to be vigilant and have an effective and reliable monitoring system .
Perhaps the Commissioner could tell us how the Commission would assess improvements in these areas .
For example , will it draw on reports from organisations such as Amnesty International and , in particular , I would suggest , the ILO ?
The Commission should be aware that parliamentary support for this framework agreement is contingent on continuing progress on the issue of labour and human rights and that the support of this House could not be sustained if that position was to worsen .
We will not stand silent if our brothers and sisters in Korea continue to be mistreated .
I hope the Commission will pass that message on to the Korean authorities very firmly .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I want to come back to shipbuilding again .
Surely it is quite absurd that shipyards that are totally bankrupt by any normal business standards are continuing to operate and still winning shipbuilding contracts at the lowest dumping prices on the world market . And this is happening not just in the normal container sector ; South Korean shipyards are also moving into the area of ferries , of passenger ships , the last sector where we Europeans still have a hope of saving jobs .
Commissioner , how can you assure us that Korea will undertake to observe the provisions of Article 8 , namely , in accordance with the OECD agreement which has not yet entered into force , not to take any action to support its shipbuilding industry which would distort competition ?
How can we ensure that our taxpayers ' money that our Member States send to Korea as aid via the European Funds , via the International Monetary Fund , does not in the end rebound on our own jobs in the European shipyards ?
Nobody would be able to understand that .
I hope you can tell us how you intend to ensure that there are no unfair shipbuilding subsidies that harm our own industry .
Mr President , I am pleased to have the opportunity to commend this important agreement to the European Parliament .
I very much agree with the remarks of Mr Porto the rapporteur and compliment him on a balanced , well-reasoned report .
He is right to point out the importance of our relationship with the Republic of Korea and has given the House the key economic facts .
I would also like to thank Mr Valdivielso de Cué for his kind remarks about my own efforts .
If the European Union is to raise its profile on the world stage it is vital to strengthen ties not only with world-rank powers but also with key emerging countries .
That is why the Commission adopted a communication on 9 December reviewing the Union 's relations with the Republic of Korea and making comprehensive recommendations for the future .
The Republic of Korea is already a key partner for us , and is becoming more important politically both in its own right and also because of the difficult security situation on the peninsula which has potentially global implications .
For all these reasons it is essential for us to upgrade bilaterally our relationship with the Republic of Korea .
The Framework Agreement does this by comprehensively covering economic issues and political dialogue .
It contains detailed provisions which directly address issues of key importance to the European Union ; economic issues such as intellectual property rights , ship-building , maritime transport and so on , but also issues in other fields such as human rights including labour rights , cooperation against drugs and money laundering .
The Framework Agreement sets up the institutional machinery through which the European Union can pursue its interests vis-à-vis Korea , and the Commission is fully committed to using the agreement to advance European interests .
I would point out that the Framework Agreement is not an act of charity which opens our markets to Korea .
It contains no trade concessions .
It is a wide-ranging non-preferential agreement which creates new bilateral channels for dialogue and cooperation and , I would point out , for the resolution of disputes with this important trading partner .
So it means that , where we have a problem or where we think they have come some distance but not far enough , we have the new opportunity of handling it in a structured way .
The vote today is timely not only because it is just before the European Parliament sends a delegation to Korea , but also because it is one year after the beginning of a financial crisis and the change of government in Korea .
Under President Kim Dae Jung , Korea has started an economic reform beginning to address some of our long-standing concerns .
More needs to be done and the Commission will remain extremely vigilant but Korea deserves our support and encouragement for the course it has chosen .
Labour rights is clearly an area where improvement is needed as has rightly been pointed out by Mr Porto .
Mr Smith has asked us how we will monitor the agreement and ensure that there are further improvements in labour rights.The answer is that we will consider all the material he has mentioned and all the material that is at our disposal , and we have a delegation on the spot in Seoul which will be active in assembling information for us .
But I think it is right to point out that a number of positive steps have already been taken under President Kim , who has involved the unions in a national tripartite dialogue on restructuring .
Last week , as was pointed out by Mrs Malone , a landmark law was passed by the National Assembly establishing trade union rights for teachers .
The fact that things are moving in the right direction is all the more remarkable and all the more a positive achievement when you consider that it has taken place at a time of severe economic contraction with growth of minus 6.8 % and unemployment tripling in just over one year .
The substance of the agreement and the need to upgrade Europe 's political and economic position in Asia are themselves sufficient reasons to commend the agreement for Parliament 's support .
However , I would add that by supporting it we have the opportunity to give a political signal of support to President Kim and his allies who are deeply committed to economic reform , who are faced with strong entrenched interests opposed to such reform , and who are committed also to the removal of corruption and increased democracy in Korea .
Mr Valdivielso de Cué is right to point out that difficulties still exist , especially in the area of shipbuilding , and Mr Jarzembowski has referred to that .
It is impossible to give guarantees as far as the future is concerned .
I believe that the implementation of the OECD Agreement would give us the best protection .
That is being held up at the moment because the United States is not prepared to ratify the agreement .
There is a strong case for going ahead without the United States because the USA represents a very small proportion of the world 's shipbuilding .
Unfortunately , European industry does not take that view .
I think European industry is wrong , because it has the hope that if this agreement is not ratified it will get more state aid from national governments .
The sooner it is disabused of that and reconciles itself to the fact that there will not be more state aid , the sooner it will support going ahead on a quadripartite basis , even without the United States , to give us the protection against Korea that this OECD Agreement would give .
For all these reasons , I hope Parliament will support the Framework Agreement on trade and cooperation with Korea .
Mr President , may I take it from what the Commissioner said that he is undertaking to give Parliament an annual report and will take into account the other two points in my conclusions ?
We will certainly take into account all the points in the conclusions and as far as the report is concerned , I am - as perhaps you know - not enthusiastic about formal reports but very enthusiastic about reporting to Parliament .
As far as I am concerned , I am happy to come to Parliament , as many here know , and to give a full report on the situation of Korea or any aspects of it that Parliament is at any time interested in .
But I am less enthusiastic about formalising it ...
Interruption by Mrs Malone
Well , all I can say is that , unless the Member States of the European Union go off their rockers , they will not appoint anybody who will take a different view .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is questions to the Commission ( B4-0004 / 99 ) .
Ladies and gentlemen , if you have no objections , I suggest that Questions Nos 29 and 32 be taken before Questions Nos 30 and 31 .
This would enable Mr Monti to reply to those two questions and then leave .
I assume there are no objections , as this only entails a very slight delay for the other two questions .
I therefore invite Commissioner Monti to take the floor first to respond to Question No 29 .
I should also like to take this opportunity to welcome him and wish him well for this year .
Question No 29 by Jaime Valdivielso de Cué ( H-1188 / 98 ) Subject : Electronic commerce
The Commission is completing a draft directive on promoting the development of electronic commerce .
This type of commerce requires the exchange of confidential data , including personal information relating to the parties , such as credit card numbers ; credit cards are habitually used as a means of payment in Internet transactions .
Can the Commission state what measures are to be taken to ensure the confidentiality of such data and prevent their improper use ?
Mr Monti has the floor .
I return your good wishes , Mr President , and I thank you for your kindness in grouping together these two questions .
Beginning with the first , the honourable Member raises the sensitive question of personal data protection in commercial transactions conducted electronically ; he refers in particular to credit card numbers , in that credit cards are habitually used as a means of payment over the Internet .
The main instrument used to protect privacy and avoid the risks associated with various forms of IT piracy is encryption , as indicated by the Commission in its communication on digital signatures and encryption .
In addition to supporting research and development on instruments to guarantee the secure transmission of credit card data , the Commission is promoting the improvement of technologies serving to minimise the use of personal data in electronic transactions .
For example , from a technical point of view , I would recall that the common action programme on research and technological development has funded various instruments designed to guarantee the secure transmission of credit card data , such as the SET standard , an open standard for secure electronic transmission , developed by Visa and MasterCard , which has now become C-SET and allows for the use of smart-cards .
The Commission has also undertaken research into general aspects of telematic security , for example under the Infosec programme ; as regards electronic commerce in particular , the Esprit programme has funded various specific projects in this field .
The Commission is moreover supporting the development of technical instruments for electronic commerce and security under the fifth RTD framework programme , which will focus in particular on the development of technologies to ensure greater protection of privacy .
Finally , I would stress that the protection of personal data in Internet communications falls within the ad hoc legal framework governing the processing of personal data established by Directives 95 / 46 / EC and 97 / 66 / EC , which entered into force on 25 October 1998 .
In the context of the previous question , I should like to raise a further two questions which seem to me to be relevant .
Does the Commission intend to enhance the existing legal instruments , making them speedier and more flexible , in order to afford consumers adequate protection in the courts ?
Does the Commission intend to set up a mechanism to provide effective legal defence in cases where consumers suffer in spite of these measures ?
I can assure you that these aspects , which have been drawn to our attention , are covered by the two directives on the processing of personal data to which I have referred , namely 95 / 46 and 97 / 66 .

Question No 32 by Karin Riis-Jørgensen , which has been taken over by Mr Kofoed ( H-1182 / 98 ) Subject : Weapons directive
Article 17 of the weapons directive ( 91 / 477 / EEC ) requires the Commission to submit a report to Parliament and the Council on the situation resulting from application of the directive .
Is that report already available and , if not , when does the Commission expect to have completed it ?
In drawing up its report , is the Commission aware of the consequences this directive has for about 10 million Europeans who hunt or shoot as a sporting pursuit , i.e. the additional taxes they have to pay and the extra work they are faced with when transporting firearms within the European Union ?
I give the floor to Mr Monti to answer Mrs Riis-Jørgensen 's question .
During the second half of 1999 , the Commission intends to present to the Council and the European Parliament a report on the application of Directive 91 / 477 on control of the acquisition and possession of weapons .
The report will examine the operation and impact of the directive in various respects .
To this end , the Commission will draw up a questionnaire and issue it to the groups concerned ; it will investigate the aspects raised by the honourable Member in her question , relating to the cost-effectiveness of applying the directive .
The problems connected with the use of the European firearms pass for hunting and recreational shooting will likewise be discussed .
Mr President , I am grateful for the friendly reply and for what you said about this report , but I would like to ask whether you know how many countries have implemented the directive .
As far as I am aware , it is the case that if a Dane wishes to go hunting in the UK he has to submit his application a month in advance .
This means the UK has not implemented the directive .
My question is therefore : how many countries have still not implemented the directive ?
I can inform you that all the Member States have transposed the directive .
Question No 30 by Gary Titley ( H-1177 / 98 ) Subject : EEA and enlargement
Article 128 of the Treaty establishing the European Economic Area states that any European state becoming a member of the Community shall apply to become a member of the EEA .
What are the institutional implications of this ?
Specifically , if EU membership automatically requires new members to join the EEA how are EFTA EEA states to be involved in decisions leading to enlargement of the EU ?
Would there need to be two rounds of ratification , one for enlargement of the EU and one for enlargement of the EEA ?
I should like to welcome Mr van den Broek and ask him to reply to Mr Titley 's question .
The question by the honourable Member concerns the relationship between membership of the European Economic Area and the states which will shortly be joining the Union and which at the time of their accession must of course adopt the acquis communautaire , pursuant to the provisions of the accession agreements when negotiated .
A part of the negotiated acquis will be the agreement concerning the European Economic Area and to what extent Union membership automatically implies membership of the European Economic Area .
Article 128 of the EEA Agreement provides for a procedural mechanism for the accession of new states to the EEA .
There are three parts to this article .
Firstly , it stipulates that a new member must submit its application to the EEA Council .
Secondly , it stipulates that the conditions for participation are the subject of an agreement between the contracting parties to the EEA Agreement and the applicant country .
Thirdly , it stipulates that the agreement must be ratified by all contracting parties .
It is up to the applicant countries to decide when to apply for EEA membership , but it must be before accession to the Union .
The Commission regularly informs the EFTA / EEA countries of progress on enlargement , by way of a joint committee to which it submits briefings .
The Council will have to consider to what extent the comments of the EFTA / EEA countries can be taken into account , since the enlargement negotiations take place in the framework of an intergovernmental conference .
As the EEA agreement is also part of the acquis communautaire , in ratifying the accession treaty the Member States will also be ratifying EEA extension .
The EFTA / EEA partners must also ratify the participation of applicant countries in the EEA .
These decisions must be made in parallel so that the applicant countries also become full partners in the EEA on the date they join the Union .
My apologies for the fact that this is a rather complicated explanation , but I hope that it is now clear to the honourable Member .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for a thorough answer although he has not actually answered the last part of my question , namely , do there need to be two ratifications - one for EU membership and one for EEA membership ?
Every country that is part of the EEA had to ratify the EEA agreement , so does the United Kingdom , for example , have to ratify both EU membership for Poland and EEA membership for Poland ?
Secondly , can he confirm that applicant countries have to apply to join the EEA - i.e. that this is compulsory , that they are required to apply .
Also , what happens if a derogation is negotiated within the accession negotiations which the EFTA / EEA countries are not happy with ?
Do they have any say if , for example , Poland were to join with specific derogations which , as far as the EFTA countries were concerned , undermined the EEA agreement ?
Do they have to simply accept a fait accompli ?
I should like to start with the last question .
Do I summarise it well if I formulate the question as follows : Could there be different conditions which apply to entry to the EU and to participation in the EEA ?
As the EEA acquis will be for the candidate countries identical to the EC acquis it would be unthinkable for the candidates to have transitional periods as members of the EEA which were different from those agreed in the accession negotiations as .
There should be clear parallelism .
As far as ratification is concerned , I tried to make clear in my first reply that since the EEA agreement is part of the Community acquis , ratification by the Member States of the Accession Treaty implies equally the ratification of the EEA extension .
I hope that clarifies my position .
As regards Article 128 , if you read the text literally they have to apply , but in fact the Council will remind them that this official act has to be carried out anyhow before accession , which also in fact includes participating in the EEA .
This formality has to be completed .
Question No 31 by Brian Crowley ( H-1216 / 98 ) Subject : The Community school-milk programme
The Commission undertook a thorough revision of the Community school-milk programme in 1993 and , as it is no doubt aware , the Treaty of Amsterdam now commits the Community to pursue action in the field of public health aimed at improving public health , preventing human illness and diseases and obviating sources of danger to human health .
Has the Commission any plans to promote the school-milk programme in new ways as part of the expanded scope of Article 152 of the consolidated version of the EC Treaty and , if so , in what ways ?
I should like to welcome Mr Fischler and ask him to reply to Mr Crowley 's question .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in principle the current school-milk programme has two aims . Firstly , we want to achieve the objectives of the organisation of the dairy market and boost sales ; secondly , of course , we want this school-milk programme to encourage in particular the younger generation in the European Union to drink milk and make a healthy source of nourishment available to children .
We see no reason why we should in any way change these objectives at this time .
So there are at present no plans for any revision .
But of course we must also wait and see what the Agenda 2000 negotiations produce .
In the light of that it may of course prove necessary to make certain changes and adjustments .
Furthermore , an external audit has been commissioned , which is nearly complete , and we will see what these independent external experts recommend and also adjust our future policy to that .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for his response .
You already have some idea what the external audit is going to say with regard to the future operation of the programme .
Could you give us an indication tonight as to what you feel would be the best way forward to ensure the continuance of the school milk programme and how it might be altered at some stage in the future ?
Mr President , I am happy to reply to Mr Crowley 's supplementary .
From my point of view I can say that I have no information on what the results of this external audit will be , but I am of course prepared to make the findings public as soon as they are available .
My personal - and I stress personal - view with regard to school milk is that in the light of reform it is worth considering even at this stage how to make this system , which is at present rather entangled in red tape , a little less bureaucratic .
Quite apart from that , on principle it must surely be in the interest of the dairy industry itself to do all it can to draw its products to the attention of the future consumers rather than just leaving it to the public administration to encourage children to consume more dairy products by subsidising them .
Here I could well imagine a combination of private-sector and Community measures , in order to achieve the best results .
Thank you , Mr Fischler .
Having thanked Mr Fischler for his answer , we should now be moving on to Question No 33 by Mrs Hautala .
That question lapses , however , as the author is not present .
Question No 34 by Joan Vallvé ( H-1191 / 98 ) Subject : Catalan national sports teams
Article 129 of the EC Treaty states that the Community shall contribute to the flowering of cultures while respecting their diversity .
Today , competitive sports events are among the most widely disseminated of cultural manifestations .
In the interests of affirming the plurality of the Union 's peoples , does the Commission consider the draft law now under discussion by the Catalan Parliament which would , inter alia , create a framework that would allow Catalan national teams to compete on a similar basis to that already applying to Scottish and Welsh national teams to be in line with the existing criteria for cultural events ?
I should like to welcome Mr Oreja and wish him a happy New Year , and ask him to reply to Mr Vallvé 's question .

In the Commission 's view , the objectives concerning culture outlined in Article 128 of the Treaty cannot be applied to sporting competitions between national teams .
Therefore , it is not for the Commission to rule on this matter .
Initially , it falls to each Member State and to the appropriate sporting authorities to set up and run national teams .
In the case of Spain , relevant Spanish legislation on the issue should be borne in mind , in particular , the Sports Act of 15 October 1990 , and Royal Decree No 2075 of 20 July 1982 concerning representation at international events and other sporting activities .
Thank you very much for your reply , Commissioner .
It appears there is no conflict with the principles espoused by the European Union . Indeed , the Union promotes the enrichment of the cultures of the Member States through respect for regional and national diversity , as laid down in the Treaties .
I merely wished to put forward the views of a significant proportion of the citizens of Catalonia who would like to see the creation of sports teams along the lines of those that currently exist in Scotland and Wales , and which could in future be set up in other areas , such as Flanders .
Such teams would allow the citizens to make their identity felt in these competitions .
I rise because I am so sympathetic to the questioner , coming as I do from Scotland and knowing how much the Scottish football team means to the people , and also as one who has a great admiration for Catalonia , because as a little girl I remember seeing off from Glasgow the International Brigade to Catalonia , which included my cousin .
It was a Scotsman who wrote the book Homage to Catalonia , so we have a very strong feeling of solidarity .
Sport was a fairly late-comer to the scope of the Treaty .
Would the Commissioner agree that perhaps the Commission should look at further enlarging that scope because , of all games , there is no doubt that football seems to arouse the strongest passions ?
We have indeed considered this matter , especially in view of certain recent developments , notably a declaration in the Treaty .
Some Member States were of the opinion that the issue of sport should be included in the Treaty .
However , it did not figure amongst the articles or the protocols , but it was included in a declaration .
As the honourable Member is well aware , it is often the case that what is initially a declaration later becomes incorporated into the Treaty .
It could well be that this is a first stage and that sport will be included following future reviews of the Treaty .
I should also like to say that last December the Vienna European Council dealt with sport from two points of view .
On the one hand , the social function of sport was recognised , and on the other , the need to adopt appropriate measures on doping was emphasised .
As regards doping , we should not be seeking an individual response from each of the Member States , but some sort of coordination amongst them .
In this connection , I should like to say that I encouraged the Austrian Presidency to hold a three-way ministerial meeting involving the German , British and Austrian Sports Ministers , with Austria in the chair and Commission representation . I myself was present in Salzburg where we exchanged ideas on the possible way forward for sport within the Community .
The President of the International Olympic Committee has called a meeting in Lausanne on 3 and 4 February to discuss doping . In my view , the European Union should be adequately briefed for the meeting .
I have therefore approached all the sports ministers suggesting we meet before the meeting arranged by the International Olympic Committee in order to establish the European Union 's position .
It would not seem to make much sense for us to attend and then for each minister to speak for himself without us having reached any prior agreement .
Consequently , we shall be meeting on 19 January to prepare for the meeting on 3 and 4 February in Lausanne .
It must now be clear to the honourable Member that sport is starting to make its presence felt .
There is a suggestion that sport should be included in Article 128 of the Treaty .
This would mean that sport would feature in the cultural area envisaged in the Treaty .
Although the College of Commissioners has not yet given its opinion on the matter , I should make it clear that I myself am in favour of such an approach . Whilst subsidiarity must , of course , be respected , I do believe it is right to start working towards the inclusion of sport in the Treaty .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Please remain with this question .
Two Members have asked for the floor and , pursuant to the Rules , only one of them may speak .
I therefore give the floor to Mr Titley to put a supplementary question for a maximum of one minute .
I welcome the Commissioner 's remarks and I endorse what he has just said .
The British Sports Minister , in particular , is very keen that we should see higher profile for sport within the European Union .
Will the Commissioner confirm that if Catalan national teams competed on the same basis as Scottish and Welsh national teams , that would mean that anybody who represented a Catalan national team would be permanently ineligible to represent the Spanish national team ?
I should like to reiterate what I said earlier , in reply to Mr Vallvé 's question .
It falls to each Member State to set up and run national teams .
You may well ask what happens in Wales and in Scotland , but their teams already existed before the Treaty .
After the Treaty , the only criterion is that it is for the legislature in each Member State to make the necessary decisions .
I cannot therefore go beyond the scope of the Treaty , because one of the Commission 's many responsibilities is that of guardian of the Treaty .
What I can talk about is what could be envisaged for the future in terms of including the issue of sport , but that is another matter .
I cannot give you any other answer at the moment .
It is for each Member State 's legislature , working with the relevant sporting bodies , to rule on the setting up and running of national teams .
Question No 35 by Esko Seppänen ( H-1204 / 98 ) Subject : Euronews
A special relationship exists between the European Union institutions , especially the European Parliament , and Euronews : the work of the satellite channel is funded using revenue from tax-payers in the EU Member States .
How important does the Commission regard Euronews as being for its information policy , and what kind of financial support is planned for it ?
I give the floor to the Commissioner to answer Mr Seppänen 's question .
As is widely known , Euronews is an independent television broadcasting company .
It began as a collaborative venture between several public channels . Some of these still have capital invested in it , but Euronews is now controlled by ITN , an independent channel .
Given the European nature of its programmes , its ability to broadcast in five Community languages and its transnational broadcasting network , the European Commission , with Parliament 's support , has been cooperating with this company for a number of years . In particular , it makes an annual contribution towards the financing of the company .
At Parliament 's suggestion , a different arrangement was arrived at last year .
The aim was to ensure greater transparency in the relationship between the European Union and the station , and to link the Community 's financial contribution to the production and broadcasting of specific programmes .
In 1998 , therefore , the Commission , with the approval of the budgetary authority , negotiated a three-year memorandum of understanding with this company .
The agreement provides for the joint production and broadcasting of programmes for the general public on a range of contemporary European issues .
A list of activities and the terms of their funding is agreed annually .
Progress is monitored through a monthly meeting between the broadcasting company and the Commission , at which a representative of Parliament 's services is also present .
As joint producer of the programmes , the Union benefits from production and broadcasting rights concerning the programmes .
And this means that the Union can broadcast them for free on its own networks , notably through its EBS satellite system , which means the arrangement is particularly favourable .
Beyond these joint productions , the European Commission has no special involvement with the company regarding , for instance , editorial policy or management .
In this way , the arrangement provides a more transparent basis for cooperation restricted to products the public can easily identify and it also respects the channel 's independence .
The agreement signed in 1998 involved a sum of ECU 3 250 million and the production and broadcasting of 42 five-minute news programmes with on-the-spot reports , 168 two-minute educational cartoons and 222 three and a half-minute news items .
The 1999 agreement is currently under negotiation .
A decision on the future of our cooperation will be taken in the light of the assessment due prior to the expiry of the three-year period laid down in the memorandum of understanding .
To date , the Commission has been pleased with the arrangement . It has resulted in the production of many programmes and has provided good coverage of events .
I think it is worth mentioning that Parliament 's services recently informed my own services that the presentation of information in programmes produced jointly with Euronews had changed , resulting in more balanced coverage of the work of the various institutions .
This is all I can say to the honourable Member on the subject of Euronews at the moment .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank you for your detailed reply , but I wish to add a remark and a question .
I understand from your reply that Euronews is no longer a channel owned by national broadcasting corporations , and , although you did not say so , I deduced that it is privately owned .
I would therefore like to ask whether the Commission has arranged for other satellite channel companies to compete for the production of the television programme , and if not , why not ?
Then I would respectfully ask the Commissioner to provide me , if possible , with the memorandum that spells out the rules that relate to Euronews .
I should like to tell Mr Seppänen that I personally am a great fan of Euronews and have done all in my power to bolster it .
Initially , I was confronted with a situation in which the Community was directly involved in Euronews .
It was involved in the management of the company and was therefore also affected by the implications of everything put out by Euronews . I visited Euronews in 1997 , and the situation seemed to be far from ideal .
It seemed preferable for the Community and Euronews to reach an agreement whereby the Community would not be involved in the management of the company . The agreement would refer instead to specific programmes .
The Community would specify the programmes it was interested in , aiming at very short programmes to be produced over a long period of time , rather than at television spots . This would ensure maximum coverage of issues related to the work of the institutions for as long as possible and with as much repetition as possible .
This was therefore the type of arrangement reached . As the honourable Member is probably aware , I have maintained my involvement within the framework of the coordination that exists between Parliament and the Commission .
A meeting is held every six weeks or two months . Mr Anatassopoulos leads Parliament 's delegation , and I lead the Commission 's .
Four or five Members of Parliament attend together with four or five Commissioners , and we review all issues related to news output , giving particular attention to those concerning Euronews .
This enables us to keep a close check on the way the arrangement with Euronews is developing .
Regarding the specific issue raised , one of the reasons why I proposed pulling out of the previous direct involvement in Euronews was that Euronews had ceased to be part of the national television networks and was essentially an independent channel .
This does not mean that it no longer has links with national channels , as the latter retain their investment in Euronews . At present , however , ITN - an independent channel - is the main owner .
You will be aware that Euronews has undergone many changes of ownership throughout its history , but it is a matter of regret for me that public channels do not have a greater involvement in it .
I did approach several public channels .
In fact , I approached the Spanish and Italian public channels , and others who were already involved in some way . I suggested they become more involved and really make their presence felt in Euronews .
Unfortunately , they were very reluctant to do so .
It is common knowledge that Member States are often only concerned about their national television channels , and they consider Euronews to be somewhat alien .
It appears close to us , but is rather more distant from the Member States .
We therefore came to the agreement I outlined and I believe that , for now , it is satisfactory .
The Commissioner said in his closing remarks that people are only concerned about their national television channels .
Well , I was concerned about Euronews .
At great personal inconvenience and considerable expense I paid the cable television company which has a monopoly on the service in my area to instal cable television so I could sit and spend happy hours in the evening listening and watching Euronews .
You will be interested to know , Commissioner , with your interest and support for Euronews , that after a period of six months , the cable company wrote to me and told me that Euronews was being withdrawn and that I have no further access to it by any means at all .
It is a sad little story but I knew you would be interested to hear it .
Mr President , I can but make a note of the honourable Member 's experience and state that I share his interest in Euronews .
In my case , whenever I am late home , I always switch on Euronews to receive the latest news .
I can well understand therefore that the honourable Member would wish to find out about the latest news from Euronews .
Question No 36 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-1225 / 98 ) Subject : European City of Culture candidates
On 30 October 1997 , on the request of Parliament and the Council , the Commission submitted a proposal for a decision on the European City of Culture .
Parliament adopted this at first reading on 30 April 1998 , and the Council adopted a common position on 24 July 1998 .
As the Commission is aware , the Council 's common position diverges sharply from the Commission proposal ; in addition , by proposing a distribution by country for the period 2005-2019 , it represents a major departure not only from the spirit of the proposal but from the primary objective of the initiative , namely the ' communitarisation ' of the European City of Culture phenomenon .
Can the Community explain why it did not withdraw its proposal following the Council 's adoption of its common position ?
What line does the Commission intend to take on the common position ?
Does the Commission not consider that it is somewhat premature as of now to begin the process of adoption of a Community initiative which will not come into operation until 2005 ?
I give the floor to the Commissioner to answer Mrs Izquierdo Rojo 's question .
I am grateful to Mrs Izquierdo Rojo for the question she has raised .
This issue was debated in Parliament this very afternoon . Mrs Izquierdo Rojo is aware that it is a matter of great concern to me , and I trust a satisfactory solution can be reached .
The Commission has made its view on the common position abundantly clear .
At the appropriate time , the Commission put forward a proposal , which we believed to be reasonable .
And we believed it was a reasonable proposal because it provided for the choice of the European City of Culture to be devolved to the Community as a whole .
I am not sure whether , of all the cultural events that take place and that have a Community-wide impact , the European City of Culture is the most significant , but it certainly receives the most publicity .
I do think , however , that we can do better than we are doing at present .
This very promising scheme was launched by Mrs Mercouri in 1985 . It has run from then until now .
As you will be aware , Weimar is the European City of Culture for 1999 . It seemed to us however , and particularly to me , that there was scope for improving the procedure .
How could the procedure be improved ?
It could be improved by firstly ensuring that this was not just an event for the city , the region or the country concerned , and investing it with a truly European nature .
That is why the Commission suggested in its proposal that the Member States should nominate the city or cities they wanted to see as European City of Culture , outlining at the same time the genuinely European action they proposed to undertake during the year in question . The Commission would then consult with Parliament and with a contact group that could define the criteria involved .
In the light of the criteria and Parliament 's report , the Commission would come to a decision and put its proposal to the Council .
The Council would then take a majority decision .
The main problem that tended to arise , particularly in 1997 and 1998 , was that the Council found it difficult to reach agreement when a unanimous decision was required .
A single country , under pressure from a single city , could make it impossible for agreement to be reached .
So , we believed that this consultative approach was a good one . All interested parties would be involved , the Commission would put a proposal to Council and the Council would then take a majority decision .
In the event , this approach did not meet with Council approval .
The Council therefore unanimously adopted a common position . I was unsure as to whether the latter did or did not modify the Commission 's proposal .
As a result , I referred the matter to the Legal Service .
The Legal Service stated that strictly speaking no such modification was involved , and that the procedure could therefore go ahead .
This is the situation in which we now find ourselves .
So what else has happened ?
Parliament today gave its declaration of intended rejection of the common position , which was debated along with Mr Monfils ' proposal .
I was in Bonn yesterday , at the meeting between the Commission and the German Government , and met with the President-in-Office responsible for culture , the German Minister for Culture . The honourable Member must be aware that this is an event in itself , because never before has there been a minister for culture in Germany .
The Länder had them , but there were none in the government of the Federal Republic .
My exchanges with Mr Naumann focused almost entirely on this issue , and I urged him to promote a three-way dialogue between Parliament , the Council and the Commission in an attempt to resolve this situation .
I well understand Parliament 's anger , indeed I share it , particularly as I had proposed a totally different method .
However , I would be sorry to see Community-wide involvement disappear completely , and not just be reduced , if no agreement were reached . There is a great temptation for governments to say : ' Why do we not just carry on as we have been with a purely intergovernmental method ? '
This is how things stand at the moment .
I have urged the Council and now urge Parliament to arrive at a compromise solution that would allow Parliament to table amendments at second reading . I will try to take over as many of those amendments as I can .
Perhaps we will then be able to find a way forward .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo can rest assured that I would never have accepted the proposal if it had not been a case of unanimity .
Given that it was , there was no other option , as she must certainly be aware .
In such cases , the Council 's position takes precedence over the Commission 's .
The Commissioner has not in fact told us anything we did not already know in his four and a half , almost five-minute lecture .
I now have only one minute in which to ask him something we do not yet know : does the Commissioner intend , in the days and weeks to come , to carry on washing his hands , taking notes and expressing his regret ? Or will he perhaps find it in himself to finally adopt a more responsible attitude ?
So far , all we know is that the minister could not have done a worse job with Granada , and that through this lunatic method of theirs of giving everyone a turn , the ministers for culture have turned something that used to be important into a farce .
We already knew all of this , Commissioner , but we expect you to adopt a position more in keeping with your post and with the Commission 's responsibilities regarding such an important manifestation of European culture for which it is responsible .
I am sorry to hear you are so unhappy , Mrs Izquierdo , but I thought it appropriate to use those four and a half minutes to fill in the background to the situation . Though you were well aware of it , other Members of the House may not have been .
I therefore explained the sequence of events .
I cannot invent the Treaty .
The Treaty exists and I am bound by it .
I cannot do more than has already been done .
If the Council takes a unanimous decision , I can only act as I have .
What I can do - and this is certainly something new , as it only happened yesterday - is to talk to the President-in-Office , tell him that this is a matter of the greatest importance and ask him to call an urgent meeting to try to reach some sort of compromise whereby we will perhaps be able to move forward and come to an agreement .
You may ask what other course of action is open to me .
But my powers are limited .
Bear in mind that there is a serious danger here , though you can be quite sure that I shall guard against it .
I shall not take any action that might lead to the demise of the European Cities of Culture . Further , I shall do all in my power to provide the scheme with more of a Community spirit .
There is of course the risk that , at a particular juncture , the Council may not agree , and that it would then take a backward step and act simply through intergovernmental agreement .
This is what it did between 1985 and 1999 , and it can continue to do so between 2000 and 2019 , or for as long as it wishes .
Consequently , the only course of action open to me at the moment is to try and persuade Parliament and the Council to reach an agreement .
Question No 37 by Bernd Posselt ( H-1230 / 98 ) Subject : Celebrating the millennium
What progress has been reached in the preparations for the celebrations for the year 2000 ? Does the Commission intend to assign a high priority to Christian-Islamic-Jewish dialogue within these activities ?
I give the floor to the Commissioner to answer Mr Posselt 's question .
) For some years now , the Commission has been planning events linked to the millennium .
I have in mind the Hanover International Exhibition , the European Cities of Culture for the year 2000 , and the 50th anniversary of the Robert Schuman Declaration .
As regards millennium initiatives we are informed of by operators in the Member States , I have instructed my services to make provision for awarding specific European sponsorship to projects conveying the spirit of the construction of Europe .
I also intend to propose to Parliament , the Commission , and the Council that the European institutions should send out a joint political message to the citizens on the theme of peace .
Further , the essential process of collaboration with the Member States was launched on 30 June , when DG X called a meeting in Brussels of those responsible for national millennium celebrations .
It was gratifying to hear that all 15 Member States were represented and to realise that they were eager to collaborate amongst themselves and with the European institutions .
I should however stress that the principle of subsidiarity will be strictly observed in any actions undertaken by the Commission .
The Commission will not merely hand out subsidies to all and sundry . On the contrary , it will concentrate on the type of projects I mentioned earlier , namely long-term projects that respond to the citizens ' wishes .
With regard to dialogue between Muslims , Jews and Christians , the Commission has no plans for a specific project of this nature .
Mr President , I would like to ask two brief supplementaries .
What part will music play in these celebrations ?
There are organisations , such as ' Europa musicale ' , that are making very intensive preparations which also involve the applicant countries .
I wanted to ask you whether there are plans only for general festivities or also for genuine cultural events .
Secondly , I asked specifically about the Christian-Islamic-Jewish dialogue .
After all , the year 2000 refers back specifically to the birth of Christ , which is when our calendar begins , and I therefore think we should include a dialogue with our neighbours , the Muslims and Jews , as this is increasingly becoming a domestic policy issue in our countries .
That is why I ask whether there are any plans to that effect .
Neither of these two matters figures in the Commission 's millennium planning for a simple reason : as far as the millennium celebrations are concerned , the Community 's involvement in terms of Community policy will be minor .
We do have certain programmes we will endeavour to carry out .
A cultural framework programme is scheduled for 2000 to 2005 . We are experiencing a very serious problem with this at the moment as one Member State has reduced its contribution to such an extent that it can hardly be termed a cultural programme any longer .
Fourteen Member States have accepted the Commission 's proposal , but a single Member State is opposed to it . In the light of that opposition , and given the need for unanimity , it will not be possible to implement that particular framework programme for the time being .
This apart , many other programmes are planned to celebrate the millennium .
Large-scale projects are to be undertaken by all the Member States .
Nevertheless , from a Community standpoint , we shall concentrate on the three major events .
The other ideas put forward were all very interesting , but there are no plans to include in the Commission 's programme any activities other than the three I mentioned .
However , the Commission would , of course , consider any further proposals that might be made in connection with these activities .
Mr President , Commissioner , World Expo 2000 will also be taking place that year .
At that world exhibition the first attempt will be made to introduce the electronic payment system across the board on a large scale .
Visitors will be coming from all over the world , some 40 million of them .
Have you any ideas on how we can also take account , during the celebrations , of this unique event , this huge experiment ?
The Commission is currently considering what action it might take in connection with the Hanover International Exhibition . As things stand at the moment , we believe that a figure in the region of EUR 7 million - perhaps EUR 6 m , EUR 7 m or EUR 7.5 m - might be allocated to it .
Please do not write this down in black and white , but just take a rough note in pencil , as it is only an estimate .
Within the first three months of this year , that is , before the end of March , I shall be in a position to issue a communication concerning the action planned in connection with Hanover . A working party has been set up , and I am anxious for the matter to be brought to a conclusion by 30 March .
I shall naturally then report back to Parliament . In particular , it will be my pleasure to let the honourable Member know the details of the action planned for the occasion .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I should remind you that the Minutes are written in ink , so it will be rather difficult to include a pencilled note , as you suggest .
Perhaps you should have a word with the services producing the Minutes .
In any case , thank you for your contributions and for your presence amongst us today .
Question No 38 by Robert Evans ( H-1178 / 98 ) Subject : Behaviour of Passengers on Aeroplanes
Would the Commission inform me if they have any plans to introduce tougher restrictions on the availability of alcohol and the behaviour of passengers on European flights in the light of recent violence inflicted upon flight staff ?
I should like to welcome Mr Kinnock and ask him to reply to Mr Evans 's question .
The Commission is naturally aware of the problems caused by unruly passengers aboard aircraft and strongly condemns the violence and abuse which they inflict on crew and fellow passengers .
Because of the increase in the number and intensity of such incidents in several places , inside and outside the European Union , in recent times , the issue is now considered to be a priority for attention within the International Civil Aviation Organisation ( ICAO ) and the European Civil Aviation Conference ( ECAC ) .
Both organisations are addressing the problem of unruly passengers as a general matter of aviation security .
They are making an assessment of current legal provisions and , in addition , collecting relevant information on the nature and the number of in-flight incidents involving unruly passengers .
Consideration is being given , amongst other things , to the need to adapt existing legislation so that prompt , effective and consistent action can be taken at a destination airport against passengers whose behaviour during the flight has been offensive .
The ECAC working group on security will discuss the relevant issues at its next meeting , which is in February , and the organisation is also arranging a workshop on these matters to be held in March .
Following these events , and taking into account the work of ECAC and ICAO , the Commission will consider what form of action may be appropriate in the Community or , alternatively , as part of wider international initiatives .
I thank the Commissioner for his very comprehensive and most encouraging answer .
He will know well that , with Heathrow Airport in my constituency , this is one of the reasons why I am concerned about this area .
I am encouraged by his remarks and by the action the Commission is taking .
However , I have concerns as to how his action can be squared with the pressure to drink that is exerted on passengers by cabin crew - the ones who are very often the victims .
They , in turn , are pressured by their employers - the companies - to sell alcohol to make money .
We know that 99 % of bad behaviour is linked to alcohol .
If the suggested changes to the rules on duty-free mean that people will be encouraged to consume the duty free alcohol they have bought on the planes during the flight , this could further exacerbate the problem .
I am concerned to know how the Commission will actually enforce the legislation that I am delighted it is bringing forward .
Thank you very much .
Don 't forget that this is not the House of Commons .
I give the floor to the Commissioner to answer the supplementary by Mr Evans , and I have two further supplementaries on this same question .
The honourable Member is right to say that alcoholic drink is involved in a large number of these incidents , but one of the purposes of the investigation being undertaken by the International Civil Aviation Organisation is to get reliable statistics on the causes and nature and , therefore , of course , on the origins and effects of the kind of incidents that concern him , as they concern me .
There is one very preliminary conclusion that can be drawn from the studies that have already partly taken place , and that is the extraordinary fact that , apparently , smoking bans on aircraft have partly the effect of creating an extra appetite for drink .
How reliable that evidence is we are not yet in a position to say .
I do not think that any one would suggest as an answer to it that smoking is reintroduced on airlines .
I will report to the honourable gentleman when we have more substantial information , and it may be that we will make legislative proposals on the basis of that information .
I welcome the Commissioner 's remarks and I would be very interested to know what legal basis there would be under the Treaty for action .
Action should be taken .
The volume of traffic and number of passengers travelling through Stansted Airport , which for the most part is very welcome within my constituency of North Essex and South Suffolk , is increasing and obviously passengers want to know that their safety is a paramount consideration .
Would the Commission consider encouraging Member States to liaise to prevent passengers , who are in the severely intoxicated state to which Mr Evans referred , from travelling .
They put other passengers ' lives at risk and also the crew .
I would respond to the honourable Member by saying that we will certainly conduct further discussions with Member States .
That is an obvious course we will be glad to take .
It is difficult to say exactly what proposals we would want to make in respect of legislation until we have a complete analysis .
I am sure she would support that point of view .
If however the analysis pointed towards a productive effect of trying to introduce Community legislation , the basis on which we would seek to do this is the Treaty provision which gives us competence in the area of transport safety and passenger safety .
The gap in the current legal provision that is set down in the ICAO Convention which governs globally the conduct of passengers and the powers of aircraft commanders is that the aircraft commander has the duty of deciding whether an offence committed on board an aircraft is serious or less serious .
That is an invidious choice for an aircraft commander to have to make .
When the conclusion is that it is serious all states that are participants in ICAO have the power to arrest and detain those who are accused of unruly or abusive behaviour .
It is not so easy when the aircraft commander cannot conclude that their conduct has been very serious or grave , in which case states may choose not to exercise their powers of custody .
It is in order to refine these definitions and close that gap which can cause difficulties for everyone involved , with the exception of the culprit , that work is now being done on the current incidence of in-flight unruly behaviour and its consequences for crews and passengers .
May I first give you a short piece of advice .
The airline which I use to go to Brussels has already found a solution to your problem .
It offers such bad wines bought outside the Union that nobody wants to consume them .
I have a practical question which is of paramount importance for me .
Can you not obtain from the Commission or some other body a ruling that passengers should not take two pieces of luggage on board .
This endangers everyone in the event of a critical situation developing .
This should be enforced by the airlines .
I will readily concede that the honourable Member has superior knowledge of wines .
I do , however , have people within my acquaintance who have been known to drink a great deal of bad wine simply because after the fifth or sixth glass they cannot taste it in any case .
So serving bad wines is not really a safeguard against unruly conduct .
The question of luggage is a slightly different one and I am sure that from time to time all of us have contravened the general rules in order to add to our convenience .
I would say that as long as the second piece of luggage does not consist of several bottles of booze , then it may be possible for the crew of an aircraft to manage to accommodate it .
In general it is not sensible either for personal security or the security of aircraft for people to try to take too many pieces of luggage .
Many airlines effectively enforce that rule .
Question No 39 by Richard Howitt ( H-1203 / 98 ) Subject : Trans-European transport networks and access for the disabled
Can the Commission indicate what measures are being proposed in the current revision of the guidelines on the trans-European transport networks to ensure that access for the disabled will be properly recognised in the guidelines and then implemented by the Member States ?
I give the floor to the Commissioner to answer Mr Howitt 's question .
As the Honourable Member will know , the aim of the existing Trans-European Networks guidelines is to try to ensure sustainable mobility of persons and goods within the area without internal frontiers under the best possible social and safety conditions .
The objective also applies to people with mobility handicaps . All decisions to build transport infrastructure projects , including the selection of technical standards , are of course primarily the responsibility of Member States .
The Commission is currently preparing a White Paper , which will be published this summer , setting out the approach to the future development of TENs policy and preparing for a revision of the guidelines .
In that context one possibility under discussion is the development of criteria relating to service levels , which could also include reference to access to the network for people with disabilities .
In preparing the White Paper the Commission has launched a broad consultation process and naturally we welcome the views of this House and of all interested parties , including disability organisations with which we enjoy very good and frequent contacts .
I certainly congratulate the Commissioner and endorse what he says about relationships with disability organisations as , for example , the work that his officials are involved with on the Bus and Coach Directive .
The progress that is being made there is very good evidence of that .
I support and encourage him to further consider the proposals about service levels and access for disabled people .
However , I would ask him to go further .
Can he look , when he talks about inter-operability , at linkages .
For example , it is no good having an accessible train if people cannot get into the station .
It is no good having a road network if the parking spaces are not there for disabled people .
Could he look at that issue and at information for disabled people so that blind people through use of braille , deaf people through use of textphone and other visual displays have full access to the information on the trans-European networks ?
And although he said in his answer that it is the responsibility of the Member States to implement , is there anything in the White Paper that can push the Member States a bit further to make sure they do just that ?
I am very grateful to the honourable Member for his question and the way in which he phrases it .
In the case of connections between modes and within modes , on the issue of the design of vehicles - for instance , low-floor in which , as he says , the Commission research services and other services have played a very significant part - and in respect of the provision of clear and accessible information to travellers with disability handicaps , we can demonstrate that we are active in all those areas .
In the case of many Member States we are pushing at an open door .
The standard of responsiveness was far from perfect but has increased very significantly in recent years .
He may be interested to know about the work that we are doing in connection with the European high-speed rail system where we have given a mandate to the European Association for the Inter-operability of Railways to assess criteria for inter-operability of rail-related infrastructure , for instance , platforms .
This highlights the very point that he made in his supplementary question .
In particular , the association has been asked by us to use as an example of law relating to the access of disabled people the public transport legislation , civil rights legislation relating to disabled people , that has recently become law in the United Kingdom .
We hope that it will be possible , more broadly , to build on that model .
To keep my record clean I should say that my question has already been asked by Mr Howitt .
We have quite considerable concern recently expressed in Ireland at the very small number of accessible buses .
Are you aware of this , Commissioner , and can you do anything about it ?
I have never assumed anything other than that the honourable Member had an absolutely spotless , unblemished record in all respects .
I am not in a position to draw attention to any power that the Commission has to try to ensure greater use of more accessible buses .
There is an irony : that the company which has an absolutely brilliant record of production of kneeling buses and low-floor buses is situated in Northern Ireland .
I hope that cross-border trade will intensify as Irish bus authorities in the Republic of Ireland take advantage of these excellent products .
I am happy to say that their purchase and use are becoming more widespread in several authorities and amongst several bus operators in the United Kingdom .
I hope that becomes a more general habit .
Thank you , Mr Kinnock .
That was the last question to Commissioner Kinnock , as we have now reached the end of the time set aside for questions to him .
I should like to thank him for coming and wish him all the best for the coming year . I have every confidence that if we both make an effort , our timekeeping will improve in the future .
Questions Nos 40 to 42 will receive written answers .
Question No 43 by Mary Banotti ( H-1180 / 98 ) Subject : Single supplements-travel costs
Can the Commission inform me whether the supplements applied to single people 's travelling costs are contrary to Community Law ?
I should like to welcome Mrs Bonino and ask her to reply to Mrs Banotti 's question .
The question being asked by Mrs Banotti was raised last year by Mrs McNally and answered by the Commission .
The Commission is aware that one of Mrs McNally 's constituents , for example , has created a pressure group in the UK to campaign against supplements for single travellers .
The Commission would however point out that the only Community provision relating to the question raised by the honourable Member is the directive on package travel , package holidays and package tours .
Article 2 ( 4 ) of this directive , which has been adopted by the Council , defines the consumer as ' the person who takes or agrees to take the package ' .
As the honourable Member no doubt knows , the directive also defines as a ' transferee ' any person on whose behalf the principal contractor agrees to purchase the package - such persons being defined as ' other beneficiaries ' - or any person to whom the principal contractor or any of the other beneficiaries transfers the package .
That is the position , Madam , as I am sure you know .
The Commission considers that single-person supplements derive from a commercial principle - higher prices for single travellers - a principle generally accepted by the market , in that these travellers generate higher accommodation costs which must obviously be reflected in prices .
Therefore the Commission does not deem single-person supplements to be contrary to Community law .
Without entering into the realms of subsidiarity or other such matters , the fact remains , in the Commission 's opinion , that market forces are operating here : there can be no doubt that a single traveller creates higher costs , be it only in terms of room occupancy .
Moreover , travellers are normally made aware of the increased price , in that all advertising literature generally indicates the basic price and the supplement ; so nor can the directive on unfair contract terms be applied .
Finally , as far as the Commission knows , these single-person supplements are fairly reasonable on the whole .
Above all they are made known , and therefore the directive on unfair contract terms cannot be invoked .
I should like to thank the Commissioner .
She gives the bad news in the nicest possible way .
I would like to know if there is any indication that markets themselves are responding to what is an increasing number of single people perhaps just looking for ' the blessed peace of the single bed ' , to quote George Bernard Shaw .
I am surprised that they continue to charge supplements to single people who sometimes simply find it difficult to afford this .
I have also come across and been approached by constituents about a situation where special offers are offered , for example in the UK , which are not available to somebody coming , for example , from Ireland to pick up the tour in the UK .
Is this also a situation which is governed by market forces or is there , in fact , a problem with its legality ?
The honourable Member is quite right : nothing is as sensitive to market trends as the industries which profit from them .
We have certainly noted an upsurge in special offers for which there is no single-person supplement , precisely because agencies have grasped the fact that the number of single travellers is growing constantly .
The market is therefore responding very rapidly with special offers .
On the second question , relating to special offers intended for a particular target group or nationality , I would prefer to ask the Legal Service whether these might be discriminatory .
Before saying anything which could disrupt the market , I believe that it is only right to seek a legal opinion : the Commission will certainly do so , Madam , and will reply to you in writing .
Question No 44 by Daniel Varela Suanzes-Carpegna ( H-1189 / 98 ) Subject : Outcome of EU-Canada talks on Canadian Fisheries Bill C-27
At the last EU-Canada summit held in Vienna , following an initiative from Commissioner Brittan , the Canadian Foreign Minister agreed that a joint EU-Canada committee of experts would undertake a detailed study of Canadian Fisheries Bill C-27 , in order to determine whether it is compatible with international law .
A first meeting took place in Ottawa on 7 and 8 December 1998 .
Can the Commission provide information on the outcome of this meeting ?
I give the floor to the Commissioner to answer Mr Varela 's question .
I believe that here Mr Varela , who questions me on Canada once every two months on average , is just as determined as the Commission , which for its part misses no opportunity - and I shall mention three very recent dates - of pointing out to its Canadian counterpart that Bill C-27 is unacceptable .
The matter has been raised on three recent occasions : on 22 October , when Sir Leon Brittan met the Canadian Foreign Minister ; on 7 December , at a meeting of senior fisheries officials in Ottawa ; and finally on 17 December , at the EU-Canada summit .
What I think emerged very clearly on the last occasion was that the Canadians have no intention of amending Bill C-27 .
They have said so repeatedly .
The new element , however - and the Commission is pursuing this possible solution - is Canada 's apparent readiness to contemplate an interpretative statement making clear that Bill C-27 relates only to the application of the United Nations agreement .
This interpretative statement , if it did materialise , would be a worthwhile move on Canada 's part .
In any event , I would add two further considerations .
Firstly , due to unfortunate timing , the discussion between the fisheries officials took place immediately after the International Court of Justice ruling in the proceedings brought by Spain against Canada for its detention in 1995 of the fishing vessel ' Styke ' .
Even though the Court merely declared that it had no legal competence over that case , its declaration was taken in Canada as a decision on the substance of the dispute ; this therefore made the Canadian authorities somewhat more unforthcoming .
Secondly , I am utterly convinced that - quite apart from unilateral Canadian statements along the lines of ' yes ' or ' no ' , and we shall have to examine their content - the only way of averting disputes lies in accelerating the ratification of the UN Convention on straddling stocks .
As you know , an entire section of this Convention provides for binding dispute settlement , which would obviously prevent Canada from refusing to recognise the Court 's jurisdiction , as it did in 1994 / 95 .
In any event , above and beyond the negotiations , and as well as keeping events under daily - or monthly - review , the Commission is absolutely convinced that early ratification of the UN Convention is the most effective strategy available to us .
Thank you for your explanation , Madam Commissioner .
As you must be aware , I have as much interest in this issue as the Commission . It is of key importance to fishing operations in international waters and , therefore , for international legislation .
A state that does not accept the jurisdiction of an international court of justice , that passes internal laws contrary to international legislation , that enforces these laws by seizing vessels , and that cannot then be tried by anyone represents a serious threat to fishing on an international level , and is a poor example to others .
However , I do not agree with you , Madam Commissioner , on what I believe to be a very important issue . I have to emphasise this , as things are not going well for us .
They are not going well for me and they are not going well for the Commission either . We are likely to go on discussing this matter here every two months , probably every month , as Canada is putting forward all the arguments it can think of against our case .
I differ inasmuch as I believe , as does the European Parliament , that ratifying the convention could give rise to long-term disputes if it is interpreted differently from the New York Convention .
The approach currently espoused by NAFO could lead to a solution . The best course of action would therefore be to decide not to ratify the convention , especially as it is in Canada 's interest that we do ratify it .
This , therefore , is where we differ .
I urge you to give careful consideration to the matter . We may be called upon to show Canada the extent to which it has become a thorn in the flesh of its relationship with the European Union .
In conclusion , we must persevere , and perhaps not ratify the convention Canada is so anxious to see in place so that it can then apply it to suit itself .
I am aware of Parliament 's position , but I would ask you to consider that that is the very purpose of institutional dialogue .
It is because we find that differing interpretations of the UN Convention are an undoubted source of contention , and could increasingly become so , that - and I would stress this point - ratification is desirable , above all in respect of the pillar of the Convention relating to a binding dispute settlement mechanism .
Please bear in mind that we have no other means of solving potential disputes , and not only in Canadian waters or NAFO waters .
If the Convention were not ratified we would have no instruments at all ; what if , for example , some other coastal state were to have a different interpretation ?
As you said , others might follow the precedent , and we would then find ourselves without any binding instruments for the settlement of disputes .
This , it seems to me , is the part of the Convention which we should surely exploit .
Indeed , as you will remember , Mr Varela , what happened in the last episode , in 1995 , is that Canada refused to recognise the competence of the Court of Justice , which has now in fact ruled that it is not competent .
So I fear that , unless a binding dispute settlement mechanism is established , Canada 's example will be followed by others .
It is also up to the Member States to address themselves to this matter .
I am however keen to stress that the absence of a binding dispute settlement mechanism is certainly not to our advantage .
Thank you , Mrs Bonino .
As the author is not present , Question No 45 lapses .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Question No 46 by Ian White ( H-1222 / 98 ) Subject : Puerto Morazan-Hurricane Mitch
Would the Commission please indicate how much money the EU has made available for emergency aid for Nicaragua and Honduras and how much EU aid is channelled through the NGO Community and international relief agencies ?
Question No 47 by Christine Oddy ( H-1232 / 98 ) Subject : Puerto Morazan - Hurricane Mitch
Would the Commission advise how much construction help , in the form of road and bridge repair teams and equipment , it has sent to Nicaragua and Honduras ?
Question No 48 by Glenys Kinnock ( H-1239 / 98 ) Subject : Response to natural disasters
ECHO has had to respond , during this financial year , to a number of tragic and costly emergencies and natural disasters .
Does ECHO have sufficient funding to deal with any new crisis which may occur ?
I would therefore ask you , Commissioner , to reply jointly to these questions by Mr White , Mrs Oddy and Mrs Kinnock in the two minutes which we have left before 7 p.m.
I shall also say a word in response to Mrs Kinnock 's question , since it relates to the same subject .
First of all , the Commission can make available to the honourable Members , should they so desire , the recently approved overall plan for Central America ; the plan contains all the detailed figures , and I can leave it with you now .
Very briefly , however , I can say that the first allocation - ECU 6.8 million - was approved on 4 November , in other words while the hurricane was still raging ; a further package of ECU 9.5 m was approved in November , as soon as I returned from my visit ; thereafter the Commission diverted or redirected for this disaster ECU 3 m which had previously been earmarked for other projects .

All these projects are implemented through NGOs , a list of which I have here and can leave with you .
The two plans have been approved by the Humanitarian Committee , to which all the Member States belong .
Directorate General 1B , headed by Mr Marín , recently released ECU 8.2 m in preparation for the overall reconstruction plan which , as the honourable Member knows , is to be presented to the Donors ' Conference in Stockholm .
Concerning the other question , I would point out that one of the problems confronting us is that ECHO 's ordinary budget is exhausted by half way through the year , and a whole series of unforeseen disasters compels us to engage in very lengthy and cumbersome procedures to mobilise the reserve .
That is precisely why , from this year onwards , we are seeing some improvement since now , at the start of the year , we have a more substantial allocation ; this enables us to plan in a more orderly fashion , especially for crises which persist from one year to the next , drawing on the reserve only in truly unexpected crises which defy planning .
This is a budgetary matter which we are attempting to clarify with Mr Liikanen - some progress has already been made - so as to avoid the considerable difficulties which usually occur each July .
I would like to know how much of the emergency aid has got through to Central America , what the difficulties have been getting that aid through and what the most pressing needs are now for the people of Central America and what can we do now to help them ?
The first projects which were decided on 4 November were immediately operational because we decided to use the NGOs which were already working in the field so that there were no gaps .
With the recent plan of ECU 10m , we have slightly enlarged the list of the NGOs .
One of the problems at the beginning was transport and how to reach a population where the bridges had all collapsed and there were no roads .
Finally , we had some success with helicopters but helicopters cannot carry large quantities of food .
The second point is that some of the governments were not exactly happy about working through NGOs but during my visit I made it very clear to the governments that , like it or not , the rules are that I cannot give money directly to a government but that we have to work through the Red Cross or the NGOs .
Finally they accepted this , even if some political tensions remain .
What we are doing now is concentrating mostly on Honduras and the north of Nicaragua .
We want to focus on drinking water in order to prevent epidemics .
There is no major need for food except for vulnerable groups .
The real major need is for drinking water in order to prevent epidemics .
The new plan is mostly concentrated on basic health care , the rehabilitation of pumps , and drinking water .
If you are interested , I can give you details of what every NGO is doing in the field .
At a time when the effectiveness of the Commission is being called into question I should like to commend the very fast and efficient response which ECHO made to the crisis in Central America .
In the light of the information you have given us , Commissioner Bonino , I should like to know what finances you have been able to direct to the recurring crisis in Bangladesh , a country with which my own country , the United Kingdom , is very concerned and involved .
Do you consider that ECHO has been able and will continue to be able to prioritise these needs as they occur on an annual basis in Bangladesh ?
I do not have the final exact figure on Bangladesh but I will obtain it for you .
What we have discovered over the past year is the major impact of recurring natural catastrophes .
Overall , in the action plan for 1999 , we want to strengthen our natural disaster preparedness .
We even thought of having a disaster preparedness or natural catastrophe fund .
We are still considering whether it is wise , possible or viable to have a fund which can be more easily used to react to , prevent , or prepare for natural catastrophes .
This thinking requires a change in the Financial Regulation .
I do not know whether the political mood is to have more flexibility in spending .
We are still discussing what is the best way .
As far as Bangladesh is concerned , I will provide you with the exact figure .
I do not want to give you an inaccurate figure .
I will check it out .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Since we have now reached the end of the time set aside for questions to the Commission , Questions Nos 49 to 79 will receive written answers .
That concludes Question Time .
The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m.

Trading system and internationally recognised standards
The next item is the report ( A4-0423 / 98 ) by Mr Sainjon , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the communication from the Commission to the Council on the trading system and internationally recognised labour standards ( COM ( 96 ) 0402 - C4-0488 / 98 ) .
Mr President , at a time when we are celebrating the 50th anniversary of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights , Europe , the world 's most important trading power , owes it to itself to continue to further the idea of what I call ' social globalisation ' .
I firmly believe that if the European Union wishes to have a high degree of credibility on this issue its own record must be irreproachable .
How can we be taken seriously by the developing countries when in the United Kingdom , for example , two million children have jobs , and 500 000 of these are under the age of fifteen ?
Why do the authorities there refuse to ratify ILO Convention 138 on child labour ?
I do not believe it is sufficient to have ratified the European directive on the protection of young people at work or the Social Charter ; we must also apply the principles contained in them and take into consideration the fate of these thousands of children who work under extremely difficult conditions in the handling and construction sectors .
I could also mention Austria , which has not yet ratified Convention 138 , and Ireland , which has not ratified Convention 111 on non-discrimination .
But even with regard to countries that are likely to join the Union , I believe that we need to take steps that are just as strict .
Given these circumstances , we must not hesitate to rely on the Declaration of fundamental principles , which was adopted by the ILO last June .
This includes the conventions on forced labour , child labour , non-discrimination and freedom to join a trade union .
Bringing these conventions together within a single unit constitutes a very important step as it means that the countries that have not ratified one or other of these conventions will still get to see reports on the subject .
The Union must therefore take action with the ultimate objective of requiring WTO members to have ratified this ILO Declaration on fundamental principles .
But attempts made so far with regard to the developing countries have all failed due to the negative approach that has been taken most of the time .
A change occurred in March 1998 when an incentive clause was inserted into the Community GSP for the first time , proposing to introduce a customs bonus for countries that respected these minimum social standards .
This helped to create a more positive approach to the social clause .
This step could serve as a model for or indeed a precursor to the European Union 's strategy in the World Trade Organisation .
Another strategy to promote labour rights at international level is represented by the hundreds of codes of good conduct introduced by multinational companies .
However , the right to join a trade union and the right to engage in collective bargaining are often forgotten .
It is for this reason that we must now go further .
As I see it , a code which is based on the Declaration on fundamental principles must be a minimum core .
In concrete terms , Parliament is calling on the European Commission to organise discussions on drafting a European code within a forum bringing together the European Trade Union Confederation , European employers and certain NGOs .
The European multinationals will be able to ratify it and their names will be published in the Official Journal of the European Communities and on the Commission 's Internet sites .
The code will not contain sanctions but , thanks to the creation of a database , a special unit in the Commission would be able to monitor effectively the companies choosing this path .
However , in the long term , it is the WTO that can do most to promote a code of conduct .
Finally , Mr President , I would like to take the opportunity here in Parliament today to make a solemn appeal to all the international institutions , to the world 's most noteworthy figures in the political , philosophical , religious and cultural spheres , to take a joint decision to finally launch a merciless fight to eliminate forced child labour from the world once and for all in the first decade of the 21st century .
What seems to be a new phenomenon is in fact age-old .
It is not acceptable to allow millions of children to languish in squalor , atrocity and suffering .
All children should be able to experience a childhood of play , a childhood of joy , hope and happiness .
We who are in a position of political responsibility have a moral duty to show determination in taking the exceptional measures needed to achieve the objective I am proposing ; it is an objective inspired by the legacy handed down to us by those who fought , often at the cost of their own lives , to defend human rights throughout the world .
We must take a practical approach and consider what measures have proved to be successful .
Promoting education is a good thing but it is not enough .
The governments of the countries concerned must grant a substitute allowance of a few dollars a month to the families of children who stop working .
This is the only solution .
It must of course be accompanied by a very strict monitoring policy .
UNICEF has denounced the consequences of , for example , the closure or sudden departure of a multinational company .
The children do not then turn to school as an alternative but instead find themselves on the street once again , looking for a job to continue to provide for their family , and if they do not find work they often end up in the awful situation of becoming involved in prostitution .
Even though the fight for the social clause will be long and difficult , we really have tremendous scope for taking action today .
It is up to public opinion to take this on board and to politicians to show that they are not simply sitting back and watching the globalisation of the economy .
Mr President , I am a member of a party that bears the word ' Social ' in its name , and so the social market economy is a particular concern of mine .
That is why I very firmly support minimum social standards at the European level .
On the other hand , the globalisation of international trade , which is leading to a liberalisation of trade , investments and capital transfers , compels us to consider social development on a global scale .
In its 1995 World Development Report , the World Bank emphasised the importance of good industrial relations to the creation and maintenance of an efficient labour market .
This , however , presupposes a democratic system in which employees enjoy rights that enable them to thwart any attempts by governments to gain a competitive edge by means of discrimination , exploitation and repression .
A second conclusion suggests itself .
If international trade is to be potentially beneficial to a country , there must be scope to take decisions and express preferences .
In other words , we must grant people at least the same rights as workers that we accord them as consumers .
In my opinion on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , therefore , I emphatically endorse the demands for social clauses in international trade agreements .
This means that the Member States of the EU would insist on and promote the fundamental standards of social protection , principally in the framework of the International Labour Organisation .
It is absolutely essential that the work of the non-governmental organisations in pursuit of these goals should be supported by the EU and its Member States .
Moreover , incentives must be created and enhanced so that the developing countries can be induced to observe the basic social standards - in other words , no sanctions and no concealed protectionism .
We should also support trademark campaigns , such as the Rugmark and many others born of consumer initiatives , as well as voluntary undertakings by companies to respect fundamental human rights .
The committee also supports the inclusion of social clauses in the trade and cooperation agreements concluded by the EU Member States .
My opinion contains a proposal for the wording of such a clause .
I thank Mr Sainjon for repeating and amplifying in his report the call I made in the opinion , although I do feel that he has overstretched his demands .
Excesses are sometimes unhealthy .
What I do not understand , however , is why , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , Mr Howitt is seeking to delete the good example of the United States from Amendment No 10 .
I do not really wish to support that deletion .
Mr President , let me say that I feel particularly honoured today because first of all I am here to speak as the representative of the large Socialist Group after the two rapporteurs , Mr Sainjon and Mr Schiedermeier , and also as a member of both committees , the Committee on External Economic Relations and the Committee on Social Affairs , in both of which I had the opportunity to take part in person throughout the lengthy process of preparing these reports .
I can therefore express sincere congratulations to the rapporteurs and the committees which , by virtue of a thorough and open procedure , were able to enhance the original reports .
I will not attempt to reiterate or add anything to what the rapporteurs said .
I will declare my support by referring to two points .
Firstly , I wish to dwell particularly on and to underscore how important it is , today , just a few days after the introduction of the euro , for us in the European Parliament , us in the European Union , to spell out the true dimension of global society .
This is none other than the fact that alongside the global market there is also - I repeat , there is also - another dimension , a global social policy of solidarity .
To this I wish to add that it has been shown by authoritative bodies such as the World Trade Organisation that there is no contradiction , no conflict between this and economic development which is at the same time a prerequisite for social prosperity .
Secondly , I wish to stress that today , in this phase we are passing through towards enlargement , we in the European Union must insist , by clarifying and refining the Copenhagen criteria , that human rights should be included in this process .
Mr President , this is not the only time this week that we shall be discussing a code of conduct for international transactions , since tomorrow 's agenda , as you know , includes a report on the same subject which was compiled on the initiative of the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
I believe there are a few points about these reports on which we have to come to a basic understanding .
The first is that we do not have the right on the one hand to include extraterritorial provisions in such reports , and then to criticise the United States in connection with the Helms-Burton Act .
Secondly , the developing countries must also be brought into this discussion if it concerns them , for they do not wish to have standards imposed on them over their heads either , standards they have played no part in formulating .
Thirdly , child labour is a vital point in this whole issue .
If this is a report about recognised standards , it should surely take more account of social standards and of other forms of work , instead of being confined to one point that virtually swamps the entire report .
International agreements naturally require clarity and precise alignment , so that they can be recognised and observed , especially if we have to insist that this should be a voluntary code of practice .
- ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , agreements on internationally recognised labour standards most certainly fall within the remit of the International Labour Organisation .
However , the implementation of agreements entered into is another matter , especially when we are talking about banning child labour .
The rapporteur sees a clear role for the European Commission in this field , but unfortunately this role must be limited as the European Union is not a member as such of the International Labour Organisation .
Nevertheless , the rapporteur still feels that the Union has certain responsibilities here .
This brings me immediately to my second point .
In Article 19 of the resolution the rapporteur requests a European initiative in the fight against child labour .
I should very much like to support this , but he proposes , first of all , introducing compensation for families whose children are forced to work and , secondly , education for children in the countries concerned as well as supporting measures .
This would be an excellent proposal if the Union had any powers in this field .
I also wonder whether the rapporteur realises what the financial consequences would be for the Union if we granted a guaranteed income to families in developing countries .
I estimate the EU 's budget would double .
The Liberal Group is of course solidly behind the banning of child labour .
But income support is not the way to go about it .
What is vital is education , as the rapporteur has indeed recognised , not only for boys but first and foremost for girls .
I therefore call on honourable Members to support the Liberal Group 's amendment to Article 19 which calls for the combating of child labour by means of European measures to support children 's education .
The European Union must assume its responsibilities in this field , preferably by cooperating with international organisations such as UNICEF and UNESCO .
Mr President , I would like firstly to congratulate Mr Sainjon on his excellent report .
Observance of social rights in international trade is a fundamental issue and one that has been under consideration for more than a century without any significant results .
One of the major causes of this failure is doubtless the protectionist and unilateral approach of the economically dominant countries .
It must therefore be clear that the affirmation of respect for human rights is not just a matter for the poor and emerging countries but also for the developing countries and in particular for the countries of the European Union . It also requires real solidarity .
It is with this in mind that a strategy has been undertaken by the European Parliament in recent years - and of course André Sainjon has played a very important part in this - to give the European Union a kind of two-pronged role : as a regional power that can introduce the principles of a social clause into its external relations and , to complement this , that can also act multilaterally , its main concern being , of course , to promotion the multilateral approach .
With regard to internal strategy , beyond what was undertaken within the system of generalised preferences , the committee and its rapporteur want the European Union to develop other dimensions to its own action , in particular in the case of its trade and cooperation agreements and agreements on aid to investment .
On the issue of codes of conduct , we have a subtle approach ; this will later be coupled with a study of how to incentivise countries to apply sanctions , but it is obviously a step in the right direction .
Similarly , it is right that , on the issue of child labour , we should give examples of incentive schemes that go in the direction we wish to take .
Of course , we must at the same time take multilateral action - this second role reinforces the first , and the first is not possible without the second - and this is done by means of two major ideas . The first involves not only recognising fundamental social rights but also beginning to put in place instruments for enforcing observance , in cooperation with the ILO and the WTO .
The second involves pursuing policies that allow affirmation of the joint imperatives of competitiveness and social progress at multilateral level . This presupposes very strong objectives such as the abolition of child labour or education of children , objectives that must be developed at the same time perhaps as pursuing other possibilities such as setting up or improving upon systems of social protection .
But this is undeniably a very good report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am certainly very pleased that we in Parliament are now recognising the right of employees throughout the world to decent working conditions .
The ILO Conventions are undoubtedly very helpful in that respect .
It is high time we implemented them , but how ?
In the debate on the World Trade Organisation and the GATT agreements , there were absolutely no problems involved in deciding on everything , even enforceable sanctions , that would further the cause of deregulation and liberalisation .
But when it is a matter of creating acceptable conditions for people at work , out come conventions that are not binding , and suddenly we are being warned not to rush into things and not to create excessive burdens .
There is only one thing I can say to you : if we do not finally make up our minds to introduce binding standards , we shall gradually create the same conditions that exist elsewhere .
It is surely unacceptable that people all over the world are now being pitted against each other in a race to achieve the grimmest working conditions , the lowest pay levels and the worst social standards .
And yet that is precisely where this development will lead , which is why I am so delighted that Mr Sainjon has presented such a clear report .
Mr President , Commissioner Marín , ladies and gentlemen , the debate on the excellent report by Mr Sainjon allows us to measure once again the distance between the progressives and certain conservatives on social issues and on the importance to be given to employees throughout the world and in all companies .
The size of this divide may be interesting . But does it really come as a surprise ?
The report by André Sainjon may enable considerable progress to be made in terms of social standards .
It introduces into economic relations values and standards promoting collective bargaining .
It takes up the fight against the exploitation of children , which includes employing them to make toys for our own children .
It is therefore without the slightest hesitation that I support his appeal and his proposals , which demonstrate both pragmatism and a real political will .
In this regard , I am particularly pleased with the introduction of social clauses for undertakings benefiting from Community measures for investment in third countries .
In line with this proposal , I would like to see this mechanism extended in future to undertakings which respond to invitations to tender in the area of public procurement .
Authorities should be able to set out basic principles and minimum social conditions in their tender specifications .
As you know , in public procurement accepting the lowest bid all too often means accepting the lowest bid in social terms both within and on the part of the undertaking chosen , and this is not good for anyone , especially not the employees .
Finally , to conclude , although I support the proposal to list in the Official Journal and on the Commission 's Internet sites the companies that do not observe the minimum social rules that have been fixed , I admit that , personally , I would have preferred more tangible or heavier sanctions . However , for all that , I must say once again that I fully support the report and proposals by André Sainjon .
Mr President , the Commission welcomes this excellent report by Mr Sainjon , which demonstrates once again his sensitivity in these matters .
We believe that this is the right time to take stock of the European Union 's policy on such a sensitive and ever-changing issue , and I think that Parliament and the Commission have always cooperated actively and successfully in this area .
From a general point of view , the Commission agrees with the analyses , questions and concerns set out by Mr Sainjon and , in general , by the European Parliament .
And it is true to say that as far as this issue is concerned , we are at a crossroads .
Since the first major debate on this matter in Parliament , in 1994 , we have taken various measures . One of these - and this was a very important point when we first discussed the matter - was to reject an approach relying on constraints , sanctions or protectionism , an approach that was also clearly rejected at the World Trade Organisation 's Ministerial Conference in Singapore in 1996 .
Instead , the European Union decided to follow the line recommended by the European Parliament by defining a policy based on the promotion of internationally recognised social standards through incentive schemes , such as those that come under the Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) .
We joined our partners throughout the world in a dialogue based on cooperation and encouragement . This is illustrated in what we believe to be the most significant advance made , that is , the negotiations with the Pakistani Government on the IPEC programme , which is a very ambitious programme where we have done all we can to increase our level of cooperation with Pakistan .
To reply to what other speakers have said , such as Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , this agreement has at least been signed .
We must now look at how we are going to implement it . In any event , this is an example of how the Commission does sometimes get things right .
The negotiations with Pakistan were far from easy , but we now have a very important and clear project that is going to be implemented there on the highly sensitive issue of child labour .
Therefore , Mr Sainjon , I believe that the approach taken by the European Commission is entirely in line with the report adopted by Parliament in 1994 .
We have also acted on negative aspects such as in the specific case of Burma , where we had to adapt the entire procedural system at the request of the European Trade Union Confederation and NGOs , as there were no precedents on how the Commission might exclude Burma from the benefits of the GSP .
As a result , the assessment of the Union 's policy is , in principle , a positive one , taking into account that we need time to develop the programmes .
We have a policy based on incentive schemes and to apply it we have the special mechanism of the GSP at our disposal .
However , this is clearly not enough and we believe that the European Parliament , and particularly Mr Sainjon , are right to emphasis that point .
There are still many obstacles to overcome to ensure that this policy is suitably implemented on the ground .
The first of these lies in the mechanism itself , the Generalised System of Preferences .
This mechanism is limited by its very definition .
It involves an additional preferential margin of between 15 % and 25 % according to the products involved , yet this is currently very limited since , as the WTO negotiations progress , the preferential nature of the GSP is naturally going to diminish and it will become less attractive as time goes on . This is a reality that we have to face .
As a result of this , the tariff margins will gradually become less and less appealing over the long term .
Following on from the invitation made to the Commission in the report , it would be extremely interesting to look at how social and environmental aspects could be given full consideration in the trade agreements the European Union negotiates or plans to negotiate , particularly in cases involving free trade or the progressive liberalisation of exchanges .
I am referring here , first and foremost , to the region that affects me personally , that is , the Mediterranean countries , the ACP countries - if this idea is accepted in the review of the new agreement - and Latin America , with Mercosur and countries such as Chile and Mexico .
Obviously , this strategy must not put the objectives of the common commercial policy at risk .
There is also a series of interesting precedents , including the fact that such clauses are already included in the Free Trade Agreement for the Latin American region and , as you know , they also exist in the bilateral agreements with Chile and Canada .
As a result , I would say that , although progress is slow , little by little this philosophy is starting to spread .
The Howitt report , which we are going to debate tomorrow , covers the issue of the code of conduct for European undertakings , and we do indeed need to make progress in this area .
Another interesting idea is the European initiative on the creation of the financial conditions required for a genuine accompanying policy to help families and provide education for children . The Commission will obviously have to consider this matter .
Nonetheless , leaving aside these additional provisions , we cannot ignore the reality of the matter .
The real obstacle is not a technical one but is , above all , a political one .
The mechanism - the Generalised System of Preferences - exists and could still be used . However , it is not being used , or at least it is not being used sufficiently .
Since 25 May 1998 , when it was adopted , only one country has requested the benefits involved in the so-called social clause .
That country is Moldova .
That is the only request we have received .
Moldova 's request only represents a small step , but it is at least of some significance .
The other countries are reluctant to take the initiative , so we must therefore establish political dialogue to overcome this reluctance on the part of many third countries to look at social standards and trade on the same level .
There is still no international debate that would allow us to convince third countries asking for the GSP benefits to move in the direction we all want . We must admit that many of them still believe that this constitutes interference in their internal affairs .
They look at it from a political point of view and say that that is what the ILO is for and that it is enough to sign the ILO 's conventions . In their view , there is therefore no reason why the European Union should seek bilateral agreements in this area , as it means interfering in their internal affairs .
Moreover , the GSP 's social clause does not cover a sufficiently broad geographical area .
As you know , we had proposed to the Council that the social clause be extended .
However , the Council rejected this Commission proposal and , for once , allow us to render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar 's , and unto the Council the things which are the Council 's . The Council is not normally present during this type of debate and , as a result , the Commission always has to take responsibility for explaining such things .
I myself do not fully understand why the Council rejected this proposal from the Commission , but that is exactly what happened .
We believe that we should support the ILO , which , as you know , is currently trying to apply a series of mechanisms .
The problem with the ILO mechanisms is that their scope is limited precisely because all three parties have to agree .
I was talking to Mr Hansen and I proposed to him that , if the ILO agreed , we could hold a large conference involving the member countries , trade unions and third countries with a view to determining which exact elements would provide clear motivation to enable us to implement this policy . This proposal is currently being considered .
In my view , it is fitting , as you point out in your report , that the WTO has decided to amend Article 29 and to make social standards a criterion for entry to the WTO .
This is an issue that should be discussed within the European Union .
It will be an extremely delicate matter as you will be aware that the Member States are very divided on this issue .
It was suggested that we make the accession of the applicant countries conditional on a specific criterion relating to the ILO conventions .
We already took the main aspects of this into consideration when screening the applicant countries . In fact , it is only natural that an ILO convention that has been signed by the European Union or by its Member States forms part of the acquis communautaire , and I do not believe that there are any particular problems for the applicant countries or those who eventually want to join in terms of accepting the European Union 's general system .
Finally , I must point out that this debate is far from over .
As I said , the Commission agrees with the criteria set out in the Sainjon report .
I recognise that we are making only slow progress , but we are following the right philosophy .
There can be no alternative .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Transport - infrastructure - satellite navigation
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0372 / 98 by Mr Danesin , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on public-private partnerships in trans-European transport network projects ( COM ( 97 ) 0453 - C4-0020 / 98 ) ; -A4-0375 / 98 by Mr Jarzembowski , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Commission Green Paper on sea ports and maritime infrastructure ( COM ( 97 ) 0678 - C4-0022 / 98 ) ; -A4-0413 / 98 by Mrs Langenhagen , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the communication from the Commission : Towards a Trans-European Positioning and Navigation Network : A European Strategy for Global Navigation Satellite Systems ( GNSS ) ( COM ( 98 ) 0029 - C4-0188 / 98 ) .
Mr President , as the rapporteur , Mr Danesin , cannot be with us for this debate , I have the honour of replacing him to present the contents of his report , and I would like to begin by thanking him for the excellent work he has done .

Due to a lack of time , I will merely highlight certain aspects of the motion for a resolution on the Commission 's communication on public-private partnerships in trans-European transport network projects . The Committee on Transport and Tourism was almost unanimous in approving this motion for a resolution , as there was only one abstention and no votes against .
If we read the Commission 's communication on public-private partnerships in trans-European transport network projects carefully and assess the actual problems that were ultimately what prompted this communication , we can determine the key issues involved . These include the inadequacies of the long-term European capital markets - which are crucial for the risk management of investments with extended maturities - the lack of advanced projects , particularly for Central and Eastern Europe , and the private sector 's lack of trust and uncertainty with respect to the public sector 's current and future actions .
Therefore , the public-private partnerships have many complicated problems to solve , and , indeed , they may not be capable of solving them . According to the motion for a resolution , these partnerships have to meet certain conditions .
They must respect the necessary equilibrium between commercial and socio-economic criteria in project planning .
They must divide the risks so that the private sector ensures that it is able to meet the commitments entered into in such a partnership , thus preventing the public sector from having to provide additional funding to ensure the completion of the project . In addition , each partnership must be analysed individually , with the analysis always including a cost / benefit comparison with a purely publicly financed alternative in terms of profitability and social consequences .
Finally , there should be no impact on public deficits in cases where no actual payments take place between the government and private investors .
The motion for a resolution also points out that the allocation of public resources has a vital role to play and it therefore calls on the Member States to devote at least 1.5 % of their budget resources to transport networks .
For its part , the European Parliament undertakes , within its sphere of competence , to make all possible efforts to ensure a higher level of funding for the Community budget headings relating to the networks .
It also calls on the Member States and on the Commission to make every effort to ensure that the legislation on public contracts applicable to infrastructure projects is both clear and flexible in order to guarantee the involvement of the private sector .
In addition , it calls on the Member States and the Commission to ensure adequate transparency and public participation in the planning process relating to publicly / privately supported projects .
These are the main aspects I would highlight in this motion for a resolution .
I would end by calling on the House to vote in favour of this report , since the public-private partnerships in trans-European transport network projects can make a very positive contribution to adapting or mobilising the participation of private capital , which , in my view , is essential . If this does not happen , it will be very difficult to adhere to current construction plans for transport infrastructures .
This , in turn , would lead to a significant reversal in the growth forecasts for our economies , our economic and social development and the competitiveness of the European economy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as the rapporteur , let me begin by thanking my colleagues on the Committee on Transport and Tourism for their constructive cooperation .
The report was adopted unanimously by the committee after detailed discussions among the individual Members and the groups .
So you see that , for all the issues that may be discussed today and tomorrow in this Chamber , there is still a constructive and cooperative working atmosphere in the specialised committees .
My sincere thanks go to my colleagues for that .
In our report , we have delivered an opinion on the Green Paper of December 1997 .
We have been relatively quick and have tried to incorporate all the information we obtained from the port operators and the trade unions .
So we did not attempt to confine our deliberations and our labours on the Green Paper within an ivory tower .
Together with the Commission , we reached the conclusion - and this was not always the view in port circles - that there ought to be an effective European policy on sea ports , albeit limited in scope in deference to the solidarity principle .
That had been disputed for many years .
As we see it , this European sea ports policy has two primary objectives .
The first is to establish fair competition at long last among the European sea ports .
There is still no escaping the conclusion that competition among sea ports is distorted by regional and national aid , and that is simply in total contradiction to the principles underlying the single European market .
As for the second objective , we are entirely convinced that the interests of sustainable mobility would be best served if the Community 's supply lines did not converge on a small number of major ports but if a thoroughly decentralised system were used with numerous peripheral ports , thereby avoiding a great many overland transport operations and making the transport system easier on the environment .
This would naturally imply the need to promote the development of some of the smaller ports or the creation of new ports , but that too must be governed by the precept of non-interference with fair competition among the sea ports .
So what are the concrete implications of these two objectives in terms of what we are asking the Commission to do ?
First of all , the Commission should at long last present a transparency study on the conditions of competition between and within sea ports .
I have already said that national and regional aid distorts competition .
But it also handicaps those ports and companies which have become more efficient through their own efforts and want to remain effective .
Steps must be taken to ensure that efficiency cannot be undermined by illegal subsidies , but the relevant facts must be on the table .
You have a host of facts , but you have not collated these facts and presented them to us .
That is our first priority .
Secondly , irrespective of the transparency study , the Commission is already required to impose penalties for the violation of competition law and to investigate suspected infringements .
You should do that more often .
You know a great deal , but it is our view that we need guidelines on aid to sea ports and on verifying compliance with competition law if all ports and port companies are to be treated fairly , and we need those guidelines before 2001 , which is the date suggested in a paper from your institution , Commissioner .
In actual fact , we should have had them five years ago .
We need clear guidelines so that , when it comes to certain practices which have become established in one or other of the Member States , it can be made clear that the practice in question has to stop .
The system must be changed .
We need fair competition .
The ports and companies will have to learn to live with that .
Another essential aspect of these guidelines is that the funding of infrastructure facilities in the realm of port operations and maritime transport must be subdivided into three categories : public ports , where infrastructural measures need not be notified or checked because they do not constitute state aid ; company-related measures in the domain of port infrastructure , which constitute state aid unless they are refinanced and therefore do not possess the characteristics of aid , otherwise they are subject to aid legislation ; company-related measures in the domain of port superstructure , on the other hand , are always subject to aid legislation in our view , in other words they are essentially inadmissible .
I shall not go into the question of exceptions here .

In conclusion , let me make this appeal to the Commission : create transparency , take action against offenders , but do not create new legislation , Commissioner .
Our committee takes the view that , at least for the time being , there is no need for either a directive on port-related infrastructure , fees or terminals , or a directive on market access for providers of port services .
I can assure you that Dutch tugs have penetrated the Hamburg market , and tugs from Hamburg are achieving the breakthrough in Antwerp .
It will work without new legislation if the Commission supports the market forces .
That is why we ask the Commission to carry on working with the current legislation .
Spare yourselves the trouble of making new laws , and operate instead with the existing legislation on state aid and competition ; protect the ports that are progressing by their own efforts , and let us cooperate in supporting the others , but the paramount aim must be to preserve a level playing field .
Mr President , Europe 's competitiveness in the maritime sector is increasingly dependent on the transport and port system : 90 % of the EU 's traffic with third countries and 30 % of intra-Community traffic passes through the ports .
Hence the obvious need to adopt the appropriate policies , designed in particular to preserve the competitiveness of the EU maritime sector , which accounts for 2.5 million jobs , and to safeguard the prospects for cooperation with the applicant countries and the Union 's Mediterranean neighbours , which also represent a major challenge for the immediate future .
An essential precondition is to apply policies to remove the existing imbalance between southern and northern ports ; there is no sign of this , however , in the Green Paper 's strategy .
The Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , which I have the privilege of chairing , considers that the aim should be to recover the costs incurred in providing port services , while the infrastructures should be financed from the revenue generated by port activities .
Self-financing is essential if ports ' accounts are to be transparent ; this is a precondition for free competition .
The fifth RTD framework programme deals with the question of ports , maritime infrastructure and marine technologies , devoting particular attention to sustainable mobility , intermodality and research into sustainable marine ecosystems .
Finally , the Research Committee supports the Council of Europe 's proposal for the creation of a European Maritime Agency , which would be responsible for encouraging cooperation between centres of excellence in Europe , the European maritime industry and the relevant political decision-making bodies ; the cooperation model employed could be along the lines of Eureka .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of Jaak Vandemeulebroucke whom I have succeeded as rapporteur for the Committee on Regional Policy , I should like to stress a number of points made in the committee , including how difficult it is to implement uniform measures in an area where there is so much diversity in terms of organisation and ownership structure .
I should also like to stress the importance of integrated and multimodal transport .
I am pleased that the exclusive interest in road transport is progressively being replaced by other priorities .
I would also mention the importance of ports as a connection for Europe 's less developed regions and also emphasise the great geographical diversity .
The report does indeed refer to the difficult position of certain insular locations , but I would also point out that some major sea ports are located inland .
I live close to Antwerp , so you will understand what I mean .
It requires dredging operations costing 8 billion a year to keep the port open and it would be a disaster for this sea port 's competitive position if the cost of this dredging had to be passed on to the user .
You will understand that we are looking at the specific measures that will result from the implementation of your policy .
Unlike major southern European and Norwegian and British ports , our ports cannot make use of ERDF aid and the Cohesion Fund .
I hope the Commission will see fit to take account of this geographical position .
I am also very pleased that you intend to implement an integrated town and country planning policy , as our ports are very greedy when it comes to space .
I should like to take this opportunity to express my solidarity , here in the House , with a small village in my neighbourhood , by the name of Doel , which is condemned to disappear due to Antwerp 's expansion .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I very much admire Mrs Langenhagen 's remarkable report , which defends a European strategy for global navigation systems for civil use .
It is a complex issue because of its very technical nature , but the system is also an eminently political issue in that the independence of Europe in the field of air traffic control is at stake .
The GNSS is a prime example of complementarity between the European Commission and the European Space Agency involving Eurocontrol , which also applies to the EGNOS programme .
This being the case , I will underscore three points voted for by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , and which I , as draftsman of its opinion , have tabled as amendments .
Firstly , we must emphasise the need to promote , by means of the fifth framework programme of research , the basic research and technological demonstrations required to develop high performance satellites that are adapted to the needs of navigation and positioning , and also the need to improve ground installations and in particular on-board equipment on the different vessels , aircraft and land vehicles .
In fact , the GNSS world market is in the order of EUR 40 billion , of which satellites represent 10 million and ground installations and on-board equipment represent 30 million .
The improvement and in particular the safety of air traffic is one of the challenges of the European GNSS but we must also aim to improve the management of sea and land traffic and also of road and rail transport .
It is also important to extend the use of the GNSS to other applications such as those mentioned by the rapporteur , Mrs Langenhagen , and in particular for sea rescue .
In this context , it is essential to identify correctly the location of the ground installations and , in particular , to ensure that they marry up to airport installations and sea and land transport communications centres .
Europe will thus have not only a satellite navigation and positioning system but also the means to use it to improve air , land and sea traffic , which is the ultimate aim of the European GNSS .
Mr President , I shall devote part of my four minutes ' speaking time to the Green Paper .
Indeed , that is where I should like to begin : the Green Paper on sea ports and maritime infrastructure has aroused great expectations , not least because for the first time ports are recognised as an integral part of the trans-European network system .
Yet it has aroused some concern among port operators concerning the funding of port infrastructure , in that full account does not appear to have been taken of the difference in circumstances between Europe 's northern and southern ports .
After a long period of stagnation , traffic in the Mediterranean has experienced its fastest growth ever over the past ten years , as a result of the increase in international traffic via the Suez route and in local traffic , including that of passengers .
Growth rates in double figures have been recorded , and many ports have at last become more business-oriented , organising themselves in a more up-to-date , competitive fashion .
Nevertheless , in the main the infrastructure is still inadequate to cope with this growth .
What is more , the nature of institutional and administrative cooperation between port authorities and local administrations still differs considerably from one sea port to another in the various regions of Europe .
For this reason , Mr Jarzembowski quite rightly recommends in his excellent report that the Commission should carry out a fact-finding study on the different types of sea port in Europe .
I would stress two further points here .
The rules on fair competition among sea ports should not allow for exemptions and should , if anything , favour those which have made the transition to private undertakings rather than those still operating as state enterprises .
My second point relates to maritime passenger transport which , especially in the Mediterranean , is of crucial importance as a factor of economic , social and regional growth .
The expansion of sea port infrastructure in the Mediterranean must be encouraged , including in third countries .
Moving on now to satellite navigation , as spokesman of the Committee on External Economic Relations I would add a few comments on the excellent report by Mrs Langenhagen .
Europe is clearly embarking here on a strategy with tremendous potential ; it is not too complex technologically , nor is it disproportionate to Europe 's resources and ambitions . In short , it is within our means .
Furthermore , this venture would symbolise the use of technology for safety and efficiency purposes , and could make European cooperation more visible to our citizens .
The time has therefore come to press ahead with the decisions and investment needed for a European satellite navigation system .
I believe that the Research Committee has done its work on the fifth framework programme ; it is now up to Mr Kinnock to propose a method of funding the infrastructure .
As far as international negotiations are concerned , clearly the United States still regard the GPS as having dual use , civil and military .
I would therefore say - somewhat paradoxically - that it is in the interest of the US , as well as Europe , for Europe to take its own initiative concerning a new constellation of regional and global satellites .
Of course we wish for interoperability with the American system , that is obvious ; let us also foster cooperation with Japan and with the countries where the space sector is taking off , such as China and India .
It would likewise be worthwhile to continue cooperating with Russia , despite the risk that their system may be unreliable .
Finally , a European entity needs to be established to certify satellite data protocols .
This too should be given due consideration .
Mr President , last week I heard a story on the radio about a transport firm which did a trial run by sending a container by train from the south of the Netherlands to Cadiz and was notified five and a half days later that its consignment had arrived in Spain .
I could not help thinking of this when I was looking through the Green Paper on sea ports and maritime infrastructure again and was struck by the second rule .
Europe 's competitiveness in the global economy is increasingly dependent on an efficient and profitable transport system .
This is something that we need to bear in mind now more than ever before when dossiers come before our committee .
There is a lot of competition between ports .
The Green Paper - and not a day too soon - calls for a system that is in line with the rules which apply to many other sectors .
This is all the more necessary as port complexes have increasingly developed into areas where many different kinds of transport , industry , commerce and often other valuable services are concentrated .
Unfortunately , I am not able to go into the most important elements of the Green Paper in any depth at this point .
I congratulate the Commission for the thorough job it has endeavoured to do and my colleague Mr Jarzembowski for the results of his diligent work .
I should also like to point out that the Green Paper was published at the end of 1997 .
Since then we have clocked up another two years , which is another way of looking at it , Mr Jarzembowski .
You opted for a somewhat different approach , but we have clocked up another two years since then .
Although I have no doubt that the Commission will accept Mr Jarzembowski 's report , soon to be approved by Parliament , we must assume that , given the passage of time , the Commission has progressed with the necessary work .
The first but decisive step is to gather the necessary information .
Reliable and comparable information .
I would appreciate it if the Commission could inform us this evening what progress has been made in this area , as I understand that detailed questionnaires have been sent out .
Finally , Mr President , various groups have submitted amendments .
The fact that there are not very many further underlines what we have known since we looked at the report in the committee , namely that there is broad support for Mr Jarzembowski 's report .
We therefore have no need to support the new amendments .
But I should like to put one question to the Commissioner in connection with Amendment No 8 tabled by Mr Lagendijk .
Could the Commissioner review the scope for promoting genuine cooperation between ports , while respecting the subsidiarity principle , as in my decided opinion this would also benefit the competitiveness of Europe 's economy in the world .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating the other two rapporteurs in this joint debate , Mr Jarzembowski and Mrs Langenhagen .
It is very clear that the development of trans-European transport networks is crucial for economic growth , socio-economic cohesion and the competitiveness of the European economy , and we are all very aware of this fact .
However , it is also very clear that , in order to build such infrastructures , we need substantial investment . Given the current budgetary constraints , it is impossible for the Member States to finance such projects .
The participation of private capital is therefore essential . That is why the public-private partnerships proposed by the Commission may be a valuable way of ensuring the funding required to implement trans-European transport networks and allow them to become operational .
This will only be possible when potential investors and construction companies , along with transport service providers and the capital goods sector , are offered a stable framework for their financial transactions .
This stability will naturally also be dependent on governments and partner countries accepting their responsibilities , thereby creating a clear political and legal framework that enables investors to recognise the political and administrative risks involved in the projects . It would mean , too , that the European Union 's rules on competition , the environment and public procurement were being respected .
Until now , and in spite of a general sense of goodwill , it seems as though the various agents involved are not having a great deal of success in initiating the involvement of private capital in the construction of transport infrastructures .
To overcome the present difficulties and bring together the resources needed to create the transport infrastructure network , we need greater efforts on the part of all Europe 's financial institutions , both public and private , and on the part of the various economic and social agents concerned .
This network is essential to achieve the objectives the European Union has set itself , which include the construction of a trans-European network of infrastructures that will promote the successful enlargement of the European Union , and the opening-up of the pan-European transport system to the countries of Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean .
Mr President , let us start by agreeing that the three reports which we are debating this evening have little to do with one another , but that it is nevertheless an interesting debate as it illustrates that we in Europe are developing a somewhat broader vision of the networks and how they operate .
The sea ports are naturally the most important intersections in these networks .
Not only the most important intersections in fact , but also by definition points where intermodal transport takes place .
We share the Commission 's view that short sea shipping- must be encouraged .
I should now like to put a specific question to the Commission .
Mr Commissioner , would you please reply to this specific question : if subsidies are not allowed for infrastructure because they do not fall within the public domain would there then not be another possibility , because intermodal installations are eligible for subsidies .
So you could always turn around the argument and say no , this is not infrastructure for private use , this is intermodal .
Mr President , I shall now revert to my mother tongue and must again make it clear that we need to abolish subsidies and increasingly move to normal market mechanisms .
Consequently , the sort of idea proposed by Mr Castricum that ports should work together is utter nonsense .
Ports are general companies and you cannot tell them to have one kind of transport in one port and another kind of transport in another .
Ports compete with one another and we must allow the market to do its work .
Perhaps the cooperation between socialists and liberals which we have had for so long in my country can convince Mr Castricum of this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we can be pleased that the situation of sea ports is finally being debated and examined within the European Union .
Moreover , the Commission 's Green Paper has been eagerly awaited by professionals in the sector , who quite legitimately hoped that it would generate development prospects .
However , the response to these expectations , as described in the Commission document , is a long way from living up to the hopes they had inspired .
We cannot help but note that this document does not correspond to the objectives set initially .
We must regret in particular the limited view which the Commission has of the role and importance to be given to sea ports . In fact , to my mind , ports do not merely have a commercial role but are also tools for developing employment and regional planning .
In this capacity , they must be able to continue to receive a certain degree of backing from public authorities .
We thought that the inadequacies and gaps in the Commission 's proposals would be noted by the rapporteur and that certain points in the Green Paper could usefully be improved upon when examined in committee .
We ourselves had made a number of proposals to promote a new dynamism for Europe 's ports .
However , none of our proposals was included either in the Commission text or in Mr Jarzembowski 's report .
For this reason I am sorry to say - and Mr Jarzembowski must forgive me - that we find the present report no more satisfactory than the Commission text .
Both documents have an excessively restrictive view of sea ports .
Certainly , these have a commercial purpose but I must stress that they also play a fundamental role in terms of regional planning and have a certain impact on employment .
The absence of references to the necessary public service obligations assigned to port authorities is regrettable .
Mr President , the Green Paper on sea ports and maritime infrastructure concerns important issues as it involves 90 % of European Union trade with third countries , 30 % of intra-EU trade and 200 million passengers a year .
This sector plays an important role in employment , economic development and regional planning ; it cannot therefore be considered solely in commercial terms .
We approve of the fact that Mr Jarzembowski 's report rejects the idea of adopting directives on infrastructure charges and on port fees and for the moment sees no need for Community legislation on organisational structure and market access for port services , given the current diverse situations .
This position is also in line with that of the Council .
While we also appreciate the progress made in committee , we must note that the report , like the Commission proposals , relies too much on reasoning that is based exclusively on the market . This reasoning leads the Commission to propose , as in other sectors , a process of port liberalisation , and thus aims to restrict financial aid .
The public service tasks performed by these structures are highly underestimated and must be given greater consideration .
Our group 's amendments aim to affirm that port activities serve the general interest and , as a result , refuse to ban the aid needed to achieve these tasks . Such decisions must remain a matter for the Member States .
I would add that it would be useful , on the other hand , to draw up a Community framework for professional qualifications and respect for safety requirements in order to fight effectively against distortions of competition and to promote social harmonisation from above .
Therefore , despite a certain degree of progress , this report in its current form does not in our opinion meet this sector 's development needs .

Mr President , with reference to the report by Mr Jarzembowski , the Green Group appreciates the inclusion of environmental considerations , particularly in recitals J and K , highlighting the importance of strategic impact assessments and environmental safety standards .
I would add that , as Greens , we maintain that proper use of marine and inland waterways forms an integral part of a sustainable transport system .
For this very reason , however , we consider it important that some aspects which the Commission has to a certain extent endorsed should appear not only in the recitals but also in the body of the text .
We Greens have therefore put forward an amendment asserting more forcefully the need for strategic environmental impact assessments .
As regards the creation of new sea port infrastructure , we believe that account should be taken of existing capacity and , above all , of cooperation between sea ports .
I know that this will not be music to the ears of Mr Wijsenbeek , who has described this suggestion as nonsense , but I repeat it nonetheless .
Mr President , European ports are a constant source of disagreement between the various Member States .
They argue over which can call itself the biggest , or whether the financial state of affairs in Europe 's fiercely competitive ports is according to the rule book .
The great differences in structure between the ports is to blame here .
I would stress that ports grow up in a particular culture and are characterised by this .
This is why verifiable regulations must take account of this diversity .
It is not a good thing if ports inside Europe are given unequal treatment .
In order to correct this discrepancy , it is first necessary to conduct a thorough inquiry into the financial structure of Europe 's ports .
In addition to this there must also be guidelines for identifying any improper aid , which must be clear and unambiguous in every respect .
That is why I have tabled two amendments on this point that should enable the classification of financial flows to be considered on the basis of clear and simple criteria .
Irrespective of whether ports are legally granted state aid , the area of tension between state aid and fair competition needs to be more clearly defined .
Excessive subsidies going to competing ports cannot be allowed to destroy everything a port has built up over many decades with major investment .
We must remain very vigilant about this .
On the other hand it is desirable to take measures to stimulate coastal transport .
On many previous occasions Parliament has expressed the view that more transport should be by means which place the least burden on the environment .
For this reason I should like to see more investment in our ports in order to encourage a shift in the modal split in this direction .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking on the Danesin report on trans-European transport networks .
The development of transport TENs is obviously a key element in the process of European unification .
In my opinion , mobility - especially within the single market area - is crucial not only in economic but also in cultural terms , so as to promote trade , competitiveness , communication and overall social development .
As the report makes clear , however , these projects require substantial financial resources and a considerable economic commitment , and the Member States ' current difficulties in supporting such ventures through public funding are becoming increasingly apparent .
This report therefore proposes that use be made of joint public-private partnerships to create the trans-European transport networks .
We share this view ; we also share the concern of the rapporteur , Mr Danesin , that , on the one hand , private operators should be assured of profitability - obviously , if there is no profit there will be no private investment - but that , on the other , the infrastructure created shouldt be socially beneficial .
Hence the need to share out the entrepreneurial risk , taking account both of commercial and of social and environmental criteria , as part of an overall strategy for mobility within the Community .
We therefore endorse the report 's concluding proposals .
Finally , I hope that the Commission will not merely offer long-term credit arrangements , but will also take more active steps to attract substantial private investment .
Mr President , Commissioner , the creation of a satellite positioning and navigation network is a very important part of the European Union 's cohesion strategy .
In some respects we have been rather slow off the mark in this area , but we realise that this development has considerable potential , not only for navigation but also for safety , and that it offers major opportunities in terms of urban and non-urban traffic management .
Every effort must be made to ensure that this network is interoperable , building on the intelligent transport system currently being developed in a systematic manner within the Community , which has already had a significant impact in the EU 's most built-up areas : Turin , Hamburg and London have all experimented with intelligent transport systems .
The navigation network represents a step forward , and the cooperation between the European Space Agency , Euratom , the IMO and the ICAO underlines the value of this approach .
I believe , however , that this approach should be regarded not merely as being dependent on the wishes of the Commission and the EU institutions ; a significant input of both public and private resources is also required .
I would point out here , for example , that in Italy the Prime Minister has established an ad hoc group on satellite navigation systems , thus attributing great importance to this sector .
Moreover , with reference to the likely impact of the positioning and navigation system , investment should not be restricted to positioning alone ; investment and experimentation should also be furthered by boosting the role of SMEs , providers and all bodies capable of making a valid contribution to disseminating this advanced technological system .
Let me now make two observations concerning the Green Paper on sea ports .
There is a need for competition in this field ; we need to find out all the facts , yet we must not forget that investment required in strategic sectors - the environment , combined transport and so on - is enormous .
Of course we should not confuse investment with subsidies , as Mr van Dam rightly said , but we must bear in mind that Structural Fund resources are vital to economic cohesion in Europe .
In this light , Structural Fund resources cannot be regarded as unfair competition .
Mr President , it gives me great pleasure to welcome all three reports and the high level of support from all political groups within the Committee on Transport and Tourism attained by those reports .
I should like to concentrate on the Danesin report so eloquently moved this evening by my colleague , Mr Sisó Cruellas , and on the Commission communication on public-private partnerships in trans-European transport networks .
Trans-European networks have a crucial role to play in achieving and operating the single market and assisting European businesses to speedier access to that market for their goods and services .
I would like this evening to unreservedly support and encourage partnership between public and private sectors in this field .
Through you , Mr President , I would like to make a plea to the Commissioner this evening to look closely at the United Kingdom model and in particular to learn from the private finance initiative schemes operating in the United Kingdom .
While I am sure he will accept that this initiative was the creation of the last Conservative government , it has been so successful that it has been wholeheartedly embraced now by the new Labour government .
In particular I think we could use the opportunity presented to the House this evening to set conditions in which public-private partnerships can flourish .
We must ensure that conditions of legal security or , more properly expressed , legal certainty apply .
The public sector needs to know that the legal framework for public-private partnerships can flourish with private investment in trans-European transport network projects ; that these investments will be secure and will not necessitate at some future date that the public sector or the governments must intervene to bail out the private investment financing or operation of the project .
In particular , the European Union in my view can benefit from the United Kingdom experience I referred to earlier , where we have built up some very real , concrete expertise in both road-building and the construction of new schools .
Similarly , through the Danesin report and the Commission communication we must seek clarity in the implementation of competition rules to avoid any distortion of competition within and between the Member States .
Equally , there should be greater transparency and clarity in the implementation of the European Union rules on public procurement .
Also , greater access to long-term financing and availability of risk capital will be hugely beneficial .
I firmly believe that the Danesin report will be a great and positive step along the way , building on the Commission communication to create such public-private sector partnerships .
I am delighted that three major UK schemes will benefit as priority projects : the Ireland-UK-Benelux road scheme , including access to the east coast ports , the Channel Tunnel rail link and the west coast mainline rail improvements .
I would make a plea that the A120 road scheme in north Essex will benefit sooner rather than later .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs and address myself to the Danesin report also on public-private partnership financing .
New trans-European networks , as has already been stated in this House , provide an opportunity for greater mobility and easier access to the market for people with their goods and services .
There is a further consequence which links in with our debate here some time ago on the coming into operation of the Treaty of Amsterdam , that is the question of employment .
These are such major infrastructural works that they require massive amounts of people to be employed which gives a kick-start to many economies .
Because of reform of the EU financial systems and reductions in structural funding and cohesion funding to certain countries under the Agenda 2000 reform package , it is essential that we find new ways of financing these very essential projects .
So I wholeheartedly agree with the establishment of the public-private partnership arrangement to ensure that the monies and the extra revenues which are created because of the single market within the European Union are put back into the European Union rather than allowing money which is invested in pension funds and so on to be invested in countries outside the European Union , which means that the Union as a whole loses all that money .
The Commissioner , Mr Kinnock , whom I congratulated on his initiative on this point , has drafted a report into this question and has seen the positive benefits which could accrue from it .
That is not to say that we do not need safeguards to ensure that there is not exploitation and to maintain the legal certainty which my colleague , Mrs McIntosh , referred to .
It also encourages governments like the Irish Government to be innovative in the way that they look to the future .
They need not be afraid to take on the challenge of a reduction in future funding from Europe , and should grasp the opportunity to encourage Irish business and the Irish financial institutions to get involved .
Finally , could I say that if we are to guarantee the success of these measures then it must be done on a tripartite basis with national , local and European involvement .
Most importantly , now we can bring in private financing to give the extra impetus and kick-start needed .
Mr President , in the little time I have , I wish to say something about the trans-European transport networks .
I want a voice of protest to be heard on behalf of working people .
Six years after the White Paper by Mr Delors , the trans-European networks , which were put forward as a way of increasing employment to compensate for the complete disruption of labour relations and the promotion of flexible forms of employment , are still making very little progress due to lack of the resources to finance them .
Now , the Commission is abandoning any final pretence .
Knowing that against the background of restrictive financial policy for EMU there is no prospect of Community or state funding for the trans-European transport networks , it has adopted its well known policy .
In an ingenious way , it is handing over these important infrastructures to private profit-oriented capital and indeed promoting a whole range of legal guarantees to ensure that the related capital and profits will be completely secured .
That policy is to the disadvantage of our peoples and their interests , it promotes an accumulation of private profits to the cost of the public service , and it constitutes a complete abandonment of any prospect that trans-European networks could contribute to the development of employment .
Let us understand this at last : the market cannot provide solutions for social problems , nor for the problems of infrastructure and public service development .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , simply trying to reach a common position with regard to the ports in Europe is a brave thing .
It takes a brave Commissioner to throw a green paper - not to the lions - but to the harbour masters and port authorities in this way .
They will immediately begin to compare and compete with each other .
However , the real challenge does not come from the neighbouring port , but from the roads .
The message from Parliament this evening will be that by modernising , by giving the ports some opportunities and by being united , we can change transport habits .
Go home to your own ports and tell them that it is not the neighbouring port which is the competition , but the roads , and then let us ensure that we make some progress .
I know that there are very large differences between ports as far as public-private partnership financing and harbour costs are concerned , but let us remember that we cannot change transport habits through market forces alone .
So now and then we should also try to do so through political decisions .
May I say to Mr Wijsenbeek that I regard him very highly , but his contribution this evening shows that he does not know very much about ports and ships . So stick to the roads , Mr Wijsenbeek , and the rest of us will take care of the ports .
May I also express my unreserved support for the project concerning a strategy for global navigation systems .
It is extremely important that we participate in this , and that the Commission , the Council , Parliament and so on all contribute to creating a European profile in this area .
Mr President , I should like to comment on the report on satellite communications . The great challenge facing the European Union at the moment is to ensure that its industry establishes the EGNOS service .
In doing so , we will have reached the goal of having a specifically European component in the first generation global satellite system for the year 2003 . It would be similar to the Union 's great achievement in the area of GSMs , having already succeeded with the second generation of mobile communications , and now trying to succeed with the third .
I am aware that this first generation of satellite communications still has to rely on the dominant military systems : both the American GPS and the Russian GLONASS . However , there is no doubt that this first step must act as a trampoline for the next stage , that is , GNSS2 , which is planned for 2008 .
This will be exclusively European and will be independent of the Americans and the Russians . A great deal of patience is required in the race to achieve this objective of the fifth framework programme for research .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would like to make two recommendations .
Firstly , the group of experts being formed for this purpose , which is naturally going to rely on the European Space Agency , must in no way marginalise Eurocontrol . And secondly , if a decision is finally made to use the Structural Funds for the resources needed , these must be provided in accordance with the regulations , with absolutely no exceptions .
That is all I have time to say on this excellent report by Mrs Langenhagen .
Mr President , it is quite clear that the construction of the trans-European transport networks , envisaged in the White Paper on Growth , Competitiveness and Employment in 1993 , has veered off course .
The straitjacket of the stability and employment pact has led the Member States to restrict their budgets and investment plans for major public transport works .
However , aware of the multiplying effect of this type of investment on economic growth and the creation of jobs , and also on the internal cohesion of the Union , these same Member States still want to take this forward .
How can we escape from this impasse ? Using partnerships between the public and private sectors or national and regional partnerships may be one solution .
However , these cannot solve all the problems because it is never easy to reconcile objectives of financial profitability with those of risk control which govern private investment . This is due to the equilibrium between macroeconomic , social and environmental criteria which must be achieved by public bodies .
It is true that increased effectiveness may be achieved by transferring the technical , commercial , financial and management experience of the private sector to the PPPs during the initial design stage of the projects .
It is also true that there could be better coordination between the Community instruments for financial assistance , the Cohesion Fund , the Structural Funds , the EIF , the EIB and even potential new instruments such as structurally subordinated loans and the so-called ' mezzanine funds ' .
But we must take care !
Our hope that these partnerships will provide a miracle solution must not be too high as there are many projects , particularly in less-populated or more outlying areas of the EU , which will not raise any interest because they are simply not profitable .
It is not just a question of altering the legal framework of public contracts or competitions in order to encourage these partnerships , as this is not enough .
Without a strong political will on the part of the EU , the 14 priority projects defined at Essen will not be developed .
In 1995 , these projects amounted to nearly ECU 99 billion .
Between then and today , the Community budget has allocated the measly sum of ECU 1.8 bn , or less than 2 % , which is absolutely nothing .
Agenda 2000 only provides ECU 5 million , which is also nothing , and nothing plus nothing will continue to produce nothing , until a sensible sum is provided which can achieve something .
Mr President , the emphasis in the Green Paper on fair competition between ports and on market mechanisms is very much after my own heart .
I should like to make five points .
One , it is a complex business , and each country has its own subsidies .
To my mind , greater transparency must be an absolute priority .
Two , not only state aid but also differences in the regulations and their application in the field of the environment , safety and employment can lead to distortions of competition .
Three , how does the Commission believe it can strike a balance between its objective of regional development and its task of combating distortions of competition ?
Four , I would criticise certain passages in the Green Paper on financial intervention in order to increase the efficiency of ports .
I would warn against new interventionism at European level .
I place my trust in market mechanisms to produce efficient ports .
Five , good links with the hinterland are important for Europe 's competitiveness .
Public-private partnership seems to be a good instrument in mobilising the necessary private capital .
Could the Commission primarily look at the waterways and railways in this connection ?
I thank the Commissioner for his positive response to the link between the Scheldt and the Seine .
I should like to ask him , also on behalf of my colleagues Mr Tindemans , if he could consider whether the Commission can play a stimulating role in the renaissance of the ' Ijzeren Rijn ' , as we call it .
This link is included in the trans-European networks ' list of priorities for combined transport .
It is by far the shortest rail link between Antwerp and the German Ruhr , but the special thing about it is that it runs through three countries when the supposed national interests of the three countries do not correspond .
Hence our question .
Unlike Mr Wijsenbeek I think it would be a good idea to consider the advantages and disadvantages of cooperation between ports , given world developments .
I would point to the cooperation in the aviation sector here .
Mr President , first of all let me congratulate Mr Jarzembowski on his excellent report on European sea ports .
Maritime transport is very important , in particular because it has the great advantage of being able to reach most parts of the world in a reasonably convenient way .
The majority of the world 's goods are therefore transported by sea .
In terms of figures , this means that the EU 's ports handle over 90 % of Community trade with third countries and that 30 % of intra-EU traffic is handled by the port sector .
More than 200 million passengers a year are also transported in this way .
Maritime transport also has a less damaging impact on the environment than other forms of transport .
During its work , the committee stressed that the various research and development studies being carried out in the infrastructure sector should take account of long-term environmental effects .
But despite its numerous advantages , issues relating to port and maritime infrastructures have often been marginalised in EU discussions .
This is clearly indicated by the fact that this branch of the transport sector was not included in the initial discussions on the trans-European transport networks .
But as a result of increased trade with more countries and the opening-up of new markets , especially in some of the former Eastern bloc countries , the maritime sector has grown considerably and become more globalised .
While all of this is extremely good news , it is essential to encourage the sector and to promote further development .
As a matter of course , therefore , all countries should to a large extent apply the same rules , practices which distort competition should be eliminated , and the efficiency of our ports should be increased .
In this way , we shall be able to strengthen the EU 's overall position in the world .
To achieve this , it would clearly be advantageous for EU ports to be integrated into the trans-European transport networks .
It would enable us for the first time to adopt a truly comprehensive approach to the transport sector as a whole .
We might then be less inclined to deal with transport legislation on a piecemeal basis and more inclined to view the sector as a single entity - a major advantage in many respects .
In the committee 's view , the Commission should make recommendations on the future public financing of port infrastructures at the earliest opportunity .
The report by the Transport Committee contains one item which I regard as crucial , namely that transport networks and the rules relating to them should not just apply to the existing Member States .
They must be extended as quickly as possible to cover the EU 's neighbours and , in particular , the applicant countries in the former Eastern bloc states .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Langenhagen , on a very successful report which could be of great importance for the establishment of a European strategy in the area of GNSS .
It is a great pleasure for me to see that the Commission and the Council have succeeded in reaching agreement on a strategy .
The strategy follows the approach which Parliament set out in earlier decisions on European space travel , on the basis of the reports which the former Member of the European Parliament , Mr Toksvig , and I myself presented in the last parliamentary term .
The development of increasingly accurate systems with accompanying communications possibilities will lead to a strengthening and a much better and safer use of European airspace .
The economics and safety of the roads will be improved and there will be substantial savings in the modernisation of railway equipment , for example in connection with reconstruction in Central and Eastern Europe .
I expect the ESA - the European Space Agency - to continue to act as the EU 's technological arm in this area .
Even if substantial public financing could prove necessary , there is no doubt in my mind that the savings on new infrastructure projects will easily be able to pay for much of the establishment of GNSS .
Thank you , Mr Kinnock .
Mr President , very briefly , I quite understand that the Commissioner cannot answer everything in the short time available .
Can I presume that he will reply in writing to the question regarding the ' IJzeren Rijn ' ?
A written answer would be preferable , since we are running very late .
Mr Wijsenbeek could also be answered in writing without us hearing his question .
Mr President , the same goes for me .
I put a specific question to the Commissioner concerning the possible exchange between infrastructure subsidies and the subsidies for combined transport .
I assume I will receive an answer in writing soon .
It would be better if these two colleagues could receive written answers ; otherwise our two remaining debates will be excessively delayed .
Mr President , I should like to receive a written reply to my question on ports with an inland location .
Mr President , I will happily provide the responses .
As all Members who know me know I always do - fastidiously .
However , it must be said , in this week of particular delicacy , that if honourable Members rightly want Commissioners to respond to the questions they legitimately raise in debate then some of the Rules of Procedure of the House need to be changed .
I would welcome that .
I , like my colleagues in the Commission , welcome the opportunity to be accountable but sometimes , as I am sure honourable Members recognise , it is the procedures that actually intervene to prevent the transparency and accountability we would like to provide .
That is another issue , Mr Kinnock .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Electronic signatures
The next item is the report ( A4-0507 / 98 ) by Mr Ullmann , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on a common framework for electronic signatures ( COM ( 98 ) 0297 - C4-0376 / 98-98 / 0191 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the use of electronics in public and private communication is so far advanced today that the mechanisms used for such communication can even speak and read digitised language .
Not only are they capable of doing these things ; they actually do them in the market for goods and services and in the area of official and private communications .
What are the legal consequences of this , and which legal questions need to be answered ?
Our task is to translate the present legal standards in these fields to take account of the new communication dimensions without restricting them .
The draft directive before us does this in a restricted but fundamental area , namely that of signatures and authentications of every type , albeit - and this must always be emphasised - only in open systems .
Only three things have to be regulated in this context : the conditions for guaranteeing the reliable identification of the person communicating by means of an electronic medium , whether digital or binary , the integrity of the transmitted information and the legal status of electronic or digital signatures .
So it is not a matter of the relationship between the power of the state and that of the market in the realm of public and private security , as is sometimes claimed .
It is actually about the relationship between public information and privacy in the digitisation of certificates and their legal validity .
The directive takes a convincing approach to solving this problem by laying down provisions on the equivalence of electronic and written signatures on the one hand and by restricting the conditions of certification to the minimum standards which are indispensable for European harmonisation , as the two annexes to the directive put it .
Discussions in the Council at the present time evidently centre on the desire , founded on the current legal position in the Member States , to have a higher standard of public security .
The German Government has told me that there could be a compromise solution to this issue , involving the addition of an Annex III , dealing with the technical specifications for certification equipment .
I am interested to hear , Commissioner Bangemann , what the Commission thinks of this proposal , which has no doubt come to your attention too .
I believe Parliament could live with it .
In my view there is a small problem , but otherwise this Annex III does not affect the basic rationale of the directive : completely free market access for all providers of certification services and guaranteed protection of consumers ' privacy within reasonable levels of data protection , including scope for the use of pseudonyms and incorporation of the principal rules governing liability .
As far as the amendments tabled are concerned , I recommend their adoption , with the exception of Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 8 , 9 , 21 , 22 and 26 , which either create inconsistencies within the directive , duplicate other clauses or effectively water down the provisions of the directive .
I therefore ask the House to approve the report , but I cannot do so without thanking Directorates-General XIII and XV of the Commission for their extremely willing and active cooperation , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and the draftsman of its opinion , Mr Tappin , as well as all the other honourable Members whose amendments have helped to improve the report .
Finally , let me make a prophecy to all those who have stayed away from this interesting midnight debate : you will be amazed at the impact this directive will have .
In the Federal Republic of Germany , no fewer than 3 800 laws are affected by it .
This should keep us in suspense .
Mr President , this report will establish a stepping stone on the path to the future .
It is estimated that commerce on the Internet will double by July .
In all Member States there are moves towards introducing technology into so many aspects of daily life - for example , electronic voting , electronic social security systems and electronic banking transactions .
If we are to move into an electronic age we must have safe and controllable procedures in place to ensure that citizens and organisations can carry out transactions swiftly and securely .
We need a clear common framework for electronic signatures to boost confidence in the new technologies .
We need to make sure that we do not sacrifice peace of mind for convenience .
An electronic signature needs to have parity under the law with a manuscript signature .
There should be no distinction , no disadvantage and no privilege .
For that reason we have focused on the need for those who issue certificates to respect the information carried electronically and the fundamental rights of a signatory to privacy .
A signatory must be able to determine the extent to which their personal data are published in directories .
Pseudonyms must be available for legitimate use but not be allowed to cover illicit transactions .
We need to ensure that the move to electronic trading is not accompanied by a growth in fraud .
Also , recognising the range of existing proposals and initiatives currently operating within the different Member States , the need to protect the principles of the internal market are paramount .
We have an obligation to ensure that the shift to the use of electronic signatures does not create technological barriers and there is , not just within the European Union , the need to promote the principle of interoperability on a worldwide basis .
For this reason it is vital that the Commission involves experts in the formation and review of policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I can see the enthusiasm on all your faces and it is clear that many of us welcome the foundation stone that has been laid here .
As already expressed by Parliament in its resolution of 17 July 1998 , it is important to set up a regulatory framework to ensure that electronic signatures and manuscript signatures have the same status in law , so that a document bearing an electronic signature may be used as evidence .
A great deal is at stake here , and according to Internet forecasts electronic commerce should reach 220 billion dollars this year , or by next year at the latest , of which Europe will account for 26 billion .
The know-how of traders , bankers and computer scientists in converting a network that is ill-adapted to economic needs - we must remember that it was the two principles of freedom and lack of cost that governed the network in the beginning - into an area for commercial transactions must not blind us to the fact that the protection of personal data and compilation of customised listings are often a neglected aspect of the legal problems posed by the development of electronic commerce .
Obviously , this proposal for a directive carries on this unfortunate custom .
However , I congratulate Mr Ullmann on having included the proposals put forward in my opinion on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
They aim to clarify the status of certification service providers in order to prevent the divergent measures that have already been seen in a number of our Member States .
Take the case of France , where two decree-laws have created intermediaries , known as ' trusted third parties ' , which carry out their work under the supervision of an administrative super-service , the French central service for security of information systems .
This super-service actually seems to be more keen to ensure that the information systems do not have any security which they cannot penetrate rather than checking that they are secure .
Another example is the case of Spain , where the 1998 finance law this time authorises the Minister for Home Affairs to act as a certification service provider .
It is doubtful whether such a measure guarantees the confidence of the signatories .
I say this simply to remind you that cyber consumers also have rights and that the pretence of secrecy , anonymity and confidentiality must become a reality once again .
Mr President , Commissioner , on behalf of my group , may I convey our sincere congratulations to the rapporteur for his report .
In particular , I wish to thank him for guiding this report through the committee stage and now through the plenary stage within a fairly short time of our receiving the draft from the Commission .
I believe we all agree that the entry into force of this directive is a matter of extreme urgency , since it will put an end to the tangled mass of disparate legal provisions that are hampering the single market in the domain of electronic signatures , a crucial aspect of cross-border electronic transactions .
There are two major concerns of the Commission and the rapporteur that deserve particular support .
The first is their desire to strike a balance between the need to ensure that the new areas of business activity opened up by the electronic signature are not shackled and virtually nipped in the bud by excessively detailed and restrictive rules - for which we have had no shortage of proposals in Parliament - and the need to increase demand for these services and promote acceptance of electronic signatures by means of confidence-building measures .
I think we have jointly succeeded in establishing an even better balance than the one created in the Commission proposal , in particular by stipulating that providers of certification services should be independent and that accreditation systems should be voluntary , and by providing for the additional option of these accreditation systems being operated by non-governmental organisations too .
These provisions and the liability legislation , which we have done nothing to alter , may also be regarded as start-up aid for future providers of certification services or as a sign of trust in their ability to deliver .
At the same time , we expect them to make good use of these benefits .
Our second concern relates to the principle that whatever is legal offline must be legal online , and whatever is illegal offline must be illegal online . We must help to establish this principle in all its implications .
This applies especially to the right of consumers to use a pseudonym for online transactions in order to preserve the anonymity that is customary when small everyday purchases are made in shops . The consumer 's right to conduct small electronic transactions under a pseudonym can also serve to prevent the creation of excessively detailed customer profiles .
Finally , I should like to appeal to the Commission to accept the amendments adopted by Parliament , to the rapporteur to reconsider his position with regard to Amendment No 26 , and above all to the Council to come up quickly with a common position .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I also wish to begin by sincerely thanking the rapporteur for his swift and very cooperative work .
In the field of electronic commerce , consumers and businesses in Europe must be able to rely on every message being attributable to its actual sender , with no possibility of legal doubt .
So as not to obstruct the development of our economy , we must therefore give the people of Europe the opportunity to supplement the traditional written signature by electronic means .
In my own country of Germany , a law was passed a year ago which provides for the use of digital signatures at quite a high level of security .
The first electronic identity cards , in other words smart cards with which electronic signatures can be produced , have been on the market since last week .
It is therefore high time that this material was incorporated into a uniform European framework , otherwise there is a danger that we shall eventually have 15 different laws on digital signatures with a variety of different standards .
This would ultimately result in serious impairment of the free movement of goods and services in our internal market .
That is why the draft directive that the Commission presented to Parliament last year was such a welcome development .
The directive guarantees providers of certification services free access to the market ; provided that electronic signatures fulfil certain conditions , it puts them on a par with conventional signatures and recognises their validity in cross-border transactions and as evidence in court proceedings .
Provisions governing the liability of certification service providers are designed to ensure consumer and business confidence .
So although I believe that some of the amendments adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights do represent useful improvements , the Commission proposal itself was a very progressive and balanced one .
For example , Article 8 ( 3 ) of the proposal provides for digital signature certificates to be issued under a pseudonym at the signatory 's request .
Not only do we have no reservations about this provision , we expressly welcome it .
In its efforts to ensure the protection of personal data , however , the Commission goes rather too far .
In its proposal , it seeks to ensure that the identity of any person using a pseudonym cannot be revealed without that person 's consent , unless such information is required for the investigation of criminal offences .
It is therefore gratifying to note that an amendment - the rapporteur 's Amendment No 27 , which was adopted by a clear majority in committee - also permits the transfer of such data if it is necessary for legal claims relating to transactions in which a pseudonym was used .
I do not think this amendment diminishes the protection afforded to personal data , particularly since any such transfer is explicitly required to comply with the provisions of data protection legislation .
On the contrary , this amendment strikes a balance between the rights of the pseudonym user and the interests of the other party to the transaction .
Moreover , a number of other amendments succeed in formulating provisions more precisely and eliminating contradictions .
One example is the term ' digital signature ' , which standard usage limits to a particular and currently prevalent form of electronic signature .
This term has been replaced in the amendments by ' electronic signature ' .
In this way , the directive is given broader scope to cover future technological developments .
Regrettably , there are also some rather inappropriately worded amendments , such as nos 8 , 15 and 23 , which my group feels have overshot their target , namely to formulate the text more precisely .
Instead of the intended clarification , they have the opposite effect and should therefore be rejected .
The same applies to the amendment on the electronic submission of petitions , which , in the view of my group , has little to do with digital signatures and is consequently out of place here .
Other amendments , namely Nos 6 and 7 , seek to have data protection clauses inserted in all multilateral conventions to which the Union is a party .
They insist that other parties to such agreements should respect the right of not only the EU but also its Member States to maintain existing rules on data protection .
They are thereby placing unnecessary restrictions on the flexibility of the Union at the bargaining table .
We therefore cannot support such amendments to the recitals either .
I assume that , when the votes are taken , the House will bear these considerations in mind and will adopt a balanced version of the directive .
Mr President , Commissioner , a great deal has already been said about the importance of this issue .
We are therefore pleased that the rapporteur has carried out his work so quickly .
However , I still believe that a decision on this proposal should be postponed until the Finnish Presidency .
So I look forward to that .
I think we have made some worthwhile revisions which complement the preliminary work carried out by the Commission . In principle , Certification Service Providers would not have to be accredited , but we have nevertheless highlighted the private organisations .
The Commission proposed strict responsibility - in Finnish ' ankara vastuu ' .
Now it appears that the Council intends to change this .
I should like to ask the Commissioner to clarify the position as regards responsibility in the future .
In my view , the Commission 's proposal represents a reasonable point of departure .
A central issue in the directive is legal effect .
Is there to be a special technique for this or not ?
I think that here too the decision we have made , with the Commission , is a good starting-point .
In principle , we should give the same legal effect as we do to manuscript signatures .
One might say jokingly that if national legislation does not allow marriage by correspondence , then marriage by electronic means is also inadmissible .
That is perfectly reasonable .
However , I do not share the rapporteur 's view that we should be prepared to approve the so-called Annex III put forward by the Council .
I do not regard it as being technologically neutral in the way that most of the committee would have wished it to be .
I also asked the Commissioner what position he would adopt in future discussions with the Council , since in my view this will be a key factor in future negotiations .
Finally , I should like to ask the language services whether they do not think that in Swedish the term should be ' elektroniska underskrifter ' rather than ' elektroniska signaturer ' .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Ullmann for his - as ever - conscientious work and extremely good report .
This is an important subject , as all the other speakers have highlighted .
More and more commercial transactions are being conducted by electronic commerce and the Internet particularly facilitates cross-border transactions .
Having a consistent , pragmatic , secure system of recognition of signatures on electronic commerce is important .
The Commission proposal recognises the need to ensure legal recognition of electronic signatures which have the same validity as handwritten signatures .
The clarification is necessary for the certification services .
Two particular concerns can be highlighted : first , the requirement for privacy ; secondly , the requirement for security .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights recommends that the use of pseudonyms should be investigated and monitored .
I recommend this report and the draft directive to the House as an important plank in opening up the single market to electronic commerce .
As an aside , it is curious that it is mainly women who have stayed for this debate .
In some ways we could compare Mr Bangemann to a thorn amongst roses , although I am quite sure he will take the subject very seriously .
I am particularly intrigued by the thought of getting married on the Internet .
As someone who is not married , perhaps it is something I can look forward to in the next ten years .
Mr President , at the end of her speech , Mrs Oddy just addressed a problem which really can arise in this area , where the issue is to what extent electronic signals can satisfy formal requirements laid down by law in the Member States .
It reminds me of my law studies , where one professor used to ask this memorable question : ' If the legally prescribed answer to the question , ' Do you take this woman here present for your lawful wedded wife ? ' - and this is the very problem which you raised , Mrs Oddy - is ' I do ' , is it sufficient for the gentleman to say ' But of course ' ? '
That is roughly how a number of the Member States see the problem of electronic signatures too .
First of all , I should like to thank the rapporteur .
The report has been of great assistance to us .
We have also been able to accept a good number of amendments .
Of the 35 amendments , we can accept 17 in their entirety and eight in part .
We could not endorse the other amendments , because they either do not actually improve the original wording or touch on problems that lie outside the scope of this directive .
That , I have to say , is an old parliamentary failing , which I have often mentioned before .
You have this constant urge to use any given piece of legislation to put the whole world to rights .
That does nothing to further the cause of clarity .
It was rightly mentioned that Member States as well as international organisations have been working very assiduously in this area , which means that , if we wish to play our part by obtaining a common set of uniform rules , which are naturally needed for the single market , we shall have to make haste .
So far , Parliament has been maintaining a brisk pace .
At the last discussion in the Council , which was not conclusive , as you know , because the opinion of Parliament was not yet on the table , we ultimately came to grief on the question of whether we could issue operating licences to certification services without becoming involved in technical details which would more or less dictate a particular technological solution .
The Commission and Parliament , of course , are against intervention on the technological side .
That is why we have tried to present a proposal which , though naturally not permitting indiscriminate certification , also deliberately avoids laying down any technological conditions .
In the end , we did not make any progress at that Council meeting .
The new proposal , which develops our ideas somewhat further , Mr Ullmann , still needs to be examined very closely by us , because in its present form , although it may not prescribe any technical solutions , it does seem to imply a kind of type approval .
This needs some thought before we can say whether it is really the ideal answer .
The Council is more or less divided into two camps . One camp comprises the smaller countries , which take a far bolder approach to this issue , while the other comprises the larger countries , which insist very strictly on such formal requirements and therefore take a less liberal view of this matter .
At any rate , we shall see how far we can progress at the next meeting of the Telecommunications Council .
There should not be too much rigidity either .
It is worth remembering that a handwritten signature can be forged too .
We should not start subjecting electronic signatures to more stringent requirements than are normally applied to handwritten signatures .
We do have liability rules for providers of certification services .
I am not entirely sure what you meant here , because these liability rules are set out in Article 6 .
On the technology question I have already said what I think .
I have told you which amendments we can and cannot accept .
I do not intend to list these in detail at the moment ; we can do that at the second reading .
As I said , the report is very constructive on this point too .
We are largely in agreement , and I hope that at the next meeting of the Council we can arrive at a common position , which we can then re-examine in detail .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Quality of ambient air
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0483 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0540 / 98-97 / 0266 ( SYN ) ) with a view to adopting a Council Directive relating to limit values for sulphur dioxide , nitrogen dioxide and oxides of nitrogen , particulate matter and lead in ambient air ( Rapporteur : Mrs Pollack ) .
Mr President , as we know , it is only the most important matters that are dealt with at the midnight hour .
We do it particularly so as to keep it a deep , dark secret from the press so that they cannot let anyone know that we really do deal with important matters here that affect people 's lives .
Thousands of people are dying every year across Europe as a result of breathing polluted air and one of the main causes of this is traffic .
This directive for the first time lays down a set of tough , legally-binding limits for emissions of the four major pollutants - sulphur dioxide , oxides of nitrogen , particulates and lead - to be met by 2005 and 2010 and based on 1997 guidelines from the World Health Organisation to protect public health .
Of the amendments proposed by Parliament at first reading , 21 out of the 28 were largely accepted by the Council in the common position under the British presidency .
These include more public information and an alert threshold for oxides of nitrogen , as well as the one proposed for sulphur dioxide .
However , the Council also weakened some of the original Commission proposals .
This is a matter of some concern to us in Parliament and so we have tabled 11 amendments to the common position .
Some of these amendments simply adjust inaccuracies or anomalies , such as Amendments Nos 1 , 3 and 8 .
Amendment No 4 ensures that action plans for any areas for which a derogation is in operation must also be made available to the public .
Amendment No 5 asks that , since the Council did not agree our proposal for an alert threshold for particulates , the Commission should reconsider this when more research is available after the review in 2003 .
Amendment No 7 , sadly , I understand the Commission , amongst others , cannot support and , as a result , the problem of dealing with especially sensitive ecosystems is obviously one of those that will have to be dealt with by action at national level .
But we feel in Parliament that it is important to highlight that the World Health Organisation recommended four different levels of limits where the directive only allows for one .
We do not feel that is satisfactory so we have retabled that .
Where we have greater problems are , firstly , on sulphur dioxide .
Amendment No 6 restores the original proposal for eight exceedances per year on the hourly limit , which the Council weakened to 24 .
The Commission acknowledges that this pollutant is directly toxic , especially for asthmatics and those with cardiovascular conditions , even in short peaks of excess pollution , and that is why such a tough limit was proposed in the first place .
I hope , therefore , that the Commission will stick to its guns on this , and likewise on Amendment No 2 .
The insertion by the Council of the words ' where practicable ' is a big problem .
I know , for instance , there is a particular difficulty with the French monitoring equipment for producing this ten-minute averaging figure but , nevertheless , this information is essential for the mid-term review .
In any case Member States are able to choose their own selection of monitoring points so they ought to be able to find a way in which they can actually deal with this difficulty .
Secondly , as far as oxides of nitrogen are concerned , this is obviously hard for Member States to achieve .
It is , of course , one of the key parts of the directive .
It is not acceptable for the Council to increase the number of exceedances for the hourly limit value from the original eight up to 18 , and Amendment No 9 seeks to restore this .
At the very least , it is essential that the Commission look very carefully at this again when it has more research at the 2003 review .
Amendments Nos 10 and 11 cover exactly the same sort of problem but for particulates .
We know more research is needed and that it is under way .
However , the common position text allows ten more permitted exceedances per year on the 24-hour limit and on the hourly limit and , in effect , pushes the review back so that not a great deal is going to result from that until at least 2010 .
Although we do not know enough about particulates , we do know that they are a killer and the World Health Organisation is not even able to suggest a safe limit .
Given that for particulates we have one derogation for southern dust and another derogation for Nordic road gritting , it must be said that there has to be more political will to tackle this problem in the Member States .
There is enough slippage there for people to cope with the very serious problems and they will have to take action .
As rapporteur I urge the Commission to look again at its strategy , particularly on the last two points and to try and accept some of these amendments .
I commend the common position to the House .
Mr President , Commissioner , I do not really know what mysterious force dictates that Environment Committee business should always be the last item on the agenda .
During the last debate , the subject of marriage came up , so we have decided to see ourselves as a sort of ' wedding night climax ' .
Unfortunately , however , participants in the ' climax ' are rather thin on the ground .
Otherwise , this directive is a good example of the work that is being done to improve European environmental legislation .
It has a direct and practical effect on people by making the air cleaner , above all for those who live in our cities .
It also provides a means of identifying ways of achieving successful cross-border cooperation .
I should like to thank Mrs Pollack for her work on this directive , which is a complex document because of its technical nature .
She has dealt with the issues in a pragmatic way and has achieved results .
We realise that the air we breathe has an effect on health - there is nothing new in that .
It is therefore gratifying that we are now drawing up rules which are an improvement on those we have had in the Union up to now .
At the same time , our aim is to bring about a further improvement in people 's health , and this is what we are calling for .
Like a number of others , I too wish this report had gone a little further and imposed stricter controls on the quality of the air we actually breathe .
Nevertheless , we regard it as a baseline from which we can all go forward together , although I am aware that many Member States already have stricter standards for air quality .
Not only does air quality have health implications - which are very important - it also has a bearing on acidification , particularly in the part of Europe I come from .
We must therefore look at air quality in general , and not just at the situation in specific areas .
More emphasis needs to be placed on the effect of particulates on health , since we are not sufficiently well informed about it .
I should like to underline the point made by Mrs Pollack that there are a number of important amendments which the Council and Commission need to take on board to ensure that the inhabitants of Europe and of the Union have decent conditions in which to live .
It is not enough to say that it is simply not possible . What is required is a strong political will .
Before Mrs Flemming adds her opinions to those of Mrs Pollack and Mrs Hulthén as to why we find ourselves discussing Environment Committee business at midnight , I would merely point out that these decisions are taken by the Conference of Presidents .
This situation has been brought about not by ghosts , but by the Conference of Presidents .
Mr President , I am gradually losing any faith in chance .
I also believe that the Conference of Presidents , sadly , does not attach very great importance to environmental issues .
But some day the people of Europe will call them to account .
Parliament is to adopt stricter EU pollution limits in order to ensure better air quality .
Just like the previous speakers , I regret that only 21 of the 28 parliamentary amendments adopted at the first reading have been accepted in letter or in spirit .
The aim of this directive is therefore to establish emission limits on the basis of the World Health Organisation 's air quality guidelines .
The report even provides for a very sharp reduction in the limits for particulates , and compliance with the envisaged limits will require a considerable effort in most of the Member States .
It lays down uniform methods and criteria , applicable throughout Europe , to help prevent any further harmful effects of atmospheric pollution on human health and the environment .
The European Union is thus introducing the strict limits that have long applied in Austria .
In some cases , they have turned out to be even stricter .
I am pleased about that .
Nevertheless , I am by no means entirely happy with all the details of the report .
Annex I ( I ) lays down limits and alarm thresholds for sulphur dioxide , and the proposed limit of 350 grams per cubic metre with 24 overshoots is far too high in my opinion .
The reduction envisaged in the maximum number of overshoots from 24 to 8 , while not satisfying my wish for a lower concentration limit , is undoubtedly a step in the right direction and will therefore have our support .
In Annex II ( I ) on NO2 and NOx limits and the alarm threshold for nitrogen dioxide , I should welcome the complete deletion of any right to exceed these limits .
Here too , the amendment tabled by Mrs Pollack reducing the number of overshoots from 18 to 8 is a step in the right direction and will also have the support of my group .
I know that Mrs Pollack has taken a great deal of trouble with this report , and even though it has not turned out to be everything an environmentalist could wish for , I should like to offer her my sincere congratulations on her report . And finally , my wish for all of us here is that we shall perhaps be able one day to conduct a debate on environmental affairs in the morning .
Mr President , cleaner air is a necessity of life , especially for asthma and bronchitis sufferers .
Good air quality is also important for the protection of the environment , buildings and vegetation .
Measures have been taken in Europe to control sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions since the 1970s , with some success .
Despite the increased energy consumption , there has been a dramatic fall in emissions of acidifying substances .
A reduction of more than 50 % since 1980 is fortunately fairly common for most European countries .
It is even likely to be possible to meet the planned SO2 and NO reductions for 2010 , thanks to the new standards for vehicle emission gases .
Particulate matter is a threat to human health .
The European Environment Agency has calculated that a reduction in the average PM10 value from 30 micrograms per cubic metre to 20 micrograms per cubic metre would prevent 10 000 premature deaths from particulate poisoning in the EU .
The reduction in pollutant emissions by traffic should now be followed by such measures as cleaner fuels and better engines .
Drastic measures are also required for industry : 30 % of NO emissions come from incinerators , cement ovens , electrical power stations and other factories .
New guidelines must therefore take serious account of the need to reduce emissions of particulate matter , NO and SO2 .
I congratulate Mrs Pollack on this report .
Mr President , I agree of course with the comments which have been made that it would be good if we could also discuss environmental proposals at a time when more Members of Parliament could take part in the debate .
But I also agree with the comments and remarks that have been made concerning the importance of this proposal , and I shall at this time be brief and , of course , thank the Committee on the Environment and especially its rapporteur , Mrs Pollack , for the speed and for the insight with which the committee has once again dealt with this proposal .
It is the case that a large number of the European Parliament 's amendments from the first reading were incorporated into the common position by the Council , either word for word or in substance , and the Commission is of the opinion that several of the additional proposals now being put forward by the committee could also help to make the proposal even clearer and more concise .
This applies , for example , to Amendment No 1 , which concerns the definition of natural events .
Seismic activities should continue to be included in the definition , but geothermal events should be added , and the rest of the amendment will clarify the text .
We are also able to support Amendments Nos 3 and 4 .
They clarify the public information requirements , which as we all know are a very important aspect of the proposal .
We are also able to support the demand that the question of alert thresholds for particulates should be reviewed in 2003 , and so we accept Amendment No 5 and also Amendment No 8 , which corrects a mistake concerning the margin of tolerance .
Then there are some other amendments which Mrs Pollack has already mentioned .
Amendment No 2 would require all Member States to report cases where the WHO 's guideline ten-minute concentration for sulphur dioxide has been exceeded .
We in the Commission want to see as much information as possible about this guideline value , but it would be too difficult for a number of Member States to comply with this , and therefore we cannot support this amendment .
Then there are Amendments Nos 6 , 7 , 9 , 10 and 11 .
In one sense , I might be pleased with the amendments , because they propose that we return to some of the limit values originally proposed , or that we tighten them further , and I can only be pleased that Parliament agrees with the Commission 's original proposal .
The fact that I nonetheless do not support them has to do with the debate which took place in the Council , because it appears that it would be too demanding for several Member States to comply with the limit values which are set out in the common position , especially those for particulates .
It would require decisions which are too difficult .
The Commission 's aim is , of course , to ensure the highest possible standards of protection which can be achieved in the Union .
The situation with regard to this proposal is that Member States which are in a position to go further may do so in connection with this proposal , because it is in keeping with the framework directive on air quality for them to go further if they can .
But as I have said , in view of the conditions in the Union as a whole , I dare not - if I may put it that way - accept these amendments , for fear that we would not then be able to push through the proposal as a whole .
The proposal is the first concrete implementation of the EU 's new programme for the improvement of air quality for its citizens and for the environment .
The Commission believes that the proposal , as it now stands , will still provide a high level of protection , and that it is therefore a strong basis for the programme .
We recently adopted another proposal on carbon monoxide and benzene .
We shall also return to the pollutants dealt with in this proposal in 2003 , to see whether even more can be done in the next phase .
I therefore put my trust in the fact that , as time goes on , the impact of the programme will gradually increase . And I also hope that we can all look forward to the cleaner air , better health and improved environment which this proposal will bring about .
I hardly dare in the present climate with the Commission to ask for a guarantee that the Commission will take on board some of the requests we have made for the review in 2003 .
I will just leave that on the table and live in hope for the moment .
I should simply like to congratulate the Commissioner and thank her for coming tonight , given her recent accident and the lateness of the hour , and also to ask her to extend my thanks as rapporteur to the staff in DG XI who have been particularly helpful on this very technical directive .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The sitting was closed at 0.10 a.m.
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I did not participate in the votes yesterday but I am recorded as having voted in a very odd manner : on my own and against my group .
And I had no intentions of doing that .
Therefore , the fact that I voted , and particularly that I voted in such a way , should be deleted .
That is all I wanted to say .
All that appears is : Mr Puerta of the GUE Group , voting against my group every time .

Very well , Mr Puerta , we shall naturally make the corrections as you request .
Are there any other comments ? There are not .
The Minutes were approved
Communication on the 1996 discharge
Madam President , pursuant to Article 6 of Annex V to the Rules of Procedure , following the vote of 17 December on the 1996 discharge , the Committee on Budgetary Control must report back to Parliament at the subsequent part-session .
We had a meeting yesterday and discussed what action should be taken .
We unanimously agreed on the following statement which I - as instructed by the committee - must read out to you .
I shall do this in English , as we agreed to use this language to avoid misunderstandings and translation errors .
The statement reads as follows :
The Committee on Budgetary Control is taking into account Parliament 's vote of 17 December 1998 by which its proposal to give discharge for 1996 was not approved .
Secondly , notes that according to Annex V of its Rules , the discharge procedure is not yet closed .
Third , is dealing with the question of closing the financial accounts for 1996 .
Fourth , will present to Parliament a report by 31 March 1999 .
Thank you for that statement , Mrs Theato .
Agenda 2000
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0444 / 98 by Mr Mulder , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the financing of the common agricultural policy ( COM ( 98 ) 0158 - C4-0298 / 98-98 / 0112 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0494 / 98 by Mr Garot , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the common organisation of the market in beef and veal ( COM ( 98 ) 0158 - C4-0294 / 98-98 / 0109 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0446 / 98 by Mr Goepel , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , onI.the proposal for a Council Regulation establishing a common organisation of the market in the milk and milk products sector ( COM ( 98 ) 0158 - C4-0295 / 98-98 / 0110 ( CNS ) ) II. the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 3950 / 92 establishing an additional levy in the milk and milk products sector ( COM ( 98 ) 0158 - C4-0296 / 98-98 / 0111 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0496 / 98 by Mr Fantuzzi , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , onI.the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 1766 / 92 on the common organisation of the market of cereals and repealing Regulation ( EEC ) No 2731 / 75 fixing standard qualities for common wheat , rye , barley , maize and durum wheat ( COM ( 98 ) 0158 - C4-0292 / 98-98 / 0107 ( CNS ) ) II. the proposal for a Council Regulation establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops ( COM ( 98 ) 0158 - C4-0293 / 98-98 / 0108 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0480 / 98 by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation establishing common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy ( COM ( 98 ) 0158 - C4-0299 / 98-98 / 0113 ( CNS ) ) .


Madam President , may I begin by welcoming Mr Funke to the House .
I think it is a good tradition that the President of the Council of Ministers always takes the trouble to attend when we hold important debates on agriculture .
Regarding the financing of the agriculture dimension of Agenda 2000 , I think it is a good thing to be continuing the trend of recent years .
If agriculture policy changes , the funding of it naturally has to change as well .
The Committee on Agriculture broadly endorses the Commission 's proposals .
The EAGGF must remain the principal source of funding for the common agricultural policy .
As with the MacSharry reforms of a few years ago , we think it is a good thing to modify its content .
Just as the MacSharry reforms for the first time introduced a budget line which had little to do with policy on markets and prices as such , this time too all manner of new chapters are being added .
Firstly there is a chapter on rural development , and the Agriculture Committee finds that this makes sense .
Agriculture policy is no longer just a policy on prices and markets , but an all-embracing policy which includes policy on the countryside .
Secondly , the Commission is also proposing that veterinary and phytosanitary measures should be included .
That seems logical to us .
Thirdly , there is information policy .
The Commission proposes to include that too .
This is likewise welcomed by the Agriculture Committee .
We think that in general the CAP is not sufficiently well regarded in Europe .
We need to highlight its positive aspects - and there are plenty of those .
What the European Commission 's proposals do not include , and the Committee on Agriculture is adding this , is any mention of a policy on agricultural product quality .
If there is one thing Europe needs after the BSE crisis and all the fuss over the quality of foods , it is for Europe to devise a policy for the quality of agricultural products .
That has to be an key part of European farm policy .
The Agriculture Committee also thinks that in future too , farmers must be able to get their prices from the market as far as possible .
Filling in a pile of forms is not all that helpful .
What they want is a better price .
That can be secured by a policy on quality , but also by developing other markets , namely the market in non-food uses of agricultural products .
As far as the environment is concerned , it will be very useful if we can legislate for the use of certain farm products in certain areas .
That will open up new markets , and prices may pick up as a result .
Lastly , with regard to European enlargement , we have no quarrel with the fact that some measure of pre-accession assistance is also included in the regulation .
As far as Parliament 's powers are concerned , all spending on markets and prices policy must remain compulsory expenditure , we accept that .
Given that Parliament has to have a voice in all other spending , this must be non-compulsory expenditure , because Parliament has full power of codecision on that .
What , in the view of the Agriculture Committee , should not be in the Guarantee Fund ?
All the structural measures under Objective 1 and Community initiatives .
Management of the funds must of course remain under the control of the Commission itself .
Where monies are disbursed by Member States through the payment agencies , they must be scrutinised by the Member States .
In view of this week 's events , it will come as no surprise that we want that scrutiny to be greatly improved .
We have to have better scrutiny .
And how do we see that scrutiny ?
The Commission 's proposal is for a report on the financial accounts three months after the end of the financial year , and for a policy review after two years .
The Agriculture Committee has tabled a number of amendments to improve things here .
We want to be told straight away , not two years later , if something has been rejected or approved .
We want to have our finger firmly on the pulse of any developments in that area .
We want the Commission to report to us on this every three months .
This does not need to be a weighty tome .
We have enough reading to do already , but it must be provided as swiftly as possible .
In conclusion , I have a comment on one contentious point in our proposal , namely the cofinancing of certain agricultural expenditure .
It includes a recital in which the Agriculture Committee is cautiously in favour of that cofinancing , but there was a tied vote on whether or not to include an article on this .
Eighteen members of the Agriculture Committee were in favour of cofinancing for certain types of expenditure , 18 were against and one member abstained .
So this is something which the plenary will have to decide in its ultimate wisdom .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in my report on beef and veal , due care was taken to ensure that three vital points were taken into account .
The first is that new consumer expectations have emerged as a result of the mad cow phenomenon , expectations which focus on product quality in terms of taste and health .
The second is the need to correct the structural imbalances of the market , where there is an annual 2 % increase in supply and a 1 % fall in demand .
The third is the validity of the Cunha report which Parliament adopted and which advocates reconciling the economic dimension of agricultural activity with its social , environmental and territorial role .
Ladies and gentlemen , as everyone has discovered , the Commission 's proposals advocate a reform in which these three concerns are not central .
In fact the Commission firstly intends to increase the European Union 's share of world markets and bring European prices closer to those of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
The approach favoured in this case , contrary to previous reforms , means that it is moving towards market regulation through price control , which is why it is proposing to lower the intervention price by 30 % and abandon the public intervention system .
I , for my part , am of the opinion that if we are to be realistic about this situation we have to think in terms of future European beef and veal production as being primarily linked to the European market , with external markets acting increasingly as limited markets for disposing of surpluses .
As the Asian and Russian crises reveal the Commission 's excessive confidence in international markets this option appears increasingly viable .
The relevance of the Commission 's trade strategy for the beef and veal sector has not been decisively demonstrated . It is a sector in which our production costs are twice as high as in Argentina and three times as high as in New Zealand .
In this context , accelerated moves towards alignment with world prices is likely to have detrimental effects on a large number of European Union cattle farmers which would of course be inadmissible .
This is why the proposals I have submitted for debate combine a reasonable price reduction with proactive management of volumes , the essential promotion of a food policy and the need to maintain decent incomes for producers .
As regards the lowering of prices , I am proposing a 15 % reduction to stimulate consumption and maintain a correct competitive relationship with white meat , which will benefit from a reduction in cereal prices .
In terms of production control , I am proposing that measures advocated by the Commission to increase extensification aid , implement veal calf premiums , encourage carcase weight reductions and introduce individual quotas for the male bovine premium , be further enhanced .
In relation to food policy and in addition to the innovative measures in the packaging and presentation of meat products , efforts should focus on restoring consumer confidence .
In this respect , it is obviously by placing demands for high quality products in terms of taste and health at the centre of the COM that we will be able to restore consumer confidence in them .
Lastly , as regards cattle farmers ' income , a 15 % reduction and vital production cuts are set to further exacerbate their situation , which therefore gives rise to the issue of compensation .
I proposed to deal with this within the budget set for this COM in Agenda 2000 .
This report , which was put to a vote in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development in December , was not adopted , probably for reasons which go beyond its content .
And yet , majority votes were obtained on a number of issues : 15 % price reduction , maintaining public intervention , uprating aid for suckler cow herds and extensification , the need for veal calf premiums and maintaining the deseasonalisation premium .
I have therefore highlighted these elements so as to propose them with my political group , the PSE Group , to the House .
Then , new amendments are aimed at solving the problems posed by Italy , Germany and Holland regarding the treatment of young male bovines .
The essential measure put forward in this connection consists of putting aside a sum of ECU 1 800 million , in the form of extra payments , to grant a slaughter premium for male bovines , suckler cows , dairy cows , heifers and veal calves .
Such a premium would be allocated on the basis of Community criteria of a slaughter ceiling for each country , determined on historic bases , and a premium ceiling per animal for each of the categories mentioned , so as to avoid distorting competition between Member States .
This compromise should restore the balance that countries which produce male bovines have waited for , without calling into question the core element of the measure taken to enable the necessary adjustments to be made to the COM in beef and veal .
This is why , Madam President , I think that the conditions are now right for Parliament to adopt this report in the near future .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , the Commission 's proposals on the organisation of the market in milk cover three main areas : price support , income support for milk producers , and the provision on guaranteed quantities .
The Commission 's proposals on price support provide for a reduction in the price of milk of 17 % , and a reduction in the intervention prices for both butter and skimmed milk powder of 15 % .
These measures are proposed in order to encourage the consumption of milk and milk products in the Community , and to improve the competitiveness of these products on the world market .
In view of the proposed amount of compensation , the price reduction should , however , be substantially smaller overall than the Commission is seeking .
With a smaller price reduction and with amounts of compensation remaining the same , it will be easier to achieve full compensation for loss of income .
We therefore propose reducing the target price for milk by 12 % instead of 17 % , and the intervention prices for butter and skimmed milk powder by 10 % instead of 15 % in each case .
Turning now to income compensation , the Commission is proposing four components : a dairy cow premium ( Article 15 ) , an additional payment ( Article 16 ) , a supplement to the dairy cow premium ( Article 12 ) and an additional payment within the limits of global amounts ( Article 13 ) .
These proposals are extremely complicated and will lead to serious implementation and monitoring problems .
In principle , however , I am in favour of the dairy cow premium together with a supplement under the beef and veal regulation , but not on the basis of a virtual European cow yielding 5 800 kg of milk per year ; the basis of this cow premium must instead be financial compensation based on the amount of quota , and national or regional animal yields must guarantee full compensation .
A general slaughter premium for dairy cows might also be considered - as a second strand of the organisation of the market in beef and veal - to make up for the price reduction .
In practice , we would thus have two forms of premium with which to provide compensation .
Now , as regards the provisions on guaranteed quantities , we support the Commission 's proposal to extend the quota until 2006 and , rather more reluctantly , the proposed 2 % increase in quotas .
In allocating 1 % to young farmers and 1 % to producers in mountain areas , however , it should also be possible , in the latter case , to take account of less-favoured mountain areas , although only as far as the quantity allocated is concerned .
When discussing a reform of the organisation of the market in milk , we cannot avoid the problem of the additional levy .
I propose that it should be reduced by more than the reduction already achieved through the drop in the target price for milk , and that it should be structured flexibly , almost as an economic instrument , so that an active milk producer would have the possibility of adjusting the quota for his holding to the economic situation , either through leasing or by going over quota .
That would certainly influence the market price for quota leasing to the disadvantage of the so-called ' armchair milkers ' , and European milk producers and the dairy industry would , despite the quota arrangements , have the possibility of selling more dairy products on the world market without the payment of export refunds .
On linking land and quotas , all I have to say is that one reason for the growth in leased quotas is the fact that both EC and national law allow non-producers to possess a quota of these quotas .
Another is the principle of linking quotas to areas of land .
In my view , the question as to whether or not quotas should be tied to land - that is , transfer of milk quota only with a partial transfer of land - should be decided in the individual Member States themselves ; there should therefore be an optional arrangement .
Article 7 ( 2 ) should , then , establish the optional suspension of the link between quotas and land , authorising Member States to introduce regional restrictions on the transfer of reference quantities without land .
Two days ago , it was reported by DPA that the presidency and the Commission were both convinced that all the Member States had to show a willingness to compromise , and that national interests should be represented impartially and clearly .
That is precisely what I wanted to do here as rapporteur - to be impartial , but clear .
In principle , I agree with the Commission that the competitiveness of European farming on the world market needs to be increased .
However , I would say to Commissioner Fischler and President-in-Office Funke that I cannot cleverly boost competitiveness on the one hand , and at the same time , by clobbering farmers with step-by-step reductions , exclude whole regions of eastern Germany from this competition on the other .
Jobs in agriculture are to be found in particular on mixed farms , producing beef , veal and pigmeat , but above all milk .
You should give these families the same chance as all the others in the European Union .
Finally , I am grateful to have been given the opportunity as a Member of this House - almost ten years after German unification - to have a hand in the reorganisation of such an important market .
I especially wish to thank those who did the groundwork for me and who have supported me in this complicated , but interesting work .
Madam President , I was not entirely happy with some of the amendments made to my report in the Agriculture Committee , such as the one aiming not to reduce intervention prices for cereals but to increase aid nonetheless .
It makes little sense to me to increase internal support , at an additional cost of some hundreds of millions of euros , in a sector which - although it accounts for 11 % of gross saleable agricultural production in the Community - alone consumes 40 % of the CAP budget , in other words EUR 17 billion out of 40 .
I hope the Christmas break has given everyone time to reflect , and that the vote in Brussels on 28 January will lead to a revision of these amendments .
I am convinced , on the contrary , that a 20 % reduction in the intervention price - I shall be proposing 15 % - is not an irrational display of pessimism on the part of DG VI officials .
The gap between the intervention price and the world price is wider than that at present ; thus the reduction proposed through Agenda 2000 should be even greater , strictly speaking , as the President of the Court of Auditors reminded us in this House a few weeks ago .
Indeed , the spectre of surpluses , which we thought had been banished in 1992 , is rearing its ugly head again in the Community : all it took was a 2 % better harvest and a set-aside rate of 5 % , and here we are already now with cereals surpluses of some 20 million tonnes .
I fear that , if we continue along this road , the forecasts for 2006 will have to be revised upwards .
Therefore , if we wish to be serious and responsible , a thorough , far-reaching reform is urgently needed .
It is useless to turn a blind eye ; I believe that the phoney reforms which you have outlined , Mr Fischler , would upset no one but would leave us once again with production surpluses .
So there is no point in deferring the problem , because it would then have to be tackled as an emergency in the near future , under much more adverse conditions than now .
For cereals , we can avoid this danger if we deal with the sector in the manner suggested by the Commission .
This is in any event my own opinion .
Of course certain rectifications are needed , three at least .
The first consists in excluding oilseeds from the single premium .
We have a protein deficit in the Community , and it has become increasingly acute since the BSE crisis ; it is absurd to invoke the Blair House constraints to claim that , with this reduction in the basic premium , we shall no longer have to suffer them .
That is rather like rejoicing when we hurt ourselves , because in that way we no longer feel pain inflicted on us by others .
Let us take the bull by the horns , Commissioner , without taking make-believe , dangerous short-cuts . In other words , let us renegotiate Blair House !
The second rectification needed is a set-aside rate of 10 % .
Its proposed abolition in 2000 is unrealistic .
Even now we could certainly do with a positive set-aside rate , because of the market difficulties already highlighted and in order to ensure that the set-aside system functions effectively .
The third rectification lies in demonstrating greater solidarity and cohesion in the COM for arable crops than currently exists .
If the Commission itself acknowledges in its introductory statement that the CAP reform of 1992 has not worked to the advantage of less favoured regions and producers in respect of arable crops - the most significant item of expenditure , representing the bulk of direct income support - we cannot remain hidebound by the logic of 1992 .
I propose that , in order to start redressing the balance , our frame of reference for productivity should be a weighted average of one third to two thirds of - respectively - average Community production and the traditional yield of a given region .
I hope that these rectifications will be accepted ; looking to the future , they would make aid more justifiable in social terms .
I believe that these aspects should also be included in other reports on Agenda 2000 , for example the one on the horizontal regulation .
This is an important opportunity to bring the CAP into line with consumers ' and citizens ' needs .
Eco-compatibility , ceilings and differentiation are not intellectual flights of fancy , but much-needed elements to ensure that the mother of all Community policies has some sort of a future .
Otherwise it will not survive .
With EUR 40 billion earmarked for 7.5 million individuals , when twice that number are out of work , economic arguments alone are ultimately no longer enough unless they are accompanied by the environmental , social and territorial considerations for which society is pressing hard .
I am concerned about the outcome of this discussion in the House .
I fear that , by pulling out all the stops to protect producers , we shall ultimately much dilute the Commission 's already tentative new proposals and rule out innovation altogether .
It cannot be maintained that because of the crisis in Russia or eastern Asia we should reject or review the reduction in cereals , milk and meat prices .
I have never believed in ' fortress Europe ' .
For Europeans to shut the door to the outside world has always been a mistake : it is precisely at times of crisis that Europe must be a little more adventurous and assert its presence on the world stage .
This is not unquestioning confidence in international markets but self-confidence ; otherwise there is no point in launching the euro to stand up and be counted in the world .
What is more , such a defensive stance sends a most unfortunate message to the CEECs , to the other Europe .
It really is paradoxical that Agenda 2000 , launched in order to bring the two halves of Europe together , is now dividing them .
Unfortunately , Mr Funke , the Agriculture Council has not impressed us with its far-sightedness over the past few months .
The Agriculture Council itself deserves a motion of censure .
It has been treading water for weeks on the reform of the CAP , rehearsing the same old arguments time and time again : the agricultural model , the two pillars .
This has not amounted to much , and has left the field clear for the ECOFIN Council , whose theories on cofinancing and expenditure freezes have complicated and even seriously jeopardised the reform 's future .
Let us avoid wars of words here too : to say ' no ' to cofinancing in the name of Community solidarity is to sow discord ; to discuss it seriously is another matter , and means assessing all the implications .
The tendency to compare net contributions and a reluctance to stump up for the poor countries of the south will not bring much progress in Europe , in my view .
What is more , to turn the CAP as it stands into a monument to the inviolable principle of solidarity is an insult to common sense .
Whatever anyone may say , the CAP is certainly not the best example of Community solidarity ; one need only look at the level of support granted to production in Mediterranean areas .
In conclusion , Minister , we should like you to explain this new enthusiasm for a zero-cost reform .
If we wish to curb expenditure and tackle the structural difficulties of excessive , uneven support leading to distortion , the way to do so in my opinion is to enact more radical reforms , not to preserve the status quo .
It would be galling to discover , after March , that what lies behind the slogan of zero-cost reform is the umpteenth postponement of any reform .
The last thing that farmers need is for everything to be deferred until October .
Madam President , I should first like to provide a formal clarification : I am speaking here as rapporteur of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , as all the other previous speakers have also done so far .
I am not , therefore , giving my own opinion or that of my group , but that of the committee .
We have the unusual situation in the Agriculture Committee that in many areas no decisions were made at all , that is , that there was no position of any kind , except that of rejecting the Commission 's position .
I was lucky , however , in my appointment as rapporteur because , Mr Fischler , I can congratulate you : the committee has approved in full the Commission 's proposal on direct support schemes and their modulation .
I am , therefore , in a position to report on your proposal here and to explain it .
I shall , however , try to make a better job of doing so than you did in your remarks .
The basis for this proposal is of course the premiums , which were introduced in 1992 in the so-called MacSharry reform - as yet we have not heard much of the Fischler reform ; we still need to introduce that - when prices were lowered and it was said that compensatory payments would be made in the form of premiums .
These compensatory payments were not linked to quality , which , logically speaking , was right , because the amount paid out was , of course , supposed to be the same as that by which prices had fallen .
The fact that this was not quite correct and that , overall , agriculture lost out somewhat , is something we discussed at the time .
The impact of these changes was , of course , considerable .
Let me quote the European Court of Auditors . The Court writes in its investigation that a point was reached where 40 % of these premiums were going to 4 % of holdings .
And then a point was reached where 80 % of these premiums were going to 20 % of holdings and where , for example - according to the Court of Auditors - one leading holding received DEM 6.61 million from Brussels in one year .
That meant that some holdings were in a position to pay their rent and labour costs out of the premiums and still had money left over .
Of course , for the holdings which were less well provided for , this is an extremely difficult situation , because the former are of course far better able to withstand price reductions than the latter .
The Commission has therefore said - and in the committee we think this is right - that this has to be stopped .
We must make the payment of premiums more dependent on criteria such as employment and the environment , and take greater account of these factors .
So far , the committee agrees .
Now , contrary to the Court of Auditors , which actually said that direct payments above ECU 100 000 should be stopped completely - that is , capped - you have rightly , like the committee , come out in favour of a sliding scale .
The intention is for 20 % to be deducted between ECU 100 000 and ECU 200 000 , and 25 % above ECU 200 000 .
That would be the level set by Brussels .
Then you say that it is now up to the Member States to make further deductions of up to 20 % for holdings which have a below-average number of workers , or in other words have reached a much more advanced stage of rationalisation than other holdings .
That would therefore give a reduction of up to 45 % .
This proposal is based on a reasonable approach , because it makes employment a factor in the payment of the premium , albeit in a standardised form and not in the form of remuneration for the actual work done .
But this would still mean that highly rationalised holdings would see their premiums reduced , and holdings with a large number of employees would receive a higher payout .
The only problem with the whole scheme is that only around 1 % - or perhaps not even that - of holdings are affected and that the vast majority of agricultural holdings do not stand to gain anything from this sliding scale , because obviously the reductions made higher up do not necessarily benefit those lower down .
Commissioner , with your permission I will outline the proposal we tabled in the Agriculture Committee ; it was not voted on , but was reported in the Commission - at least unofficially - to be a better proposal than yours .
I am not allowed to report on it as such , because the Agriculture Committee has of course decided otherwise , but I should nevertheless like to touch upon it .
We could in fact say that very high administrative expenditure is required for the holdings to prove that they are not working to full capacity .
This might lead to legal disputes and cause difficulties .
That is why we have proposed giving the holdings an option : we deduct 45 % straightaway , and then holdings with a large number of employees may voluntarily submit evidence of their labour costs , 50 % of which are offset .
Calculations showed that under these arrangements , 97 % of holdings would be wholly unaffected .
We therefore create a mechanism for holdings which have a large number of employees and which use ecologically sound farming methods .
The two usually go hand in hand .
We give holdings of this kind more than we give holdings which have undergone a process of rationalisation .
That seems to me to be very sensible .
The other holdings are competitive anyway because they have reached such an advanced stage of rationalisation .
Thank you , Madam President .
I will save the rest for when I speak for my group and on my own account .
Madam President , we have to let fairness prevail .
I must insist !
I too would have very much liked to have another two minutes to talk about the milk market .
I would ask you to indicate that speakers must keep to their allotted time .
Applause
It is very hard to interrupt a Member , Mr Goepel , especially a rapporteur , and if you had gone beyond your time you know that I would not have interrupted you either .
Our rapporteurs do an important job .
As the President of the sitting , I cannot simply cut off a rapporteur .
You are well aware that I do not do that .
I may be wrong , but I do not do it !
Madam President , the grain reform programme in Agenda 2000 involves undoing much of the regulation relating to letting the land remain fallow .
At the same time the document does not , however , pay sufficient attention to other uses of farm land .
It would be sensible to invest in the increased cultivation of crops for energy , as an alternative use for land .
In rural areas important work , for both nature and the economy , is to be found in the production of bioenergy .
The benefits of bioenergy are that it is renewable , clean , localised , and it provides employment .
So far indirect regional , national and environmental benefits have tended to provide the incentive , rather than direct economic benefits .
The adoption of developed technology has brought new opportunities for the exploitation of bioenergy , and that will allow us , in the future , to increase our level of self-sufficiency in energy production in Europe .
More investment in bioenergy product development will also bring with it a vital economic benefit in relation to other energy sources .
As part of the implementation of the Kyoto agreement on climate the Commission has announced its objective to double the use of renewables in the Union area by the year 2010 .
Recognition of the non-food option in Agenda 2000 would also prove that the Commission meant business .
The production of bioenergy as a cheap source of power will need support , along with that given to other alternative energy sources in the future , for it to gain the status we intend for it as part of European energy policy .
Finally , I would like to express my thanks to the rapporteur for his hard and time-consuming work .
Madam President , in its Agenda 2000 communication , the European Commission includes proposals that improve and consolidate economic and social cohesion through the reform of structural policies , the common agricultural policy and the policy on rural development .
Within the proposals for agricultural reform , the top priority is the Union 's commitment to maintaining some viable rural communities and to protecting European rural heritage .
In order to do so , it must have a very strong and competitive agricultural sector at global level that operates within a framework of sustainable development .
In this context , the Commission has set out its proposals on direct support schemes within the common agricultural policy relating to all common organisations of the market that grant direct payments .
In the proposal for a regulation in question , the Committee on Budgetary Control calls on the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to incorporate three amendments that have the common objective of ensuring that Parliament is better informed .
The Commission 's proposal is based on the principle of subsidiarity .
Without wishing to question this approach , it is important that the measures adopted to guarantee payments to farmers benefiting from these schemes are accompanied by a certain degree of coordination at Community level .
The system of penalties applied to farmers who do not meet labour or environmental standards must be applied for the same reasons in all Member States and should be similar throughout the Community .
Lastly , I should like to draw attention to the fact that the Commission wants this proposal for a regulation to be implemented by the management committees in which the Council and the Commission are involved yet which Parliament is excluded from .
On this same theme , I should like to point out that Parliament approved a resolution in September in which we asked that we be guaranteed real control over the implementing measures .
For this reason , the Committee on Budgetary Control stresses that the Commission must inform Parliament of the measures Member States adopt in applying this regulation . Moreover , before the final decision is adopted , Parliament should have the right to contribute , for a limited period of time , to the debate on the Commission 's proposals on the implementing measures .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , may I first thank you very much for your warm welcome and for giving me the opportunity to be here in the European Parliament for my first , as it were , official appointment as President-in-Office of the Agriculture and Fisheries Council , and to address you .
I should like to outline the German Presidency 's priorities on agriculture and fisheries ; I hope that Parliament will be a constructive partner in this work and will actively support us in the quite enormous project we have ahead of us .
As you know , we are also under pressure of time because , of course , parliamentary elections are on the horizon .
I am setting great store by your cooperation , ladies and gentlemen .
Today , you will be debating the agricultural component of Agenda 2000 .
I have followed the deliberations hitherto in the European Parliament 's committees and plenary closely - and in this respect I am also grateful that I was able to hear what each of the rapporteurs had to say today - and I conclude , although this will certainly come as no surprise to you , that opinions do still diverge widely on the core issues .
I therefore deduce that the German Presidency has its work cut out to reach an appropriate compromise .
Certainly , if you include the question of financing , Agenda 2000 is the central political theme of the German Presidency as a whole .
The federal government has set itself the goal of adopting Agenda 2000 in its entirety as early as this spring .
This is a truly ambitious task and it will only be achieved if Parliament , the Commission and the presidency work together constructively and in a spirit of mutual trust , and if they really want political success .
The Commission 's proposals for the sector of agriculture and rural development are part of a package , and I welcome the fact that this is also how the European Parliament sees it .
I would , therefore , earnestly request that you bring deliberations in Parliament to a close in good time , so that we can also stay on schedule in this respect .
I believe that it is in both our interests to make a success of the Agenda and to make it clear to the people of Europe that the European institutions are not only capable of action but also of successful action , and that they can design policies for the future .
On 1 January , Germany took over the presidency for the eleventh time since the foundation of the European Economic Community .
The German Government is very conscious of the great responsibility this brings , especially when the projects on the table are , after all , of such great historical significance , such as paving the way for eastward enlargement and preparing for the WTO negotiations which will begin at the end of the year .
That is also why concluding the negotiations on Agenda 2000 is our top priority .
We can - and for this I am very grateful - build on the solid preparatory work carried out by the Austrian , but also the British and Luxembourg Presidencies .
All the same , I must add that very intensive work will be required to overcome the differences of opinion - which are in part still considerable - and to reach a workable compromise .
Despite the uncertainty over financing - and further intensive discussions will also be held on this - I will , as chairman of the Agriculture Council , lead the negotiations on the agriculture part of the Agenda on the basis of the Commission proposals .
This is what was envisaged from the outset .
In the meantime , we have set up a high-level group , which started its deliberations this week , beginning in fact with beef and veal , and milk .
It is intended that this group should prepare for negotiations in the Agriculture Council and demonstrate possible ways of reaching compromises , and that it should , therefore , prepare draft decisions to a very large extent .
At the federal government 's meeting with the Commission on Monday of this week in Bonn , Commissioner Fischler and I agreed that , if convincing alternatives are presented , the Commission is prepared to review its proposals and if necessary to table new ones .
I welcome this and am extremely grateful to the Commissioner and his colleagues for giving this undertaking .
For at the present stage of the negotiations , it is certainly still too early to speculate about compromises .
I do not think that would be sensible .
But it should be pointed out - and I fully endorse what Mr Goepel said - that all of us , despite the respective interests we hold at national level , must also be prepared to reach compromises ; otherwise at the end of the day we will not have a result .
I should like to make it clear , however , that I believe it is essential to safeguard the interests of European agriculture , to invest the European model of agriculture with tangible initiatives , and to bolster rural areas by encouraging sustainable development .
In the future , European agriculture will have to be competitive in order to hold its own against international competition .
With this in mind , European market organisations ought to be reformed and geared more closely to the requirements of the market .
I must add , however , that in so doing it still is , and will continue to be , up to us to maintain and further improve our high standards of environmental and consumer protection , and also - in the interests of fair competition - to ensure that these standards are adequately safeguarded in international trade agreements .
As chairman of the Agriculture Council , I should like to work with the Commission towards further improving the status of environmental protection in agricultural policy , giving Member States and regions a greater say in policies on agriculture and rural areas , and making animal welfare and precautionary consumer protection integral parts of the common agricultural policy .
Important ideas on these matters - for which I am extremely grateful - have emerged from the European Parliament ; I am pleased about this and fully support its greater involvement , including in agricultural policy .
I would emphasise once again the necessity in European politics of the trio - if I may express it thus - of the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
I could of course list the members of the trio in any order : the Council , the Commission and Parliament ; Parliament , the Council and the Commission - as you wish , the order should not make any difference .
Although Agenda 2000 will be the German Presidency 's main priority , alongside it are other important dossiers in the field of agriculture and fisheries , which should , if possible , also be completed .
As always in the first half of the year , negotiations on agricultural prices are on the agenda , the importance of which has admittedly - as we all know - diminished .
I would be grateful if Parliament were able to complete its deliberations on the outstanding Commission proposals within this parliamentary term .
If it is to live up to the expectations of the consumer , Community law should be further developed on the basis of the Commission Green Paper .
The entire food production chain needs to be regulated efficiently and consistently .
We also want to make improvements in the field of organic farming , in terms of both production and marketing .
In addition , we attach great importance to animal welfare and combating epizootic diseases .
I might perhaps mention the most important animal welfare issues here . They are as follows : decisions on treating laying hens in battery cages in a way appropriate to their species ; laying down standards for the carriage of animals by sea ; continuing to specify minimum slaughtering standards ; and incorporating the Council of Europe recommendation on animals kept for farming purposes into Community law .
Combating epizootic diseases is becoming increasingly important in the light of the growth of trade in live animals and the economic damage resulting from outbreaks of disease .
In view of this , moves are being made to amend the directives on swine fever , foot and mouth disease and zoonoses .
Those are my comments on the agricultural side .
I also wish to talk briefly about fisheries , because there too we have an extensive work programme .
Of course the Agenda 2000 negotiations also affect the fisheries sector .
Therefore , for example , a decision has to be made on the core issue of the future financing of fisheries support .
Alongside this , negotiations need to be held on the regulation on structural measures in the fisheries sector , to ensure that this proposal is adopted by June 1999 at the latest .
I am aiming to table the key political elements of this proposal for a decision as early as the March Fisheries Council .
In addition , the common fisheries policy needs to be further developed to ensure sustainable and balanced management of fish stocks .
Discussions on continuing or renewing fisheries agreements with third countries are a further priority , as is the review of these agreements , which was initiated by the Council .
The Fisheries Council will also be dealing with restructuring the common organisation of the market in fishery products .
That was a brief presentation of the German Presidency 's priorities and the work it will be doing on agricultural and fisheries policy .
Obviously , in the ten minutes available to me I was only able to touch on some points very briefly .
I am aware that I have exceeded my speaking time somewhat , but as this is my first speech and presentation in this House , perhaps I might be forgiven .
I should like to assure you that as the President-in-Office of the Agriculture and Fisheries Council , I will continue - including within the so-called informal trilogue - to seek an in-depth exchange of views with the European Parliament .
I believe it is necessary and I am convinced it is important .
Applause
After what was your first speech to the House , I should like to welcome you here very warmly on behalf of Parliament .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to warn you straight away that I shall need rather more than ten minutes to comment on all the reports before the House today .
If possible , however , I will try to save some time at the end of the debate .
Firstly though , I should like to thank all the rapporteurs very warmly for the work they have done in the run-up to today 's debate .


The individual market organisations were dealt with in the reports of Mr Fantuzzi , Mr Garot and Mr Goepel , the horizontal regulation by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf and the EAGGF regulation by Mr Mulder .

The report on the reform of the market in wine is on the agenda for February , and the reports on rural development and on pre-accession aid were already dealt with in November .
I do not , therefore , need to comment on those reports today , but I should like to make it clear that my thanks also go to the rapporteurs , Mr Görlach and Mr Sonneveld .

As rapporteurs , all of you have contributed to our being able , so far , to keep to our timetable for dealing with the Agenda 2000 proposals .
Negotiations in the Council have now entered the decision-making phase .
The technical issues have been resolved and the newly created high-level group started work this week .
As soon as a political agreement is reached , the Commission will , in any case , make all the necessary arrangements , so that the legal texts can be adopted definitively before the parliamentary elections .
Most farmers and farming unions now agree that reform of the common agricultural policy is unavoidable .
The danger of further surpluses - despite growing demand on the international agriculture markets - the forthcoming WTO round and rising production potential , which will also increase considerably with eastward enlargement , are factors which are shaping the discussion on the future structure of market management policies .
In addition , there is an important internal debate on what society demands of agriculture .
The effects of agricultural production on the environment are part of this debate , as is the question of social criteria for agricultural policy and the desire for a better quality of life , be it through higher food safety and quality standards , or through sustainable development of rural areas and considering the purposes they serve for our society .
We have , as you know , encapsulated this approach in the concept of a ' European model of agriculture ' .
If this model is not to be doomed , however , we not only need to gear it more closely to consumers and the markets , we also need to strengthen policies on rural areas .
I am therefore opposed to any attempts to adopt only a slimmed-down reform or to leave important areas out of the reform .
I do not believe in ruining the future prospects of farmers and the processing industry with half-baked , and therefore ineffective measures , and running the risk of our being faced with another debate on reform in the near future .
The question now is what the final reforms should consist of , so that we can equip European farming for the challenges ahead .
The European Parliament has played an active part in finding an answer to this question , and has prepared a number of amendments in this regard .
I will now , therefore , comment on the most fundamental of the proposed amendments and explain my position on them .
Let me start with financing .
The transition from price support to direct income payments will not lead directly to savings in the agriculture budget .
To start with , expenditure on the agricultural policy will even increase slightly .
Crucial here are , however , the positive effects which the reform will have on the economy .
Independent academic institutes estimate the increased cost to the budget to be between EUR 3 billion and EUR 4 billion , but put savings to the consumer at between EUR 10 billion and EUR 17 billion .
That means a reduction in the consumer price index of between 0.3 % and 0.45 % , and thus an important contribution to stability in Europe .
The most important objective of our proposal for the new EAGGF regulation is , in the future , to use the Guarantee Section to finance rural development measures outside Objective 1 programmes .
This is an attempt to take account of multifunctionality and would also make it easier to defend the common agricultural policy at international level .
It is intended that the Guarantee Section should also finance a series of accompanying structural measures in the fisheries sector , specific veterinary and plant protection measures , and measures to provide information on the common agricultural policy , and overall that the existing legal provisions should be consolidated and simplified .
I am pleased to see , Mr Mulder , that you support the proposal to extend financing by the EAGGF Guarantee Section in your report .
Let me now turn to the individual amendments you have proposed .
The legal base for the regulation is Article 43 of the Treaty .
A number of amendments seek to base it on Article 209 as well .
But , Madam President , this proposal only relates to provisions specifically on EAGGF financing ; basing this regulation on Article 209 as well is therefore superfluous .
A number of amendments concern the issue of cofinancing for measures which are at present financed exclusively from the Community budget .
This is a question of principle , which must be settled outside the agricultural regulations .
The same goes for the question of whether agricultural expenditure should be classified as compulsory or non-compulsory .
These matters should be discussed in connection with the interinstitutional agreement .
We also think that the amendment aimed at changing the budget year would actually simplify matters considerably .
This would mean , however , that the budget year in which the change was made would last twelve and a half months , resulting in a one-off cost to the budget of around EUR 800 million .
The Commission can therefore only accept this amendment if it is clear where the extra money is going to come from .
As regards the amendments on the quality of agricultural products , there is no question in my mind either that measures to promote quality are becoming increasingly important .
These can , however , already be financed under the Guarantee Section at the moment , and are indeed financed by it to some extent .
The same applies to promoting the use of renewable raw materials .
If we were now to start specifically naming , as it were , every single measure which we think is important , then we would have to give a whole list , which does not actually make any sense either .
On the wish you expressed for financing under the Guarantee Section not to disrupt the management and implementation of measures not previously financed by the Guarantee Section , I should like to point out that financing the supporting measures from the 1992 reform out of the Guarantee Section has not caused any particular problems .
It is true that the financial provisions on paying agencies and the clearance of accounts are different in the Guarantee Section , but I maintain that overall this is an advantage and can very easily be combined with structural financing .
In addition , we intend to set up a special advance payment system for rural development programmes .
Another amendment emphasises that at the end of the year , non-utilised appropriations from the Guarantee Section should be transferred to a special reserve for future years .
This is an interesting idea , but the rules in the Financial Regulation for the Community budget do not allow it .
This would contravene the principle of the annuality of the budget .
Finally on the Mulder report , I should like to make it clear that I will take your request for regular information on decisions on the clearance of accounts into consideration .
Similarly , I will include precise evaluation measures in the financing from the Guarantee Section .
That brings me to Mr Garot 's report on the beef and veal sector .
I am grateful that you in this House think it is necessary for the package to include reform of this market organisation .
It is well known that without a price adjustment , prospects for beef and veal on the home market are hopeless .
It is also well known that WTO rules will - from the middle of 2000 - limit Community exports of beef and veal which are eligible for refunds to just 820 000 tonnes a year .
If the European beef and veal industry is to be able to maintain beef production at anywhere near current levels , then , according to our analyses , a 30 % reduction in the intervention price is imperative .
I have examined in detail the alternative proposal , which consists of restoring market balance solely by reducing production .
I cannot endorse this proposal , because it cannot guarantee the future of the European beef industry .
Nor can I , therefore , accept any amendments which - contrary to the Commission proposal - are aimed at lesser price reductions .
We have to leave open the possibility of taking advantage of the positive market trends on the horizon .
If we do not , then our competitors certainly will .
As regards the level of direct aid , it is necessary - alongside the beef premium itself - also to take into consideration the other proposed changes to the common agricultural policy , and not least the impact we can expect these to have on the market .
That is why I cannot accept amendments seeking to raise the beef premiums either .
Another question is how to find a fair solution to the question of the form in which direct payments are made .
In the EU , we have , broadly speaking , just two different systems of beef production : one is based primarily on cereals or silage maize , and the other is primarily grass-based .
I do not see any prospect of a solution , if we do not take sufficient account of both systems .
Furthermore , as early as November 1996 , the Agriculture Council committed itself to examining appropriate solutions for the particular situation of regions dependent on intensive stockfarming .
On the other hand , I do also admit that the common agricultural policy needs to be more environmentally friendly .
This is one of the key elements in the future success of the European model of agriculture .
In view of these ground rules , and the diversity and complexity of the production systems used in the European beef and veal industry , the Commission believes that one solution might be to allow subsidiarity through national envelopes .
It does seem , however , that this proposal is meeting with strong resistance here in Parliament - but not only here - and I shall therefore give further consideration to how this fact can be taken into account .
Although I cannot accept the amendments today , for the reasons I have mentioned , I can assure you that the Commission will show an open mind if progress is made in the debates on the form which compensation should take , especially if it becomes apparent that this will also simplify matters .
Various other amendments seek to further tighten the criteria for granting extensification aid .
Although I cannot formally accept the amendments concerned at this stage of the discussions , I should also like to point out that this issue needs to be examined further , and that I am favourably disposed towards improvements .
I shall now turn to the reform of the milk sector .
I know that it will be particularly difficult to reach a consensus here , because opinions still differ widely .
Let me start with the regulation on milk quotas .
I am pleased that Parliament supports the proposal to extend the arrangement for a further six years .
As regards the situation after 2006 , I agree that we should turn our attention to this well in advance of that date .
In this context , Amendment No 45 seems to me to be quite acceptable .
However , your proposals also include more extensive quota increases .
You have to be clear on one point : every percentage point increase in quotas requires an 8 % reduction in price and an additional budget of around EUR 1 billion .
On the other hand , I do not see the quota arrangement continuing , unless we accept a certain increase in quotas .
In political terms , this means that if you want the quota arrangement to continue , you also have to accept market reform .
As far as the allocation of additional quotas is concerned , we have based our proposal on priorities , set according to the support expressed by Parliament on various occasions .
I cannot , therefore , endorse the amendments which upset the delicate balance we wish to achieve with the additional quotas .
The proposal to apply sanctions when the reference quantities are exceeded , as a means of managing the market , may admittedly seem attractive at first sight , but in practice I see it causing us huge difficulties .
The problems we have , in particular in Germany , with so-called ' armchair milkers ' are something we have to overcome , and we should do so without departing too far from the main principles of the quota arrangement .
Nor should we disregard the possible legal consequences of some of the amendments and the demands for compensation which might ensue .
For that reason , I cannot support the amendments along those lines .
As regards transfers of quotas , what we are trying to do in our proposal is to extend and improve the options Member States have under the law , without restricting their room for manoeuvre in this field .
The wording therefore tries to preserve a balance between the call for subsidiarity , on the one hand , and maintaining the basic principles of the quota arrangement on the other .
In my view , most of the amendments tend to disturb this balance .
The wording is actually being revised in a number of areas at the moment , so that the aim of Amendment No 12 can , in any case , be achieved .
Allow me to emphasise once again that the current developments on the milk markets and our quota policy make me all the more determined to press on with the reform of this sector .
I conclude , from discussions in various forums , that our proposals present a balanced and reasonable answer to the challenges facing the milk sector .
I cannot , therefore , support the amendments advocating a greater or lesser degree of price reductions for milk as a starting-point for reform .
On the direct payments to compensate for price reductions , discussions have focused on three problem areas .
Firstly , the level of compensatory payments : here too , you should not look at the compensatory payments in isolation .
The Agenda 2000 package does in fact contain several proposals which will be of benefit to milk producers , either because they result in a fall in costs , or because they result in increased output .
Moreover , it is unlikely that the fall in institutional prices in the milk sector will be fully reflected in producer prices .
That is why I cannot support the amendments which advocate increasing the compensatory payments .
The second point concerns the methods by which compensatory payments are made .
By tying them to the milk quotas , we have tried to make the system both straightforward and fair .
Unfortunately , the various alternatives discussed in the report do not meet these criteria .
I thus find myself unable to comment on them here .
The third point is related to the system of national envelopes .
Our proposal tries to give the Member States scope to modulate the aid , so that they can take account of producers ' different circumstances .
At the same time , however , Member States are obliged to notify the Commission of their national provisions before they are enacted .
This should provide a guarantee against distortions of competition .
That is why I do not share the fears expressed in this regard .
But it will certainly be necessary - once the final shape of the beef and veal production model is clear - to make sure that the compensatory payments in the milk sector fit in with this model .
One final comment on the basic regulation : I do not believe that it is appropriate to include provisions in the basic regulation which are not directly related to the common organisation of the market in milk .
I therefore propose to accommodate the provisions on animal welfare , and the aspects of milk production which concern structural policy , the environment and quality , where they each belong .
I should now like to turn to arable crops .
Developments so far have shown that , although the 1992 reform was a major step in the right direction , it did not go far enough .
Continuing the present regime would mean either increased surpluses or set-aside far in excess of the 17.5 % .
Against that background , the reform is therefore necessary as a matter of urgency , I welcome all the changes which improve the Commission proposal , but not those which water it down .
First of all , several amendments seek to lessen the proposed price reductions , or even to dispense with them altogether .
I fear that a price reduction of less than 20 % would not allow us to achieve our objectives .
A limited price reduction would result in increased use of export refunds , and our exports of cereals , pigmeat and poultrymeat would thus be restricted to the maximum quantities set by the WTO , while the volume of international trade increased .
As regards set-aside , I am not ruling out the possibility that from time to time - because of unfavourable market conditions - certain areas of land will have to be taken out of production for a year .
However , this should be the exception , because the market should be eased primarily by exports and not by compulsory set-aside .
Should it be necessary to fall back on set-aside , then the Commission will make a proposal to the Council and Parliament to depart from the normal rate of 0 % .
All amendments relating to this are therefore unnecessary .
A further bone of contention is the area direct payments .
The changes you have proposed would simply perpetuate overcompensation , which came in for severe criticism , in particular from the Court of Auditors .
We should not forget that , in the future , although market prices will be subject to greater fluctuations , they will , on average , be above the guaranteed price .
Several amendments provide for additional payments for voluntary set-aside , in order to promote renewable raw materials .
I can certainly support any efforts to find new markets for agricultural products in industry .
However , I doubt whether modulated set-aside payments are the right answer to the problem .
I must also point out that subsidies introduced on new crops will not be covered by the so-called peace clause , and can easily be contested by the other WTO members .
We should not , therefore , accept changes of this kind .
It is a different case for the numerous amendments directed towards retaining the existing regime for oilseeds or maize .
This is not supporting new crops , but continuing or extending the existing regime .
In the case of maize , I should , however , like to emphasise two points .
First of all , evidence should be provided that special treatment for maize is still economically justified , when as it is , the Commission is proposing that a distinction should be drawn between irrigated and non-irrigated crops .
Moreover , singling out maize for special treatment would hugely complicate the aid system , and would further enhance the privileged treatment accorded to silage maize .
For oilseeds , it is true that keeping a specific premium would mean that the Blair House constraints would continue to apply , but in some cases , these are already - because of the massive sanctions - forcing the premiums actually paid out below the future target level .
For all these reasons , I cannot accept changes which shake the foundations of the proposal .
I can only comment on the main aspects of the changes here .
I must also tell you , however , that the Commission cannot accept changes aimed at radically redistributing aid , or gearing Community instruments - such as , for example , the calculation of yields for the intervention system - to the national specifications of particular Member States , and to the detriment of other Member States .
I should just like to add a few words on the quality of cereals .
Our produce must conform to the needs of the market and , in particular , to the requirements of importing countries , which means that we have to produce high-quality cereals .
This point is in part addressed in Amendment No 4 .
Although I cannot accept the form of wording chosen , I do share Parliament 's concerns in this regard .
The Commission will therefore consider ways and means of improving quality as part of the application of Agenda 2000 .
That brings me to the last report , on horizontal rules for direct support schemes .
The reform of the market organisations will mean that in the future most agricultural expenditure will be in the form of direct payments .
It therefore seems reasonable to align these direct payments with the general aims of the common agricultural policy .
That applies just as much to the social as to the environmental criteria .
The proposed ceiling on direct payments should help the social balance .
Should Member States wish to go further , they can introduce a system of modulation based on the number of employees .
Making it compulsory to apply this rule Community-wide would , however , cause serious problems , in particular with regard to carrying out checks and the definition of work units , which differs from Member State to Member State .
I reject the idea of extending capping or modulation to payments other than the direct payments within the market organisations , because payments made , say , under rural development , are pursuing specific goals and should be regarded , for example , as payment for work done to protect the environment , and not simply as income support .
Given the great ecological variety and number of different farming structures in the Community , it would , realistically , be very difficult to lay down environmental conditions for the receipt of direct payments at Community level .
The Member States should , however , be able to make direct payments conditional on compliance with environmental requirements .
As regards the appropriations saved by capping payments , it was proposed to hand this money over to the Member States .
Clearly , however , this would have corresponding consequences for the budget .
Consideration should be given to whether there are not other options - in addition to the agri-environmental schemes - for utilising the appropriations saved through modulation and cross-compliance in ways which would not affect competition .
Perhaps we could consider earmarking appropriations for the other accompanying measures , or for the compensatory supplement or the forestry measures .
They should not simply be used for income support or structural measures .
To sum up , let me stress once more that the Commission is not in the business of pushing through the Agenda for its own sake , as it were .
At the heart of the debate between the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council is much more the fact that , for the Commission , the agricultural part of the Agenda will be its position for the WTO negotiations to be reopened at the end of the year , which will result in further liberalisation of the agricultural markets .
Since everyone agrees that this will be the outcome , the Commission does not believe it can justify imposing several reforms on farmers shortly afterwards .
This may indeed be more convenient and perhaps it also wins more approval in certain quarters , but European agriculture - like other sectors of the economy - needs stable basic conditions .
The Agenda provides these , while also allowing European agriculture to have a share in the growth of the agriculture market .
A slimmed-down reform could do neither .
That is why it does not make sense .
Associated with this , I admit , is the fact that , in particular for demographic reasons - half of European farmers are over 55 - we are not seeking to prevent inevitable structural change , but to accept it and to shape it in an appropriate way .
I am therefore extremely grateful for the broad support which our proposals on rural development have found in this House .
I can assure you that I am open to all practical alternative proposals which share our objectives , as I have already suggested here in connection with the beef and veal sector and step-by-step reductions .
Applause
Madam President , I should like to ask the Commissioner if the Commission could give Parliament a list of its position on all the amendments which have been tabled to the Agenda 2000 proposals .
I ask this because we have to vote on 28 January .
Madam President , I think that it would be useful to have a list of this kind .
We will see that you have one for the vote on 28 January .
Madam President , I have a question for Commissioner Fischler : we have in fact just dealt with amendments which have not yet been put to the vote .
You have anticipated events somewhat .
The situation is rather difficult , as you yourself described just now .
That might mean , however , that after the vote we have to ask you once again whether you can accept the amendments .
If you do not accept them , there is a possibility that we will refer them back to committee , which is , of course , what we also did in the case of the structural measures under the second pillar .
Will you be present at that time to give us that information , if it proves to be necessary , so that we can decide whether to embark on this procedure ?
Yes sir , God willing , I will be there !
Laughter
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , following on from what you just said , Commissioner , may I also wish you a long political life , irrespective of the discussions which will - we hope - be coming to a head again tomorrow !
Ladies and gentlemen , in this parliamentary trilogue - and I should like to start on a positive note - we agree on one point : CAP reform is inevitable and necessary , and it is not only up for discussion because of imminent eastward enlargement .
This is an argument which , when advanced in various Member States , including my own , is always misleading .
The problems caused by overproduction and the fact that the agricultural policy has hitherto lacked an ecological dimension - and this is something we Social Democrats explicitly recognise , Commissioner - have actually been tackled successfully in the past , and here too , some success can be discerned .
Nevertheless , and we are all agreed on this , reform of the current agricultural policy , in the light of the many years of repeated and serious shortcomings - and this is once again our view - constitutes our primary duty to the people .
The common agricultural policy does work , but recently it has in particular started to lean more towards the social side , meaning that there is a danger that a common agricultural policy and its attendant costs will meet with less and less acceptance from the European public , and the European taxpayer .
This increasing lack of acceptance on the part of the general public cannot , however , be written off as academic debate , and thus as not having any repercussions .
An increasing number of jobs in rural areas will be at risk as a result of these difficulties , unless , in the interests of those concerned , an unvarnished and - if necessary - blunt analysis of the shortcomings is finally carried out .
We have indeed come a long way together in this respect .
Commissioner , some of your proposals are along the right lines , but these parts of the proposals are not , in our opinion , sufficiently thorough and remain basically symbolic .
You are somewhat lacking in courage here to lead the way and to show your teeth for once , so as to improve the lot of weaker farmers in Europe .
Some details are , we believe - and this also emerged from the contributions made here by our rapporteurs from the Group of the Party of European Socialists - in need of improvement : you made proposals in the milk sector , for example , which further undermine the position , in particular , of smaller and weaker farmers in less-favoured areas and which - I must also add this - are a hotbed for yet more bureaucracy to rear its ugly head .
In the Middle Ages , being sentenced to be quartered was one of the most severe punishments there was .
In bringing in the dairy cow premium , please do not reintroduce the quartering of premiums .
We have actually moved on since then , and by the way : why not just go outside and try to explain this to a perfectly normal European - no one will understand a word , not to put too fine a point on it !
Detailed criticism in this House should not , however , result in total rejection of reform , which would only become necessary with eastward enlargement .
We cannot accept that .
We Social Democrats strongly urge all the Members of this Parliament to make an active contribution to this analysis , to help to provide alternatives which fulfil our responsibilities in the field of social and environment policy , and not to make themselves dependent on pressure groups which refuse reform of any kind .
We have , unfortunately , had bad experiences in the various countries in this respect .
I should also like to make the following point clear : anyone acting and arguing in this way - including through the media - robs the weaker , and often enough those who have lost out as a result of this agricultural policy , robs those very people of their hope for a better future .
For us as Social Democrats , it is intolerable that only one third of the annual agriculture budget reaches active agricultural employers .
This state of affairs becomes nothing short of grotesque when 80 % of this aid is paid out to just 20 % of farmers , who are also the wealthiest ones .
The President of the European Court of Auditors was quite right when he recently once again described this - basically , although he expressed it in diplomatic terms - as a scandal .
Moreover , the Social Democrats refuse to support a policy in the future which still gives the same entitlement to aid to the country millionaire - who , by massive rationalisation , has almost made his well-situated holding into a one-man business , and by having the best access to world markets secures the best prices - as to a farmer in a less-favoured area , who often enough can only hold his own by going short himself .
Let me just make one point clear : we do not envy this global player in the agriculture industry his economic success .
But in our policy , which must be geared to social criteria , we take account of the fact that this role of global player is something which smaller and weaker farmers in many areas of Europe simply cannot assume .
European support policy , Mr President-in-Office - and I believe this to be one of the most important headlines to have emerged from recent discussions , including under the new presidency - European support policy in rural areas must , in critical aspects , become social policy .
We must also make this clear to the lobby groups .
Obviously , we also have to come up with an integrated policy for rural areas throughout Europe .
We must not only safeguard existing jobs , we must also create new jobs in rural areas and also , by means of better infrastructure policy , ensure - and this is all part of it - that in a rural area it is possible to travel , on a daily basis , to a job outside agriculture , so that the rural community remains viable .
If we translate this better approach - which is also perceptible in the Commission 's proposals on Agenda 2000 - into active policy , then I will have no further concerns about its being acceptable to the public .
One of the points close to the heart of European Social Democrats is that we make the amount of aid distributed to agricultural holdings dependent on the number of long-term jobs - on which social security contributions are payable - to be maintained and created in that holding , and of course this includes both employees and members of the family .
Reducing unemployment is one of the main themes of the Council presidency ; of course , this also affects rural areas and agriculture , and we want to work together against this severe employment crisis .
The Social Democrats in the European Parliament call this policy a policy for rural areas .
This is an integrated policy .
We have also had a wide-ranging discussion in our group .
We have had to reach compromises , and we are glad that we are also able to reach compromises of this kind in direct negotiations with the Council and the Commission .
I can , however , tell you a secret - it is no secret really - the secret of the democratic Members of this House : in the future , we do not want these negotiations to lead simply to our making a contribution ; as elected representatives of the European people , we also want to have the power of codecision in this final part of the European budget , because that is what we have been elected for , and we ask for your support in this respect too !
Madam President , I wish to begin by thanking Mr Garot for his report on beef .
As rapporteur he tried to mellow the severity of the proposals in the beef sector .
The beef regime is the most complicated of all the regimes , mainly because it has the longest lead time .
Beef farmers are still suffering from the aftermath of the BSE crisis in the UK , which has thrown the whole beef industry into a spiralling free fall , with consumption badly damaged .
For example , pig and poultry meat consumption at 23 million tonnes is now more than three times higher than beef consumption at 7.1 million tonnes per year .
This is only partly related to price .
When imports of beef into the EU are added to domestic production , the total is almost one million tonnes higher than the internal market uptake .
A major difficulty arises because of the constraints of the Blair House agreement on export volumes and the level of export refunds payable , together with the collapse of the Russian economy and the strategic downward price pressure which is applied by other third-country markets as they take advantage of the Russian problem .
On the one hand there are added pressures from the West , mainly from the US and the Cairns Group , as we prepare to start negotiations on the next WTO round and , on the other , there are pressures from the East to reduce the cost of enlargement .
It is essential that beef farmers are shown the maximum consideration .
The 10-month and 22-month premium for steers and the deseasonalisation premium must be kept in place .
The proposed slaughter premium , while it is a contentious issue , is not a good replacement system .
While it might be very simple to operate , it is not linked directly to land area and does not suit the highly desirable objectives of the Commission to promote environmentally friendly grass-based systems of production - which the Commissioner has just mentioned .
It is also vitally important that the market be stabilised with the continued availability of intervention , whenever that is necessary and until such times as balance is restored to the market , and that imports and production be reduced .
Finally , I wish to say to the Commission that I understand what it is trying to do but , until the beef market has time to recover from the recent crisis , it is absolutely necessary to ease the very severe proposals so that farmers can stay in business .
The Commission has a responsibility to find out why food prices to consumers are increasing steadily while farmers ' product prices continue to fall heavily .
Someone in the middle is profiteering .
We need to stop this so that consumers can benefit from the price reductions to farmers .
I know the Commissioner is aware of this .
Madam President , in the first instance I should say that despite all the interesting contributions we have had to this debate , the whole discussion of Agenda 2000 is somewhat unreal , because as Commissioner Fischler has rightly indicated , the changes in policy will mean that the policy costs more .
I keep hearing everywhere that there is less money available .
Is there really much point in talking about changes to agriculture policy when we do not know exactly what the future financial position is going be ?
It is high time Parliament was told .
What funding is available for agriculture ?
I should like to know how Commissioner Fischler sees his proposals in relation to the availability of funds .
The position of the Liberal Group in general is that the prospect of accession by the Eastern European countries makes it necessary to modify the agricultural policy .
We are in favour of price cuts for the principal products .
However , and above all because the world situation has changed significantly from two years ago , the general line is a smaller price cut than that envisaged by the Commission , together with full compensation for that reduction .
We favour equal treatment for the most important products , and in specific terms that means equal treatment for the price of cereal starch and potato starch .
We think that quotas have to remain , so we must have the milk quota , but also and above all a variable system of set-aside .
Lastly , a word or two on cofinancing , largely for the benefit of the German minister who is here with us .
The Liberal Group favours the cofinancing of income subsidies , not in order to improve the net payment position of certain countries , but primarily because this is unavoidable in the context of the accession of the Eastern European countries .
If we had to pay income supplements as well , that would bankrupt the common agricultural policy and we do not want that .
Yes to cofinancing , provided it can vary according to region , provided payment by the Member States is compulsory , and provided that Member States which do not do this are penalised by Brussels .
But policy must continue to be set in Brussels , and there must be equal opportunities for competition throughout the European Union , with no distortion of policy by national rules .
These , Madam President , are the broad lines of the Liberal Group 's position , and many speakers from my group will have points to add .
Commissioner , having heard your proposed reductions , I doubt that the famous European model of agriculture can continue because there is not just one model but two : the successful model and the poor model .

In addition , the famous and much-discussed option of multi-functionality will actually become a reality .
Many farmers will have to work in other sectors in order to earn a living .
It is interesting to see that the five reports were produced by Members who come from the rich areas of Europe and who naturally have shown evident impartiality for which I must congratulate them all .
I come from a poor area and this is reflected in my views .
I must also congratulate Mr Rehder for having made a left-wing speech in this sitting , which is something I do not normally expect from the social democrats , while the Commission generally talks only of the market , using highly capitalist rhetoric .
This is therefore somewhat of a change , hopefully in the right direction .
With regard to cofinancing , I must say that this is clearly a problem for the poor countries .
They will have difficulty in maintaining cohesion and in remaining within the concept of cohesion if the compulsory expenditure is not covered in full by the European budget .
As for milk and milk products , it is clear that a fairer allocation of quotas and the targeting of the more disadvantaged areas and young farmers is of the greatest importance to us .
This would correspond to the European model of agriculture .
With regard to cereals , we are clearly in agreement , but not on the amount by which the price of cereals must be lowered . However , we do agree , for example , that non-food production must be encouraged so that we can continue to be farmers .
We agree that the compulsory set-aside should be maintained and in this I agree with the opinion of Mr Mulder who suggests a figure of between 0 % and 17 % .
With regard to beef and veal , Mr Garot is an expert on the subject .
We agree almost totally with his proposals and we naturally consider that the modulation is important .
I also feel it is important to carefully note this modulation in the report by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
Just one thing needs to be decided : who is going to assess the modulation and who is going to judge the question of the work units on each holding ?
Madam President , Commissioner , I will simply make a few general comments on Agenda 2000 .
I should like to acknowledge the work done by Parliament 's various rapporteurs .
My group is always prepared to contribute right up until the last minute and I should point out that we believe that some of these reports are extremely valuable .
Commissioner , before beginning this debate , we must take two basic facts into consideration : firstly , the result of the votes in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development ; and secondly , the debate on the Cunha report .
Although it is true to say that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has not managed to produce clear reports on the reforms of the common organisations of the market , we must take account of the fact that the Commission 's proposals have been rejected by a wide majority .
The reasons for this situation are clearly outlined in the Cunha report and reflected in Parliament 's limited authority in agricultural matters .
In my view , if this House had greater powers in agricultural issues , as should be the case , the Commission would not have been able to put forward the current proposals once the Cunha report had been adopted .
The Commission 's proposals do nothing more than take the 1992 CAP reform one step further . Yet we are now unfortunately aware of the considerable consequences of that reform .
Extremely high numbers of holdings are disappearing and agricultural jobs are being destroyed . In addition , the current imbalances caused by the fact that aid is allocated to farms in accordance with their size are becoming more marked , as are the imbalances between continental and Mediterranean production .
As a result , these proposals would compound the social problems in rural areas .
The Commission 's proposals on the fundamental question of limiting and modulating direct aid are tentative and insufficient . They do not rectify the imbalances between farmers , so they will not help us prevent farms from disappearing .
Commissioner , with all due respect , it cannot be said that your proposal for modulation will protect social equilibrium .
The Commission should have been aware of the problems in presenting proposals for Agenda 2000 when it drew up a package of proposals on rural development that attempted to convey the idea that it would compensate for the negative effects of reforming the common organisations of the market .
The truth is that the proposals on rural development are insufficient , as Parliament has said .
At times they are more destructive than constructive and the whole fundamental and innovative aspect of agri-environmental aid , which my group supports , is partially distorted by financing regimes and proposals that , to some extent , conceal a partial renationalisation of the Community 's policy .
Having discussed the content , I should like to briefly mention the circumstances that gave rise to Agenda 2000 .
Although it is clear that it was an attempt to prepare for the enlargement of the European Union to include the CEECs , this aspect is only reflected in the dramatic reduction of the mechanisms for regulating the markets .
However , there is no indication of how the CAP would apply to the new members , nor of how it would be financed after 2006 .
Therefore , Commissioner , what will happen after 2006 ?
Will the dismantling of mechanisms regulating the market be taken even further ?
Will the common agricultural policy be renationalised once and for all ?
This all remains a mystery .
In truth , my group believes that the proposals in Agenda 2000 are not so much related to enlarging the European Union but rather to developing negotiations within the World Trade Organisation .
And if this is the case , Commissioner , we should like to know that recent legislative developments in the field of agriculture in the United States will not be ignored , and that the proposed mechanisms for decreasing protection for Community agriculture will not be taken too far .
Lastly , I would like to make a brief comment on the financial aspects of Agenda 2000 .
Initially , the proposals proved wanting due to the Commission 's game of juggling the flow of euros .
What is more , the effects of the crisis have not been sufficiently analysed and , in the agricultural guidelines , the margin needed to finance rural development will undoubtedly be reduced .
In this respect , the Commission 's lack of political vision has given rise to the suggestion in the context of the report on own resources that direct aid be cofinanced .
This is an abuse of the Commission 's powers , as well as a violation of Article 2 of the Treaty and of the principle of financial solidarity . It may also pave the way for the renationalisation of the CAP .
Commissioner , you yourself have acknowledged that the debate on cofinancing should not have been held in the context of agricultural regulations , but in other forums .
However , Commissioner , this severely distorted the debate we held in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I believe that the Commission has sent out clear signals with its messages .
Finally , I should like to end by once again acknowledging the difficult task the various rapporteurs had , and to point out that my group believes that some of this work was extremely important .
Madam President , Commissioner , our group believes that the approach being taken to reform is a step in the right direction .
We think , however , that in many areas the action being taken is too half-hearted .
It is a question of abolishing public intervention , and not just of reforming it .
A price reduction within the intervention regime is wrong ; instead , we need to set a deadline for being able to dispense with intervention altogether .
It is also wrong to cling to the instrument of export promotion ; instead , we need to indicate when we will finish with this .
I believe that both the policy of reducing prices and , in particular , the policy in the beef and veal sector , constitute a step towards abandoning intervention .
In 2006 , we - or however many of us are still around then - will discuss this , but a deadline should be given .
The same applies to issues connected with the milk sector .
We need to be told what will happen in 2006 .
Are we to expect quotas to be discontinued at that time ?
Holdings need to prepare for this .
This also affects the question of quota trading , and the value of the quota .
That concerns Germany in particular .
This should be clarified .
Of course , Mr Funke , that is also a request to the presidency .
Holdings need to have security .
A further criticism is nothing new to you , Mr Fischler .
We do not want old-style alignment with the world market .
We do not want a closed shop .
We want doings and dealings , but please , if so , then we also want farmers to compete on quality .
Anyone who wants to produce for the world market should go ahead and do so , and will then have to see that he adapts his trade to the other trading partners .
The state must stay out of this .
This should not be supported with public money .
Our next criticism is that you are still not concentrating enough on the internal market .
After eastward enlargement to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , we will - after China - be the largest internal market in the world .
Production should also be targeted at this market , and competition on quality should prevail .
We want the market , and we want to make it possible for producers and farmers to gear themselves to the market .
I now have to commend you - and our group has consistently supported this - for deciding to create a specific line for structures , appropriations for which will be diverted from the EAGGF Guarantee Section , albeit rather too cautiously .
More should be done here !
But the resistance to going down the road of quality-based policy is huge .
Perhaps your courage has deserted you .
But we can of course still appeal to it .
At the next round of reforms in 2006 , it is to be hoped that the measures which are at present only accompanying measures will become the focus of agriculture policy .
Allow me now to comment on the conduct being displayed here in Parliament .
Until the elections in Germany , you had the German Government 's blocking tactics to deal with .
Now we have the PPE Group 's blocking tactics to deal with .
All the groups ' coordinators on agriculture policy here had come to a unanimous agreement .
We wanted to reach a compromise .
We wanted to produce a line of argument , and this time we wanted to have a say in the reform ; we wanted to use this procedure to postpone the vote , to bring our influence to bear , and also to strengthen your position vis-à-vis the Council in many other areas .
Chaos was the only result .
I hope that in the vote in the plenary it will still be possible to reach a sensible consensus , so that we achieve a majority and are , after all , able to continue to exert this influence .
I should like to say to you , Mr Funke - as President-in-Office and as the German Agriculture Minister - that if Mr Borchert had still been here , the PPE Group would have gone along with this , so that there was support and a demand from Brussels ; Borchert could thus have claimed that Brussels had issued demands .
Now they are going down the opposite path , so that people can say that the new Agriculture Minister is selling off agriculture and reducing prices .
You should bear that in mind too .
It is the opposition which is at work here , and the present opposition still has to learn to adopt a constructive approach .
I hope that at the Council negotiations a way will be found to move employment and the environment to the centre of agriculture policy , and that in 2006 we shall be able to set this agricultural policy back on its feet once and for all .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , last year Parliament adopted Mr Cunha 's report on CAP reform within the framework of Agenda 2000 .
The ARE Group , in its proposal for a federal and united European Union , contributed substantially to this report and fully endorsed the proposed European agriculture model .
In the context of today 's debate we must enter into the spirit of the Cunha report and the measures adopted by Parliament , in particular regarding future CAP financing .
The cost of enlargement to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe requires a more ambitious reform and equitable budgetary revision .
For the second year in a row , the average agricultural income per holding has fallen in the Union .
What is more , after more than a year the Commission has still not responded to the political demands of the European Parliament .
I should like to remind you that although the 1992 reform led to a temporary improvement in markets , it did not remedy the main problems in the operation of the CAP .
For the European Union to be able to cope with the challenges of enlargement and renewed negotiations within the WTO , the CAP needs to be thoroughly reformed so as to provide us with a viable system for the next ten years .
Such reform must be jointly determined and controlled by Parliament .
Simply proposing a unilateral reduction of the intervention prices of agricultural products does not in itself constitute a policy .
Proposing to offset scheduled price reductions by giving farmers national direct aid that might quickly be called into question , would weaken agriculture , employment and the environment , and would once again increase public aid .
If there has been a consensus on one issue , that issue is the need for CAP reform .
What is more , the Commission 's motivation to carry out such a reform might indeed be questioned .
It doubtless needs amending , but with what aim in mind ?
The Commission , while claiming to uphold CAP principles , is in fact gearing its reform towards scrapping Community preference in favour of prior acceptance of a new opening to third-country imports , to the detriment of a thorough reform for the benefit of the Community .
This would lead , among other things , to an increased reduction in the number of holdings .
In this context , what new approaches can be taken in relation to these five reports , none of which was fully adopted in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development because of national disagreements , despite efforts by my fellow rapporteurs who should be congratulated for their work and tenacity .
In my opinion Mr Mulder 's report is an improvement on the Commission 's text , particularly as regards agri-environmental measures and technical management measures , but the problem of cofinancing remains to be solved .
As regards Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's report and the fact that the European Commission 's proposal was adopted unamended , I intend , in the spirit of the report , to endorse those amendments aimed at improving provisions relating to aid ceilings , for example on the basis of measures relating to employment and the environment .
As regards Mr Garot 's report , which I fully endorse , the compromise currently under discussion calling for a limited slaughter premium per animal category should be fully endorsed by the committee .
What is more , I shall support the rapporteur 's call to restore balance to cattle farmers ' low incomes in relation to other categories of farmers who receive more support .
In terms of milk , which is the only COM that was not amended in 1992 , a delicate balance has been created by introducing quotas .
This must be preserved by resisting overproduction and inflationary tendencies .
Like the rapporteur , I am in favour of balanced development in all regions and of equal income .
Additional quotas that do not distort the market must be granted firstly to young farmers and less-favoured areas such as mountainous regions by increasing aid for processing high-quality milk products .
Lastly , we must support Mr Fantuzzi 's position regarding more selective intervention in quality standards and the implementation of minimum import standards .
We cannot endorse a single rule for cereals and high-protein oleaginous crops when the European Union continues to suffer a shortage of proteins for animal food .
The Commission 's refusal to propose a specific regulation for high-protein oleaginous crops does not bode at all well for future WTO negotiations .
As regards set-aside , the base rate must remain low and continue to allow production to be controlled .
By the same token , voluntary set-aside for environmental reasons or non-food purposes must be reviewed .
To conclude , once again on behalf of the ARE Group , I call on the Commission to set this necessary and urgent CAP reform in motion by redistributing aid in a way which resolutely favours the rural economy , the environment and product quality , for the benefit of farmers , consumers and European taxpayers .
For many reasons , of which you will all be aware , the CAP in its present form is neither sustainable or permanent .
It is the Commission 's duty to bring CAP reform closer to Community preference by basing its bilateral agreements on equitable trade rules that are aimed at maintaining jobs in agriculture and a balanced number of holdings in line with the notion of rural development adopted by Parliament .
By moving away from the traditional policy of support through price control , the CAP is not aimed at sustainable and humanist agriculture .
Any future CAP must respect the right of Europeans to control their agriculture and their food .
This is the price the European Union will have to pay if it wants to be a leading player in globalisation .
Once again , to conclude I would say that it is not more or less aid that is needed , but better aid !
Madam President , I should firstly like to congratulate the rapporteurs for their hard work and diligence in preparing the reports .
Unfortunately the committee did not reward them as it should have done when they brought their reports to committee .
We are now embarking on a further reform of the common agricultural policy under Agenda 2000 .
There is no doubt that when we are finished it will cost more and will become more difficult to defend .
We have to strive to find a balance between the producer on one hand and the consumer on the other because the taxpayer is becoming less inclined to support the rural community .
The whole of agriculture across the European Union is facing a very difficult time financially .
Returns to the farmers are reducing year on year in spite of major support going into the industry .
We are in agreement with that support .
We have to ensure that the industry survives because the family farm is the backbone of the European Union .
We must ensure that young farmers will come into the industry , that their status within that industry will be a good one and that it will be an industry they want to be part of .
Milk is an important part of the industry .
Many farmers throughout Europe depend on it and we must ensure that we get a policy that is balanced and correct .
Milk quotas in principle should remain but should be changed in line with the suckler cow and sheep quotas .
In my area farmers who do not get out of their beds in the morning to milk cows can lease their quota and make more profit than the farmer who does and who has to pay money to lease the quota through another farmer .
There must be something wrong with a system that produces a situation like that .
It must be reformed and brought in line with other quota systems .
With regard to beef , in my area the industry has been totally shattered and something needs to be done to restore it .
I do not think private storage would be enough and we need to consider keeping the whole area of intervention .
I am against paying premiums on heifers and bulls and that is something the Commission should look at .
I do not think it will be a help because no extra money is available .
I cannot agree with the Commissioner when he speaks of the national envelope .
This will thoroughly change the common agricultural policy .
The national envelope will mean inequality between the nation states .
It means farmers in one area will have advantages over farmers in other areas .
We should not go down that road .
I would ask the Commissioner to take on board one other point .
If we are going to tie the hands of the producers as to how they produce food , we should not import food from non-EU countries which is not produced to the same high standards .
Do not tie farmers ' hands any more .
Give them fair and equal competition with the rest of the world .
Make sure that imports into the Union are of the same standards as the food we produce .
Madam President , Commissioner , the debate on the agricultural facet of Agenda 2000 and its 8 regulations would appear to provide us with a solid legislative structure and a whole range of attractive new elements .
It therefore seems strange for us to be talking about the national envelope , sustainable or global development , cofinancing , multifunctionality , eco-conditionality , subsidiarity , high quality and the challenges to be met when , in fact , everything can be summed up in just one word : continuity .
What we are dealing with here is a new CAP reform , an overhaul of the 1992 reform .
Nothing has changed : price reductions - 15 , 20 , 30 % - the Malthusian set-aside , rationing and austerity .
The situation is even worse than in 1992 because not everyone will receive compensation .
It is true that you have at least achieved something new tactically speaking in that you have succeeded in dividing the Committee on Agriculture .
Proof of this lies in its rejection of the five reports . Northern Europe , Britain , Germany , ultra-liberal Europe and the Europe of accountants have applied pressure which has led to submission , then despoliation and lastly , illusion .
Pressure , submission , despoliation , illusion : this is the downward spiral in which European farmers are trapped .
The first stage is pressure , which has three sources .
Firstly , there is budgetary pressure from Germany , which is keen to reduce its contribution ; I can understand this and , what is more , the French might be working along similar lines ; secondly , there is pressure from the cohesion countries , namely Spain , Portugal and Ireland , who all want to retain their share of the Structural Funds ; thirdly , there is pressure due to enlargement to the East , which will require additional Structural Funds .
Enlargement is adding pressure precisely because it dictates agricultural price reduction to the extent that once the ten Eastern countries have arrived , EAGGF expenditure and guaranteed prices will not increase .
Lastly , pressure is being exerted by the WTO 2000 negotiations , given that Agenda 2000 is the progeny of WTO 2000 .
This will lead to reductions in land aid and export aid and , as a consequence , will result in submission once again to the United States .
This submission is twofold : in the first place there is submission to Germany .
It is Germany that is pushing for cofinancing to reduce European agricultural credits and evidently to increase the Structural Funds for the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , which are of strategic interest to Germany .
Then there is submission to the United States , as in 1992 , something which appears to be genetic in the case of the European Commission .
Even before negotiations got under way , it began by aligning itself with the United States and not once did it call on them to engage in fair trade which would take into account animal welfare , environmental protection , social protection for farmers and food quality .
No , instead it aligned itself with the United States !
And this occurred despite the fact that the United States , exceptionally , is not hesitating to release 6 billion dollars of aid for farmers when they advised us to stop giving out aid .
The result is that instead of taking the offensive we give in to them .
A perfect example of this is the symbolic banana dossier .
Section 301 applies , or is threatened to apply , and we , moreover , do not even possess the same legislative arsenal .
A fitting expression to sum this up might be : when the going is good we give in , when the going is bad we still give in !
The consequence of this is the despoliation of farmers , which is my third point .
By way of example , under the Guarantee section of the EAGGF , ECU 500 million are to be redirected to cover pre-accession funds . In other words , farmers in the West will suffer in order to finance the accession of farmers from the East .
The last to arrive will be the first to receive financial aid .
This is undoubtedly a very Christian way of going about things : the worker who arrives at the eleventh hour earns more than the people who arrived before him .
Moreover , the financial resources under the Guarantee section of the EAGGF will be used to finance restructuring and the fishing fleets which until now have been financed by the FIFG .
This means that in order to help the victims of the fisheries policy , those who have suffered under the agricultural policy are forced to endure further hardship .
This is the unfortunate illusion the reform has created .
Commissioner , we are told that the aim of the reform is to achieve the European agriculture model as developed by Arlindo Cunha .
Indeed , we all agree with the family-run farms , food safety , environmental protection and sustainable development .
Nonetheless , in reality you are rigorously ensuring that the opposite of this occurs .
If the reduction in agricultural prices is not fully compensated the outcome is a fall in agricultural incomes , which forces the farmer to look for other forms of compensation to keep his head above water .
And where does he find such alternative sources ?
In the race for overproductivity .
This in fact means that farming will grow to the detriment of young farmers , family-run farms , country populations and the survival of the European model .
Costs will be reduced through the use of growth activators , cheap inputs and urban sludge , for example by using antibiotics , which results in a drop in quality , safety and environmental protection .
And lastly , it will lead to increased depopulation , desertification and insecurity , and a reduction in quality and food independence .
I grant you that if this scenario comes true you will have achieved the tour de force of turning the clock back to the 1960s where we counted for next to nothing on the world market .
So in this context , that of an agricultural Euro-Disney , you will not play the part of Mickey as that part is played by Mr Kantor .
Neither will you play Uncle Scrooge as Germany plays that part .
You will not be the director as Walt Disney is American .
All that is left to play is the part of Pluto , the dog that keeps guard over American interests .
But at least the character of Pluto is as nice as Sissi , which will mean that Austria will get out while the going is good .
All the same , it is a shame that you are forgetting and abandoning the great agricultural operas in favour of little operettas .
Madam President , today we are debating the proposals for reform of the various agricultural sectors without knowing the possible financial impact of such proposals and , above all , whether or not they fit in with the future financial perspective .
This prevents us from being able to realistically address the fundamental question of how to finance such proposals .
It is true that the Commission has come up with some optimistic hypotheses , according to which there will not be any problems .
However , as the Court of Auditors itself has established , the truth may be somewhat different . In particular , the Court of Auditors draws our attention to the question of whether or not we will be able to manage an agricultural policy where the new Member States , which will join from 2003 onwards , will not receive direct support .
Could we maintain such a course over time without tensions arising ?
The second general comment is that , although the Commission wishes to increase the competitiveness of European agriculture , it is essentially doing so through pricing instruments and by reducing guaranteed prices .
But this new direction lacks the necessary extra element as the Commission has not set up programmes promoting the high level of quality in European production .
Having established these premises , I should like to say that the path chosen by the Commission would seem to be the right one , in view of international growth forecasts , the increased competitiveness of European agriculture , the opening up to new Members and the future WTO negotiations .
But this should be an opportunity for using these proposals to correct any anomalies which still remain from the past .
For example , in the cereals sector , it would appear to be too optimistic to establish a zero rating for the compulsory set-aside of land .
There are some forecasts which say that we will still possibly need to reintroduce export refunds and will certainly to reintroduce legally binding measures .
Also , the possibility of adjusting the reference periods for regionalisation plans in some Member States should be raised , and even the idea of setting different production levels for maize in comparison to other cereals .
Moreover , it does not seem necessary to use surface area to even out aid for oilseed in relation to aid for other cereals .
As regards dairy produce , whilst the price guidelines are acceptable , there is no real justification for providing support according to the ' virtual cow ' system .
Prices drop in the same way for all livestock farmers and it is ridiculous that the way support is allocated benefits precisely those who are most competitive and , in contrast , penalises those who are working to make their farms become competitive .
A similar situation applies in the meat sector .
Reform should not further penalise those Member States who have less premium units - whether these be for suckler cows or male bovines - and these reforms are on top of the age limits established for obtaining premiums for sheep .
The system that allows the Member States to distribute some support according to national guidelines also seems to us to be raising more problems than it solves . And , as the Court of Auditors itself pointed out , the need to respect a minimum Community framework is still a vague provision in the proposals .
The proposed decentralisation could cause problems when it comes to precisely determining which costs can be subsidised with Community funds .
Finally , in relation to the horizontal regulation , although we are delighted that it tries to correct some imbalances within the CAP , we do however regret the fact that there is a danger that this will be unworkable .
Defining the environmental obligations to be fulfilled must remain in the hands of Community authorities . The same applies to setting the overall ceilings for receiving aid where permanent employment can and must be taken into account .
Despite their tentative nature , we support the Commission 's proposals , not so much for the savings that these proposals could make but more because we believe the indiscriminate granting of subsidies is unjustifiable . And as the Commission 's own information shows , we must remember that only 0.2 % of farmers receive aid worth over ECU 100 000 .
We believe that the Commission 's small effort outlined in these proposals should not be subject to so much criticism from the right .
Madam President , Mr Funke , we are almost namesakes ! The Fantuzzi report , on which I should like to say a few words , has indeed received a great deal of attention - at any rate , 93 amendments have been tabled by the groups , all of which are , of course , justified to a greater or lesser extent .
Mr Fantuzzi has done a good job - I have to grant him that - and he also always wears the nicest ties in Parliament , because they are made in Italy .
But he has advocated a 20 % reduction in prices , which I oppose , and I shall tell you why : 20 % is far too much for farmers to withstand .
We can only just , with gritted teeth , withstand a 10 % reduction , above all because only 50 % of this will be compensated .
In my region in Baden-Württemberg , there are not any of these holdings which Mr Rehder always claims are receiving millions .
Perhaps he should show them to me .
Not in my region in any case , where the situation is quite the opposite ; farmers have a hard time of it there , and it would be nothing short of insulting to reproach them constantly for being some of the rich ones .
If we want to be competitive on the world market , Mr Funke , then we also need to know whether farmers are able to withstand this .
I wonder , however , with whom we are supposed to compete .
With countries where wages are only 10 % of ours ?
Where the environment is being damaged ?
I reject conditions of competition of this kind .
That is also why we must reject price reductions of 20 % .
Price reductions alone are not the right way to help agriculture in the long term ; instead , we need more intelligent solutions , if we want to hold on to our farmers .
In practice , therefore , we also need to promote oil plants and protein crops - I fully agree with Mr Fantuzzi there - and we need to promote energy and industrial crops .
There is a shortage of these crops on the markets , and we need better support for them so that industry , and the processing plants we have now set up , can also source these products in the future .
If we promote these crops , they will enrich ecological diversity , while at the same time this would have the advantage of our not concentrating solely on cereals , cereals which we cannot sell as it is .
By constantly reducing prices , we should not turn our agricultural producers into whipping boys - it only serves to depress farmers .
After all , there is 1.5 pfennigs ' worth of wheat in a bread roll , and a bread roll costs 70 pfennigs .
After the reform it will probably cost 80 pfennigs , despite the Commissioner 's reducing the price of wheat by 20 % .
I cannot explain that to anyone , Mr Fischler .
Can you ?
Please let me have the recipe , and then I can go to the people and say that this is as it should be .
Two thirds of EU governments are led by Social Democrats , and they are unable to accept Mr Rehder 's proposals .
Why then , Mr Funke , are the two thirds not saying : Mr Rehder is right , we will adopt this agricultural policy ?
I would take advantage of his claim that 20 % of farmers receive 80 % of the aid , but I am not even sure if he really knows what he is talking about .
In the future I should like information which is a little more specific , because that is a sound bite which is doing the rounds and which disavows agriculture ...
Heckling
... perhaps in many other regions too : I have also seen holdings of this kind in Andalusia , Mr Colino .
It does not irritate us when the information is specific , but it should be specific , and not delivered as a sound bite ; otherwise we will also have to investigate in Lower Saxony , to see whether all is well there , that is quite clear .
We reject sound bites , Mr Funke - I agree with you there - and instead we should call a spade a spade .
Help us out of our plight , and afterwards I will shake your hand again , because having the name Funke is not such a bad thing after all , is it ?
Mr Rehder feels that he has been challenged .
I hope that you only want to ask a question , since we are not going to embark on a debate amongst ourselves .
Madam President , I should just like to point out that this is not something which Mr Rehder - who may have been underestimated - has made up .
I invite you to go and see the President of the European Court of Auditors ; he can show you the figures .
The fact is that you cannot simply denounce things which do not suit you .
That is a remedy which inflicts further damage on small farmers .
Mr Friedmann will explain it to you quite calmly , even if you still do not believe Mr Rehder , whom you have surely underestimated .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , the Luxembourg summit called for agricultural production to be able to continue in all regions of the Union , including wherever there were special problems .
The realisation of this expression of political will is the responsibility of the Council of Ministers , for which Parliament drafts an opinion .
Agricultural conditions vary widely in the Union .
In the south it is too hot and dry , while in the north it is the opposite : too little warmth , which reduces crop yield and raises building and heating costs .
The Union 's permanent adverse natural conditions , both in the southern and northern regions , must definitely be taken into consideration when decisions are being made .
Maize does not grow in all Member States .
Aid for the storage of maize should therefore extend to silage for those producers of milk and beef who cannot farm maize because of the prevailing natural conditions .
Otherwise aid for maize will distort competition in the single market .
Parliament has already approved aid for silage in Mr Cunha 's report .
In northern regions crop farming needs increased subsidies owing to local conditions .
Grain too has to be dried .
The harsh experience of the war has taught the nations of Europe the vital importance of their own food production .
In Finland , the Union 's northernmost Member State , food production is possible thanks to the Gulf Stream .
The reductions in producer prices in Agenda 2000 are too great for producers in the EU 's most problematic regions , as farmers there will not even be able to recover their production costs at current market prices .
This would lead to virtual farming .
The crises of the global economy in Asia , Russia and South America have forced world market food prices down .
The USA also had to grant aid to its producers to the tune of USD 8 billion , so that farmers would not go bankrupt .
For that reason the proposed reductions in producer prices in Agenda 2000 should be halved and farmers should be fully compensated for those reductions , so as not to put too great a squeeze on European producers .
The changes in the global economy have to be taken seriously , and we should not be making it difficult for farmers to cope in the face of major challenges .
I have a question for the President-in-Office : how do you intend to make sure that the considerable producer price reductions in Agenda 2000 do not lead to a wave of bankruptcies in Europe ?
Finally , I would like to remind everyone that food is a lot more than just a product with a price on it .
It is European culture at its best and high quality food always has its own price .
Madam President , the common agricultural policy was to remain central to the medium- and long-term planning of European agriculture .
Despite its limitations it has stood the test of time .
But having said that , we must also provide for the unpredictable .
The present difficulties experienced by farmers are serious .
They are not the result of the 1992 reform but due to unpredictable circumstances which include BSE , the collapse of the Russian economy and , in some cases , the renationalisation of food markets .
In my view we are not responding to these short-term difficulties .
Many farmers may not survive to benefit from the long-term measures of the proposed reform which is the subject of Agenda 2000 and this debate .
I urge the Commission to look seriously and urgently at these more immediate problems .
Whatever the cost , it is not in the interests of the European Union that the family farms which are central to the European agricultural model are fast becoming marginalised .
We have a duty to respond to their plight .
In my view they are not crying ' wolf ' .
Perhaps their difficulties serve the hidden agenda of some who do not have to courage to say openly that family farms do not have a future in the Europe of a new millennium .
I propose today that some financial reserve be provided within the agricultural budget to address such emergency eventualities when they occur .
With improving job opportunities outside agriculture I am worried about the continuity of family farming .
I feel young people will not take up farming as a profession .
If we ignore this fact we are burying our heads in the sand .
Down the road this Parliament will find itself having to address the serious problem of the human resources of agriculture necessary for the continuity of the agricultural sector .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , everyone is engaging in an analysis of the exceptional conditions which appear to have reduced today 's debate to an impasse .
In fact , although the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development clearly rejected the Commission 's proposals , it has been unable to come up with any coherent alternatives in spite of the quality of the reports presented .
There are at least three reasons for this .
The first is the lack of precision and the weakness of the Commission 's projections .
Today it appears clear that these projections were seriously affected by the financial crisis , the underestimation of the actual cost of the reform and prior acceptance of American demands in renegotiating the WTO agreements .
The second reason for this impasse is the financial constraints imposed by the Stability Pact with the introduction of the euro .
The third and most fundamental reason is the decision to base this reform on the need for capital returns through a reduction in agricultural prices , and not on the needs of producers , consumers or society .
The Commission can firstly be reproached for having retreated into the triple across-the-board logic of reducing prices , dismantling market management instruments and reducing European financial intervention .
It can also be reproached for wanting to impose all its ideas despite their unpopularity .
In this way , following the Vienna Summit , President Santer labelled the positions adopted by Heads of State and Government as being ' purely tactical ' and went on to state that the final agreement would be based on the Commission 's proposals .
To think in these terms amounts to a blatant refusal to acknowledge the widening gap between the aspirations of farmers and citizens of the Union for more jobs , higher incomes and a better quality of life , and the Commission 's ultra-liberal ambitions .
If those countries who are experiencing the gradual exodus of agricultural workers , the growing imbalance between producers , produce and land , and the uncertainties surrounding food safety , had the opportunity - as we will tomorrow - to censure such a policy , they would do so .
In this context , it is incumbent on both Parliament and the Council to develop an alternative policy .
We have the means to do so .
Twice Parliament has called for a new approach to the CAP , an approach based on employment , balanced land use , the Community preference and a rejection of cofinancing .
I also think that the Committee on Agriculture 's vote on the various reports has revealed an overall desire to reject alignment with world prices , to protect agricultural incomes , to pay for all the social benefits agriculture offers in terms of employment , land development and the environment , to limit and modulate public aid by distributing it more fairly and to maintain producers ' organisations and market management instruments by improving them .
This constructive and alternative approach can once again be demonstrated either in preparation for Parliament 's vote on 28 January or by referring the reports back to committee , which would give the Commission a strong hint that it needs to formulate other proposals .
As regards the Council , the presidency yesterday and today reaffirmed its good intentions to develop a more competitive and ecological form of agriculture , protect farmers ' interests and advance a more effective employment policy .
However , by enclosing all of these proposals in the straitjacket of budgetary austerity and reduced agricultural expenditure , would the Council be able to resolve current contradictions in European integration ?
Might it not worsen the economic and social recession that threatens us at present , given that the solution would appear to lie in increasing the Union 's financial resources from the profits generated by financial activity ?
This would appear all the more essential as agriculture and food production are faced with the human and global challenges of the next millennia .
Parliament focused its report on the need to respond to the challenges facing humanity in terms of food , energy , the environment , water supply and sustainable development .
The decisions this House will make on 28 January must remain faithful to these aims .
Madam President , the Agenda 2000 package of reforms provides a major challenge to Europe 's decision-makers and I do not underestimate that in any way .
The need to achieve an early agreement on the package must be balanced with the importance of ensuring that a fair and a reasonable set of proposals is seen to be adopted .
The common agricultural policy clearly must be examined and adjusted in an attempt to strike a balance between on the one hand providing proper support to our food production industry , and on the other hand ensuring that good value is achieved for the expenditure of public funds .
Adequate and transparent systems must of course be in place to ensure that financial controls meet the high standards that we are entitled to expect .
The diversity of circumstances across the European Union in the agricultural sectors clearly requires due consideration in the new common agricultural policy , which must be tailored to properly fulfil its purpose .
My home area of Europe - the north-east of Scotland - is sometimes called the larder of Scotland , containing as it does some of the best examples of high-quality agricultural , and indeed fisheries , production in Europe .
Aberdeen Angus beef , cereals , oilseed , sheep , poultry , soft fruit and potatoes , to name but a few , are all produced in an industry which is economically crucial to Scotland , with an output of £ 2 billion and one in ten of all Scottish jobs being dependent on it , directly or indirectly .
Our farmers are all aware and accept that common agricultural policy reform is needed , but the nature of the final report proposals should reflect the needs of the industry in Scotland , for example , in the definition of farm unit size .
Scotland , politically , is in a disadvantaged position at this moment , with our national interests being represented from London .
I hope that , as the reform package is finalised , the UK Government will , this time , properly articulate the case of Scotland 's agricultural industry and that the Commissioner will take due note of any direct representations received from Scotland .
Our farmers , as well as our consumers and our taxpayers , are entitled to expect that reforms will bring about a genuine improvement in any new package and that specific changes , once agreed , can be carefully phased in so that our farmers can adjust to further changes in a properly managed way .
The farmers that I know are hardworking people , many in small family businesses who are aware of , and accept fully , their responsibilities to the consumer , to the environment and to the rural economy .
Madam President , Commissioner , let us work towards a common agricultural policy which will encourage , not further discourage , their efforts to continue to survive .
Madam President , Commissioner , in September 1997 when I drew up the opinions of the Committee on Agriculture on the Agenda 2000 Communication and on the Structural Fund reform , especially concerning Objective 2 , I highlighted the financial problems of the CAP as well as the dramatic consequences that the initial proposals put forward by the Commission would have on European farmers ' incomes .
For more than a year these problems have been hidden to a certain extent , both by the Commission and by a great many professional agricultural associations who at the time had not fully comprehended the situation .
Today the problems are building up , from the partial disappearance of the green ECU to the fall in both farmers ' incomes and the number of farmers - it must be added , contrary to the objectives of land-use planning - and so on .
So , in order to solve this financial equation we no longer talk only in terms of reduced prices for agricultural products , with of course the promise of full or partial compensation through aid that will inevitably be called into question within the framework of future WTO negotiations .
Given that this will not be enough to help budgetary balance , the needs of enlargement and many other problems , some are advocating CAP cofinancing .
This would mean an artificial increase in the European budget which would be entirely inconsistent with the Edinburgh agreements and the Treaties .
As Mr Fantuzzi mentioned earlier , all of this seems worthy of a motion of censure even if a good financing plan that was clear , precise and took into account the development of expenditure at current or constant prices had been able to clarify our debates and prevent all the rapporteur 's proposals from unfortunately receiving such a pounding .
The CAP , I should like to stress , is the only genuine common policy we have and I was surprised to note today that the defenders of a federal Europe are prepared to sacrifice it in favour of other interests .
No one would deny that the CAP in its present form is in need of reform , Commissioner , which goes to show that the original version was no good or at least was not sufficiently well adjusted to agricultural development and the needs of society .
We have had the problem of BSE to contend with and very shortly the GMO problem will lead to understandable consumer concerns over food safety .
If there was one reform needed it would evidently be needed in this area , but the Commission 's proposals - your proposals , Commissioner - for price reductions force farmers to seek compensation for this steady fall in their income through ever more intensive production methods by enlarging their buildings , finding ways to reduce their input costs and by intensifying production to the detriment of environmental issues .
For some this will mean fertilisation using urban sludge with all the risks associated with it .
For others it will mean using growth activators and using less costly animal feed .
Finally , Madam President , when these proposals for CAP reform are discussed with other proposals on animal welfare and the responsibilities of farmers who produce agricultural foodstuffs , we note that European farmers are caught up in a downward spiral , the inevitable consequence of which will be to speed up rural depopulation .
Is this really your aim ?
Is this really our aim ?
I do not think so , but the action we are taking is unfortunately leading us in this direction .
Madam President , as is well known , the CAP is based on three principles : the unified market , Community preference and financial solidarity .
Regrettably , these principles are increasingly being called into question .
In particular , the principle of Community preference is under attack from the large multinational food companies , which see it as standing in the way of their attempts basically to destroy Europe 's small farms .
As far as financial solidarity is concerned , the Member States ' main concern seems to be to assess the costs and benefits arising for each of them from the implementation of the CAP .
We are aware that resources must be earmarked under the Community budget to finance employment and infrastructure measures but , in our view , if agriculture is sacrificed to this end , Europe will be taking a step backwards in a sector which is crucial to international competition .
I should therefore like to know what guarantees are to be given for the future of farmers in Padania and Europe , so as to protect their incomes and their technical and human resources .
Madam President , I welcome the work carried out by our rapporteurs .
It remains to be seen what you will make of it , Commissioner , at a time when the Commission is being particularly criticised .
In my opinion , the best proof of our will and ability to work towards improving human society in Europe and throughout the world would involve shrewdly deciding our future and making social choices .
But we need to have the means to be able to do this , and instead of limiting ourselves in budgetary terms and thus restricting our political activities in a way that is unsatisfactory , we need to ensure that we have sufficient financial resources to progress .
Since the beginning , the common agricultural policy was the motor behind the creation of what was first the common market and then the European Community and now the European Union , pending the advent of the European State .
We are in a state of political penury .
European decision-makers are all too often in the pay of the United States which has forced its ideas , its operation and production methods on us to the detriment particularly of European farmers - 40 million jobs in agriculture have been lost since 1960 - and the cultural dimension of European agriculture .
The United States , having imposed their antisocial rules on us by means of the GATT , now want to impose their hormones on us until such a time when they can unleash their unfettered genetic engineering in Europe .
These practices , which mean a couple of extra dollars in the pockets of genetic engineers but rarely boost farmers ' incomes , undermine consumer confidence in the food products that we place at their disposal .
There is a huge distance between the debate on quality and the measures actually taken to implement this quality .
Budgetary phobia , added to the bad handling of what has been termed the mad cow crisis , has considerably undermined my confidence in the Commission , in its ability to shrewdly predict the future - and not only the future of European farmers - and its overall approach to what is generically referred to as rural society , its role and its future , without forgetting the Community preference provided for in the Treaty of Rome .
Commissioner , you are being asked , as we indeed are , to reorganise European agriculture through Agenda 2000 with farmers of whom over 60 % are over 50 years old .
And , as you mentioned earlier , as much as possible will be achieved with these people , but there appears no desire to take measures to make the farming profession and that of rural and environmental manager more attractive to young people .
Nothing specific has been proposed , not even a credible 20-year draft outlining what will be done for farmers about to retire or for the young people who might begin their careers .
I suggest you do a little test , Commissioner , if you have enough time , among the people in your office to see what conditions would be necessary to entice civil servants away from their jobs to take over or start a farm somewhere in either Northern or Southern Europe .
I am sure that if we were to create conditions based on the answers given we would see young people flocking to work in farming .
Agenda 2000 also requires us to provide for enlargement to include countries of the East .
I should like to say straight away that I am in favour of this enlargement taking place .
But if it is stated that there will be no increase in the budget and that the same envelope will be kept for agriculture and for the Structural Funds , this will essentially boil down to Southern Europe paying for enlargement to the East .
In other words it is the poor in the South who will be paying for their poor Eastern counterparts .
This situation is unacceptable , Commissioner .
I should like to conclude by reminding you that our common enemy , politically speaking of course , is the Council .
Commissioner , in your position regarding the resolutions adopted by Parliament , you will need to remember this .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , for us the Agenda is a package .
At the outset , I will say quite deliberately that in the end , it is the results which will count and not only whether we keep to the timetable .
For me , the Commission 's proposals on agriculture go too far .
I think that the votes in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development have made it clear that there will be no majority in this House in favour of the Commission proposals , as they currently stand .
After all , if we look at America , we find that two years after the farm bill came into force , discussions on parts of it have already been reopened .
Let us not make the strategic mistake of already wanting , as it were , to negotiate away some of the negotiating points which we need for the forthcoming WTO round .
I tell you quite clearly , Commissioner Fischler , that anyone who works in this way has never worked with cattle .
Mr President-in-Office , perhaps we should issue a joint statement to the German and European public , saying : we do not have any problem , in terms of both sides making the necessary adjustments , with fully integrating the agricultural economies of the applicant countries by 2004 , provided that the basic freedoms of the internal market - free movement of people , capital , services and goods - are established at the same time . There could then at long last be a fair debate in this House about the other difficulties and stumbling-blocks connected with the agricultural policy .
On the financial side , I should like to say that obviously the issue of fair contributions and a balanced budget in terms of both income and expenditure forms part of the Agenda debate .
The question of cofinancing also belongs in this negotiating package .
As you know , Parliament will be giving its definitive opinion on this in February .
I must of course also confess , Mr President-in-Office , that the reason why the question of cofinancing is so controversial with German farmers and the subject of such contentious debate is that they might see themselves being faced with considerable problems - in view of the transposition of the accompanying measures and the reluctance of several Länder to cofinance them - if we were to choose this approach .
As you know , even Lower Saxony was not exactly at the top of the list for transposing the accompanying measures in Germany .
These days , of course , everyone has their experts .
Commissioner Fischler , I should like to say very clearly that the experts recently drafted in by the Commission , whom you specifically referred to as testifying for the Commission proposals , produced reports which are based on very foolhardy theories .
This is because if you are going to say that price reductions will benefit consumers , that unions and employers will take account of these price reductions and that this will affect prices accordingly , then the price of pigmeat in recent months ought to have been substantially lower .
When , during this presidency , we are debating and arguing about employment policy , we should not forget that these experts are assuming that there will be a substantial decline in the number of those employed in agriculture , if these proposals go through as they stand .
That is another reason why they need to be fundamentally amended .
Madam President , there is widespread agreement in Parliament that we should have agricultural reform .
The question is whether we can agree on a reform which has the right balance , so that the agricultural sector does not end up carrying the heaviest load , and so that the burden in connection with the reform which will take place because of enlargement and the WTO negotiations is evenly distributed .
I have a few comments to make .
The first concerns the Fantuzzi report on cereals .
I think the reduction in the price of cereals proposed by the Commission is too great , because inadequate compensation is being provided .
I would like to bring the attention of both the President-in-Office and the Commissioner to the fact that cereals are the most important element in controlling agricultural production .
If the price of cereals is low , this will result in over-production of animal products in the form of beef and veal , pigmeat , eggs and poultry , because the farmers will want to have compensation and everyone will exploit the low price of cereals .
I therefore think the price of cereals is set too low and the Commission is not sufficiently interested in using set-aside .
The set-aside scheme is the best tool for regulating the production of cereals .
The USA has shown this for many years .
If the production of cereals is too high , land is put into storage .
That is cheaper than putting cereals into storage .
Finally , Commissioner , a comment on the calculation showing that EUR 3-4 billion is being saved on the budget and that consumers are saving EUR 10-15 billion .
This means that agriculture will transfer EUR 15 billion to consumers and agriculture will lose out in the reform , because compensation will not be available through the market , and that is no solution for supplying the market with agricultural produce .
I think there is a long way to go before we can reach agreement on agricultural reform , but I hope we can succeed .
I agree that it should happen before March , and we will do our best .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , 1999 will be a decisive year for the future of European agriculture .
At the Vienna European Council in December a number of disagreements remained and some Member States wanted to reduce their contribution to the Union budget . This seriously called into question the financial solidarity between Member States and overall European unity .
I should like to remind you and , moreover , stress that agriculture is the only sector to have a common policy on which European integration has hinged for the past four decades .
In Agenda 2000 the Commission proposed a reduction in support prices , an increase in direct aid to producers , cofinancing by Member States , and so on , but it remained frustratingly silent about the increase in the production of agricultural products for non-food purposes , which is something I regret deeply .
I remain absolutely convinced that the European Union needs to create a development strategy for non-food agricultural products and that the Commission needs to include a specific section on such products in the CAP reform .
In fact , these non-food agricultural products are able to meet a large number of needs in terms of agriculture and rural development . For example they can meet needs relating to food production control , diversification and employment , and they can help maintain a rural bias in industrial spheres in the production of new renewable materials and meet general interest needs regarding the protection of the biosphere .
All of these elements will very positively help define a specific European agriculture model .
This is why , on behalf of the UPE Group , I have tabled three amendments along these lines , in the context of the Graefe zu Baringdorf report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the proposed CAP reforms presented by the Commission are no more than an attempt to continue the 1992 reform .
The effects of this are well-known and included discrimination between farmers , regions and products . In addition , its consequences , particularly for my country have become clear in recent years and include reducing the number of holdings and jobs , abandoning and emptying the countryside and ruining family-based agriculture .
The proposals must therefore be changed by radically altering their orientation .
The support for large farmers and holdings must be drastically limited and the aid to family-based agriculture and small and medium-sized holdings must be significantly increased through positive and genuine modulation .
Furthermore , sufficient resources must be provided to finance a common policy which aims to include new countries struggling with the fall in prices and the American requirements in terms of the next WTO round of talks .
Finally , it must be reaffirmed here and now that the recent cofinancing proposal , that is , the recent proposed renationalisation of the costs , and only the costs , of the CAP , is not acceptable , neither in the light of solidarity nor on the basis of the Treaties .
The recent rejection of the proposed regulations in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is a sign which must be fully respected by the Commission and particularly by the Council .
Madam President , one of the intentions of CAP reform is to reduce support prices to bring them into line with the world market , in order to comply with international agreements .
The compensatory payments to farmers do not , however , cover the resulting loss of income , and thus endanger the farming community .
The Commission proposals are geared towards the world market .
The European farming industry is , however , very diverse and structured in smaller units than is the case in the United States , for example ; it is hard to make a direct comparison .
Even US experts warned that full-blown liberalisation would threaten international agricultural commodities markets with the same fate as that of US farmers - a loss of income of 16 % - and advocated market stabilisation measures .
Quantity management must continue to form part of the market organisations .
We need farmers who maintain the ecological balance and care for the countryside .
Linking compensatory payments to environmental requirements is desirable and important , but for this to be fair , it has to be done on the basis of uniform European environmental standards .
This reform package would continue to sound the death knell for farmers .
It is not acceptable in its present form .
Thank you , Mrs Raschhofer .
The debate is now adjourned ; it will be resumed this afternoon at 3 p.m.
VOTES
Mr President , the text of the Treaty is perfectly clear .
We have expressed our intention to reject the Council 's common position and it must now call a meeting of the Conciliation Committee to see if it can reach some sort of agreement regarding the amendments .
If this is not done , if the Council refuses , it is likely that when discussions have ended , the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media will put forward a motion rejecting the common position .
But we are still hopeful of finally arranging a meeting with the Council so that we can work together on amendments which will enable the Council and Parliament to agree on a solution which both respects Parliament 's prerogatives and guarantees the cultural quality of the cities chosen in 2005 and beyond .
I thank the rapporteur Mr Monfils for his explanation .
We will await the Council 's reaction and determine our position accordingly .
Mr President , you took the vote incredibly quickly , which I welcome , but I did not have a chance to speak .
I would like to draw the attention of the House to the fact that there is an error in the German version of Amendment No 18 on Article 5 which needs to be corrected .
In Article 5 ( 1 ) it says ' sorgen dafür ' and in Article 5 ( 2 ) it says ' stellen sicher ' .
In legal terms there is a considerable difference between the two .
It should say ' stellen sicher ' .
Mr Ullmann , we will look into that without any difficulty .
In linguistic terms it can be corrected .
In any event , the House has approved your report by a large majority , and that is why I congratulated you .
Mr President , I should like to clarify two points in relation to this report .
Firstly , we need to take into consideration in paragraph 2 of the resolution the fact that Portugal - and this is something I welcome - has ratified ILO Convention 138 .
The reference to Portugal in paragraph 2 should therefore be withdrawn .
Secondly , I agree with Mr Kittelmann 's Amendment No 9 as a replacement for paragraph 19 .
Mr Sainjon , thank you for your explanations .
Of course , there is no question about the first point ; it is a technical correction of a factual matter , and I need not therefore seek Parliament 's approval .
I have taken note of the second point .
Mr President , I am pleased to note the statement made by Mr Sainjon about the need to remove the incorrect reference to Portugal in paragraph 2 of this motion for a resolution .
However , I would like to ask the Bureau what procedure we can use to remove this reference .
Is it the rapporteur who makes the correction or do we have a separate vote to remove these two words from paragraph 2 ?
Mr Barros Moura , what I said was precisely that we do not need a vote , it is a technical correction of a factual matter and now that the rapporteur has pointed it out , the reference to Portugal can be deleted without further ado .
On Amendment No 9
Mr President , I would like Mr Sainjon to explain how he intends to proceed with paragraph 21 if he supports Amendment No 9 by the PPE Group .

As I pointed out , Mrs Mann , I accept Amendment No 9 tabled by Mr Kittelmann as a replacement for paragraph 19 , on the understanding that the rest of the resolution , namely paragraphs 20 , 21 and 22 , remains unchanged .
Mr President , I can confirm that approval of the Kittelmann amendment means for us the approval of paragraphs 20 , 21 and 22 .
I must add that for us the voluntary nature of the code de conduite is a crucial point .
Only if this is included in our text can we approve it fully .
Mr President , as regards paragraph 19 , I should like to withdraw the Liberal Group 's amendment in favour of Amendment No 9 by the PPE Group on condition that a phrase is added , namely ' for boys and girls ' after the words ' career opportunities ' .
I have discussed this with the PPE Group , and therefore ask for it to be approved .
We are withdrawing Amendment No 4 in favour of Amendment No 9 , provided the words ' for boys and girls ' are added to Amendment No 9 .
Parliament adopted the resolution
We think there is good reason to consider carefully our stance on the committee 's proposal to reject the common position adopted by the Council .
We believe that the European Capital of Culture event is of great benefit to the Community .
For the sake of the event 's future , it is essential that there should be a fair and effective system for deciding which cities should host the event and when .
We feel that the compromise proposal of an automatic rota system with a guidance panel with diminished powers , as put forward by the Council , has some definite disadvantages .
On the one hand , the proposal would transfer the emphasis from the cities - which are supposed to be the focus of the event - to countries , and on the other , the Council procedure undermines the position of the European Parliament .
In this respect , the committee 's criticism - in line with previous decisions - is correct .
We would nevertheless stress the need to find a solution that is acceptable to all Member States , in order to avoid future arguments over the selection of cities and the designation of years .
Moreover , the advantage of the Council 's proposal is that an element of predictability would be introduced which would make planning and follow-up activities easier for the city concerned .
Our position on this issue depends partly on whether or not we think a compromise will improve the way in which nominations for the European Capital of Culture event are handled , and partly on whether a viable solution to the problem can be found which avoids argument in the future .
Mr President , I abstained from the vote on the Brok report , not because I do not agree with most of his proposals ; of course I do !
Indeed , this week I am more strongly than ever in favour of Parliament having a stronger influence over the Commission .
We must ensure that Parliament is no longer the Commission 's slave but that instead the Commission - which must of course also be strong , but supported by Parliament - is monitored by a strong Parliament .
This week we have seen the disaster that has occurred as a result of this not being the case hitherto .
I am in favour of the strictest measures in the current crisis , perhaps going as far as a motion of censure .
But there is one thing that I do not agree with : the proposal to have an elected President of the European Commission .
I could perhaps have accepted this in the Social Democrats ' more moderate version but not in the form in which it has now been adopted , because in my opinion an election of this kind is not appropriate for a multinational structure such as the EU and could easily lead to national or nationality-related problems .
In my view , the Commission and the Commission President must be determined by Parliament , but I do not believe in this kind of EU-wide presidential election .
The report is a very relevant one as regards the changes in the appointment of the President of the Commission introduced by the Amsterdam Treaty .
However , we do not entirely agree with the ideas contained in paragraphs I ( 2 ) , I ( 3 ) and I ( 4 ) . We think the implications of these requirements are too far-reaching and specific .
Instead , we support the amendments to the above paragraphs tabled by the PSE Group . In our view , they allow the governments of the Member States more room for political manoeuvre , since they make the more modest assertion that it would be interesting if , in future , the political movements were to nominate candidates for the presidency of the Commission .
Amendment No 2 is also more circumspect , pointing out that it would be wise for Member States ' governments to take account of the outcome of the European elections when nominating the candidate for the presidency of the Commission .
The amendment goes on to propose that Parliament should hold a vote as soon as possible on the candidate nominated by the Member States .
Nor are we able to support paragraph II ( 1 ) , which we regard as too broad in scope but too specific as regards the number of Commission members to be chosen from among sitting MEPs .
Instead , we support the amendment to this paragraph tabled by the PSE Group , to the effect that we should continue to develop the practice which has been successful up to now of choosing some MEPs as Members of the Commission .
Furthermore , we cannot give our wholehearted support to paragraph IV ( 3 ) , since we think it is far too specific as regards the time appointed for the nominee to make a statement of intent .
Instead , we support the amendment tabled by the PSE Group to the effect that the nominee for President of the Commission should make , as extensively as possible , a statement of intent , followed by a debate , at the July 1999 part-session .
This debate was needed because the Amsterdam Treaty strengthened Parliament 's powers with regard to the investiture of the Commission President since the vote is now binding . It also strength the power of the nominated President with regard to the choice of the Commissioners - in agreement with the national governments - the definition of the Commission 's programme and , once appointed , the political coordination and direction of the Members of the Commission .
It is therefore necessary to strengthen the democratic legitimacy and political responsibility of the Commission and consequently of its President .
This is the main thrust of the idea proposed by Jacques Delors , and backed by Mário Soares and Felipe González among others .
It aims to organise the European election campaign around not just a political programme but also the choice of Commission President , with the European political parties having to publicly present their candidate for this post to the electorate .
The main positive effect of this would be the personalisation of the election campaign and therefore increased visibility of the institutions , better understanding of the rationale and greater emotional identification of the citizens with the European Union itself and its objectives and policies .
I believe that the EU would surely gain in terms of greater prestige , proximity to the people and democratic responsibility .
The Brok report generally includes these objectives , although the requirements of realpolitik , which aims to preserve the power of the prime ministers to negotiate and choose the person to be proposed to the European Parliament , have dulled the clarity of the report in favour of forms of parliamentary compromise that allow room for both sides of the argument .
In any case , it has been proposed - I am pleased to say that this is due to my amendment - that the European Council should choose the person to be nominated as Commission President bearing in mind the election results .
It is therefore not right for the German Government to claim that it will start the process of nominating the next Commission at the Cologne European Council set for 3 June , before the European elections !
The method thus proposed allows the necessary involvement of the other relevant and pro-European political forces in the Commission by means of the Commissioners in important posts .
In particular , this does not conflict with the continuing intergovernmental nature of the EU and its institutions , which were originally conceived as having a supranational nature .
However , this method is the only way for the nomination and future appointment of the Commission to correspond to a genuine agreement - as specified in the Amsterdam Treaty - between the Council of Ministers and the Parliament directly elected by the people .
Parliament would surely gain in legitimacy - because the elections would have a higher turnout - and also in responsibility .
The Commission President would gain in authority in respect of the Commissioners and the governments . This is essential in order to guarantee that the Commission is the independent body acting as the political driving force of the European Union and defining the Community interest , as is provided for in the Treaties .
It is not the administrative secretariat of a Council , easily dominated by the large Member States . It is clear that this system would involve a strengthening of the political responsibility of the Commission and its Members who would be considered individually by Parliament , and this would certainly be welcome .
The experience of the appointment and performance of the Santer Commission and the circumstances which caused this motion of censure demonstrate that realpolitik has not led in this case to satisfactory solutions , be it for the EU and its prestige , be it for the Member States and their citizens , or be it for the European Parliament and its irreplaceable role in the construction of a European democracy .
Since the beginning of my term of office as an MEP , I have met many European citizens who deplore the lack of democratic dialogue within the Community institutions and particularly within the European Commission .
The most frequent criticism relates to the European Commission 's lack of direct democratic base , which is partly due to the more or less secret negotiations it holds and the balances it strikes without most of the electorate knowing .
The single currency is in place , enlargement continues according to its own criteria , and in six months the European Parliament elections will take place .
It would therefore be highly appropriate for European democracy to fully commit itself to a broader process of reforming the Commission .
To satisfy some 370 million Europeans it is time to seriously consider nominating candidates for the presidency of the European Commission in the elections next June to allow them enough time to present a genuine political programme . It would also enable the person nominated to be accompanied by Commissioners who have been selected from among the elected representatives of the European Parliament .
Article 214 of the Amsterdam Treaty confers new powers on the European Parliament and brings the Commission 's term of office into line with that of the European Parliament .
It is therefore perfectly possible for this proposal to be implemented in time for the June 1999 deadline .
The advantage of this would be twofold : it would make the electoral campaign more dynamic by upping the stakes , namely European policy for the next five years , and it would also create a more independent European Commission , one that would better implement Community law and do so with respect for political equilibrium .
A more tangible Europe , and one which is closer to its citizens , has never seemed as realistic and feasible as it is now , thanks to the Brok report .
I therefore approve of its provisions and as it is the beginning of a new year , I should like to express my wish to see the majority of us commit ourselves to this aim , an aim which the majority of Europeans are hoping will be achieved .
Grand federalist moves to definitively transform the European Commission into the government of Europe are once again in full swing .
Last October , the President of the European Parliament in this House welcomed the new role conferred on the Commission by the Maastricht and Amsterdam Treaties , which according to him involve the Commission exercising political , legislative and budgetary management .
Today , through the Brok report , the Committee on Institutional Affairs takes over by trying to create new provisions in the Amsterdam Treaty , the ' catalyst for fundamental changes in Community interinstitutional relations ' .
The new provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty are deliberately quite unclear , in line with the tried and tested federalist way .
In any case they have never been clearly explained to the citizens , as the debate currently taking place in France goes to show .
For example , amendments to Articles 158 ( 2 ) ( appointment of the President and Members of the Commission ) and 163 ( internal organisation of the Commission ) help the Committee on Institutional Affairs to twist its interpretation of the Treaty according to the federalist view . This view sees the gradual transformation of the Commission into a sort of government of the Union , invested by Parliament on the basis of a programme of ' political guidelines ' which reflects the results of the last European elections .
The legal basis is exploited for the good of the cause .
In particular , the ' political guidelines ' evoked in Article 163 of the Treaty are , in the context of this Article , aimed at constituting the Commission 's instrument of internal discipline and not an ' investiture programme ' .
Furthermore , such a programme certainly does not exist under Article 158 , which deals with the Commission 's appointment .
More generally speaking , the Commission 's shift towards government status , as recommended in the Brok report , in our view goes against the nature of the Union and as a consequence , beyond the terms of the Amsterdam Treaty .
In fact , despite its ambiguities , the Treaty leaves the Council the right of initiative in choosing the nominees for the Commissioners ' posts and the power to finally appoint the new Commission ( Article 158 ) .
These provisions should also be viewed in the light of the Treaty as a whole , which leaves the Member States the most important role , both under Article D , which entrusts the European Council with responsibility for providing the Union with the necessary impetus and defining the general political guidelines thereof , and Article 145 , which gives the Council the power to take decisions , coordinate economic policies , and confer implementing powers on the Commission .
Therefore , notwithstanding federalist eagerness to exploit the new Amsterdam provisions to their own ends ( which was only to be expected ) we are firmly convinced that the Council should retain its pivotal role in accordance with the general thrust of the Treaty and the Union 's status as an association of States .
In fact , we should like to consolidate this role by making the Commission itself accountable to the Council .
Lastly , the idea of the ' Commission 's independence ' , on which the report lays great emphasis , is , in our view , extremely ambiguous .
Although we agree that the Commission 's independence vis-à-vis pressure groups should be enhanced ( and , indeed , have tabled amendments seeking to ensure this ) , we do not believe it to be of the least use vis-à-vis the democratically elected governments meeting within the Council .
As I emphasised yesterday in the general debate , the theory of the Commission 's independence has induced a feeling of superiority which is largely responsible for the lax behaviour noted today .
Fraud is the natural outcome of poor European institutional planning .
We must not increase but reduce the Commission 's independence , and we must reduce the excessive privileges this body enjoys : a monopoly on initiative , self-regulation , discretionary powers , and so on .
We abstained on the report by Mr Brok , which emphasises the influence and responsibility of the European Parliament with regard to approving the Commission .
We are supporters of this form of vetting of the Members of the Commission before they take office , but we do not think that people should only be eligible for a post in the Commission if they are current or former Members of the European Parliament .
There are many other ways of gaining parliamentary experience so as to be able to carry out such a job .
Similarly , we are not avid supporters of each group in the European Parliament having its own candidate for the position of President of the Commission as part of the election campaign .
The Commission should retain its independence , and Parliament should retain its own independence as a supervisory body .

The Brok report was originally scheduled for debate at a different part-session , but the departure of Mr d 'Andrea means that it has now been put on the agenda in a very timely way , because this week is dominated by the issue of the European Commission 's accountability to Parliament .
I voted against the report , because what the rapporteur is seeking goes much too far .
Apart from anything else , it would not be a good thing for the election of the Commission President during the European elections to mean that we got a kind of ' minister for Europe ' .
The European Commission is after all an executive , and in principle it thus has no responsibility for making policy .
The Amsterdam Treaty gives the European Parliament greater powers in the appointment of the Commission President .
Logically , this should mean that Parliament has more influence when it comes to malfunctioning on the part of the Commission .
But I think Parliament can use its powers primarily to influence the budget .
That does not impinge on the work of the Council which , after all , appoints the members of the Commission and therefore bears the main responsibility for taking action .
It seems strange to me that the report makes no mention at all of this responsibility of the Council .
The President of the European Commission does not have to be elected on the basis of a political programme , since the Commission , as I say , is the executive arm of the Council and Parliament .
If the vote on the discharge for the 1996 budget is now considered to be in the past and if the vote of censure of the Commission is currently making a mockery of this parliamentary session , then the motion for a resolution currently being examined doubtless belongs to the future .
The importance of this resolution lies in the fact that it will not only affect future relations between Parliament and the Commission but also the future democratisation of European institutions .
In this respect , this declaration is indeed aimed at all European institutions but its chief justification is as an internal discussion paper for Parliament . This is because it attempts to chart the most democratic course possible for Parliament to negotiate in 1999 .
When the public first heard of the Amsterdam Treaty it thought that the intergovernmental conference had been a great deal of effort that had led to nothing much .
The Treaty is undeniably complex and those who expected institutional progress to lead to a trouble-free enlargement of Europe have been disappointed .
However , it did introduce a number of new elements which it is our duty to consider so as to fulfil our mandate as representatives elected by universal suffrage .
Our comments here centre on three of the new elements contained in the Treaty .
Firstly , Parliament shall give its assent on the person nominated by governments as President of the Commission .
The nominee shall then act in the capacity of the person jointly responsible for forming the Commission .
Secondly , the Members of the Commission and the nominee for President shall be subject as a body to a vote of approval by Parliament .
And thirdly , the Commission shall carry out its duties respecting the political guidelines as set out by its President .
In this way we are able to see the gradual emergence of a European Union with an executive body , namely the Commission , which will be formed by two legislative institutions . One of these institutions , namely Parliament , will represent the citizens , and one will represent the Member States , namely the Council .
It will be a tripolar structure which a priori may seem somewhat fragile , unstable even .
But we are all aware of the fragility of democracy itself and that the most elaborate structures which aim to respect the rights and duties of everyone are the weakest .
This does not make them any less effective even if they do require the various partners to make huge efforts to listen to each other and compromise .
With the implementation of the Amsterdam Treaty , it is obvious that neither the Council nor Parliament will be capable of forming their executive body without first taking into account the position of the other .
They are in fact forced to listen to each other and negotiate the composition , political guidelines and operating methods of the Commission .
Today Parliament is therefore clearly capable of playing a bigger part in the formation of the college of Commissioners .
My second point concerns the opportunities that have arisen because of the points I have just mentioned regarding the European elections and the boost they are likely to receive thanks to a process to create ever greater European integration .
In short , the main thrust behind the proposal put forward by Jacques Delors is , in my view , relevant .
There is a striking contrast between the obvious loss of impetus in European architecture and the concerns of the public . This is because the public feels the impact of European policies on their daily lives but fails to see any evidence in Europe of the democratic practices they are accustomed to in the different Member States .
Giving a fresh impetus to the European debate means making the choice of the future President of the Commission a campaign issue in the next European elections and preventing them from being dominated by exclusively national concerns .
Lastly , this would also herald the beginning of a genuinely European political life and one which , at the same time , is highly personalised .
My third point concerns the desire to better politicise relations between Parliament and the Commission and , in this connection , to reduce the Union 's democratic deficit .
The public has been surprised to see that the European Parliament - which is essentially a breeding ground that states dip into when forming their governments - is called on so little when it comes to appointing the Commission and the President of the Commission . This goes against the democratic practices of our respective countries .
What is more , Parliament 's democratic credibility will only be truly strengthened when , as our declaration requests , ' a significant number of the members of the Commission ( are ) chosen from among sitting Members of the European Parliament ... ' This , in my opinion , also implies due respect , here as elsewhere , for the balance between men and women .
In spite of the progress made in terms of reform of the Treaties , many of us have for a long time been absolutely convinced that this House will only be considered as a proper Parliament when it is able , among other things , to make the European Commission fully accountable to it .
That said , it is absolutely vital that the reform of European institutions takes place within the context of future enlargement to include Central and Eastern Europe .
An enlarged Europe including some 20-25 members would be totally inefficient if it were to have a European Commission that comprised at least one Commissioner for each Member State .
The vital reform of the structure and composition of the Commission should therefore confer on it a legitimacy other than that conferred on it today through the national appointment of its members .
In any democratic state the government is formed as a result of ideologies that exist in representative assemblies which reproduce more or less faithfully the divisions existing in the society that elected them .
In an ever closer union , genuine democratic legitimacy will always be visible in this House which is elected by direct universal suffrage .
It is therefore indeed the European Parliament that should confer new legitimacy on the European Commission .
Implementing the report 's proposals in this regard will constitute a further step forward in both Parliament 's emancipation and in the democratic unification of the European continent .
I should particularly like to highlight once again the vital need for the Commission 's independence from Member States and for the inevitable consequence of this , which is that Parliament would have increased control over it .
At the same time the Commission must remain protector of the Community 's interests and guardian of the Treaties .
It must also once again become the driving force behind European integration .
The aim of this report was , among other things , to support the proposal put forward by the Jacques Delors ' Our Europe ' foundation , which suggests that the appointment of the future President of the European Commission should be an issue in the next European elections .
This is a proposal that I endorse , which is why I have signed it .
Our proposal to make European elections more personal and more political by encouraging electors to participate in appointing the future President of the Commission was watered down in the Brok report to the point of being ridiculous .
This is due to the compromises made between the groups .
Why is this the case ?
It is because the Heads of State and Government simply do not want it .
Whether they are socialist or conservative they want to go about their business without any democratic debate , preferring a Vatican-style conclave instead .
In short , they are anxious to retain control over the appointment of the President of the Commission without any outside interference , be this from the electorate or from political parties .
If this continues we may end up with the following outcome regarding the future President of the Commission :
on 3 and 4 June 1999 , at the Cologne Summit , the German Presidency proposes to initiate the process of appointing a new Commission by nominating a President ; -on 13 June 1999 the European elections take place.Henceforth electors will only have to record the result of ' in camera ' negotiations of Heads of State and Government .
This topsy-turvy world is yours if you want it .
By interpreting these articles in the as yet unratified Amsterdam Treaty in a somewhat extreme way , the rapporteur and Parliament will end up turning the Commission into a kind of government .
This is further borne out in the explanatory statement .
I believe that this contravenes the articles in the Treaty which establish that the EU should be a form of international cooperation between independent nations .
It is an attempt to turn the EU into a federation without giving Member States the chance either to discuss it or take a decision on it , and this I cannot accept .
The Brok report on the approval of the President of the Commission and the ' independence ' of the members of the Commission clearly reflects the ideology which prevails in the Committee on Institutional Affairs and its belief in a federal culture .
We should like to point out that the Commission has never been regarded as independent , but as a joint decision-making body with Parliament and the Council .
In the conclusions of the explanatory statement , mention is made of going beyond ' the intergovernmental method to the Community method ' , and of strengthening the process of integration by ' furthering the goal of a united federal Europe ' .
The purpose is to prepare the way for the Commission to become a kind of government that is chosen directly by the European Parliament and not by the Member States .
In our view , the report goes too far in its interpretation of some of the provisions contained in the Amsterdam Treaty .
The committee has also taken too much to heart the proposals put forward by the former President of the Commission , Jacques Delors , to make the main purpose of the European elections the nomination of the President of the Commission , rather than the election of MEPs .
The report is also full of contradictions .
On the one hand , it wants to safeguard the Commission 's independence , while on the other it would like Parliament to be involved in negotiations to choose members of the Commission , hence ' a relevant number ... should be chosen from among sitting Members of the European Parliament ' .
Since we are opposed to the transformation of the EU into a federal power and advocate an intergovernmental arrangement instead , we have decided to vote against this report .
The report tackles some of the institutional problems that exist in the Union , above all from a democratic perspective .
According to paragraph III ( 1 ) of the report , Parliament would be able to call to account and to dismiss individual Commissioners . As we have seen during the past week , this is an instrument which , in Parliament 's hands , carries considerable weight .
Unfortunately , the same paragraph also contains the rather curious statement that it is important to safeguard the Commission 's role as ' the only body with the right of legislative initiative ' , an idea to which I am strongly opposed .
It would be democratically damaging to cooperation , as we have seen today .
I do not think that the right of legislative initiative should be the exclusive prerogative of the Commission .
In my view , an instrument that allows individual Commissioners to be dismissed is so important that I intend to vote for paragraph III ( 1 ) ; however , I should make it clear that I am opposed to the Commission having the sole right of legislative initiative .
Despite its good points , the report also has certain weaknesses .
A number of these would be improved by the amendments tabled by the PSE Group , which I shall be voting for .
For the most part , the report follows up the modifications to the process of appointing the President of the Commission which are contained in the Amsterdam Treaty .
However , we are not in complete agreement with the report as a whole .
The governments of the Member States should be given more room for political manoeuvre , as provided for in the amendment tabled by the PSE Group .
Furthermore , we think the report goes too far in calling for a number of members of the Commission to be chosen from among sitting Members of the European Parliament .
We do not share the view that the Commission should have the sole right of legislative initiative .
This would in fact give substantial power to the Commission , which cannot be held accountable since it is not popularly elected .
In this respect , we think it is important for national parliaments to have more say in intergovernmental cooperation than at present .
Globalisation offers more opportunities , but it also brings new dangers .
Codes of conduct for multinational undertakings play a vital role in safeguarding human rights .
Using the ILO Declaration on fundamental principles and rights at work and other international minimum standards as a starting-point , a minimum code of conduct should be drawn up , to be ratified voluntarily by the European multinationals .
It is crucial that the Commission , in initiating and carrying through this proposal , should work closely with representatives of companies , trade unions and non-governmental organisations .
In particular , we would like to stress that the Commission and those Member States who sit on the WTO 's decision-making bodies , when assessing applications , should make it a criterion of acceptance into the WTO that candidate countries comply with minimum social standards .
In order to ensure the constructive development of the multilateral trading system and to bring about reforms in world trade , further work in this area must be guided by the principles of accountability , equity and solidarity .
The profits that accrue from world trade should be utilised to improve living standards in all parts of the world and to bring about an equitable distribution of wealth , with the ultimate objective of eliminating the widening gap between rich and poor .
The Danish Social Democrats voted in favour of the report concerning the upholding of human rights in international trade .
To begin with , the EU should ensure that the ILO conventions are ratified and respected in the Member States .
Furthermore , the EU should ensure that a social clause based on ILO principles is incorporated into agreements with third countries .
We voted in favour of making a code of conduct for European multinational undertakings based on the ILO conventions as binding as possible .
Experience shows that voluntary codes of conduct are not respected .
It is more effective to adopt European framework provisions which can be accompanied by possible sanctions .
The need to take the social dimension into account when liberalising international trade has , in the past , been evoked by those who in fact wish to increase protectionism in the industrialised world to the disadvantage of developing countries .
It is even more important that the call for widespread respect of a few simple principles and rules enshrined in ILO international conventions be considered as highly legitimate . These conventions are designed to restrict the use of child labour , prohibit the use of forced labour , and guarantee the right to join trade unions and engage in collective bargaining .
The European Parliament has called for this on many occasions and has also expressed its desire to see minimum standards included in a social clause , within the unilateral and multilateral trading system .
It has also said that it is willing to support the principle of a more in-depth dialogue on this issue , within the multilateral framework of the WTO .
We need to demonstrate our credibility to our partners at the many discussion and negotiating forums in which the European Union and Member States participate .
How can we hope to maintain this credibility when some of the Union 's Member States have not ratified all of the ILO conventions specifically relating to these fundamental rights ?
I broadly share the rapporteur 's concerns and wishes , but I should particularly like to stress the need to put our own house in order first of all .
This is why I urge Member States who have not already ratified these conventions to do so as soon as possible .
Accordingly , I call on colleagues from these countries to use all of their powers of persuasion over their government authorities to ensure this is carried out .
The resolution and the Commission 's communication recommend the inclusion of a social clause , in the context of international trade . More substantial support for the ILO Declaration on fundamental principles and rights at work is also called for , particularly in respect of child labour both inside and outside the Union .
I therefore support the report , even though there are one or two things which I would question , such as financing .
The Year of the Child is just beginning .
The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , which has been ratified by the governments of all the Member States , will be ten years old this year .
It is distressing to see the splits that exist in the Union over compliance with even minimum standards , such as a child 's right to a childhood - to play and learn without having to work , as established in the Convention .
The report calls on the Member States to respond to serious shortcomings in the protection of children in society and at work .
However , there are a number of amendments which substantially weaken the report 's intentions .
Amendment No 10 is the only one that actually enhances the report , and I am therefore going to vote in favour of it .
Even if it contains several inappropriate comparisons , for example , regarding child labour in the United Kingdom , which are based on unsubstantiated information ( school children or students who do a morning paper round cannot be considered in the same light as those who work 12 hours a day making carpets ) , the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations has nonetheless decided to vote in favour of Mr Sainjon 's report .
This is because we all recognise the need to put an end to social dumping which has corrupted the world trading system as it currently operates within the framework of the Marrakesh agreement .
And yet , in 1994 , not so many of us were of the view that the Uruguay Round negotiations had their place in the 1960s , in a world in which trade generally took place between a small number of similar or comparable countries . However , the end of the Cold War and the globalisation of transport and communications systems meant that countries of socially different levels found themselves in competition with each other .
Rules which may be beneficial in a specific context can nonetheless become quite the opposite in different circumstances .
Such is the situation we have been forced to acknowledge just a few years after the Marrakesh agreement entered into force .
In making an inventory of the EU resources still available to combat social dumping , the Sainjon report notes that such resources are scarce . What is more , the rapporteur can only propose optional and incentive measures .
One can only agree with the rapporteur 's recommendations regarding the very stringent limits to be brought to bear on the marketing of products made by prisoners .
The same applies to the desire to combat forced child labour .
The suggestion put to the Commission to intervene in WTO decision-making procedures to ensure that respect for minimum social standards by the applicant countries is upheld as a criterion for admission is also very positive .
We must urge the Commission to rigorously ensure such demands are carried out .
It is in fact clear that the decisive level for action in this area as in many others is global and not European .
Unilateral European provisions may even backfire on European companies if competitive third-country companies are not subject to the same rules .
The European Union and the Member States must therefore work at global level to promote the need for binding measures to put an end to both unacceptable working conditions and the phenomenon of distortion of competition linked to social dumping which has a direct effect on European companies and jobs .
Since 1996 , in discussions about the common transport policy action programme for 1995-2000 , Parliament has considered using private capital to fund TENs .
The delay in financing means that the whole job-creation project is failing at European level .
We are all aware that one of the reasons for this delay is the decline in infrastructure investment by Member States that are keen to reduce their public deficit .
The public sector alone cannot provide this financing , which is why private sector funds are being considered .
The Commission 's communication , which is the subject of our colleague 's report , paves the way for such collaboration by setting up partnerships between public sector organisations and private sector investors and companies .
However , as with any successful collaboration , guidelines need to be set out .
A public-private partnership ( PPP ) should be aimed at planning , programming , financing and carrying out a project given the go-ahead by public authorities .
And in order to see it through to completion , the risks involved should be distributed according to everyone 's ability to cope with them .
In fact there should be some form of guarantee to fall back on should one of the partners involved fail to deliver .
Lastly , as the rapporteur suggests , for the PPP to succeed , ' public procurement ' directives will need to be amended .
However , they must not become too liberal in nature and , to counteract this hypothetical risk , it would be preferable if the notion of public service utilities were taken into account .
Although the concept of the public-private partnership has the support of high-priority projects , there is doubtless great interest in smaller-scale infrastructure projects which are also ' of major potential value at local or regional level ' ( paragraph 17 of the resolution ) .
The port sector handles more than 90 % of the Union 's trade with third countries and approximately 30 % of intra-Community traffic , as well as more than 200 million passengers every year .
It is therefore indispensable for Europe to have an efficient port and maritime infrastructure in order to assure the important services offered by this sector .
Similarly , it must not be forgotten that ports constitute a crucial factor within the regional economy , particularly in the peripheral and ultraperipheral maritime regions of the Union .
The European Commission 's Green Paper has the advantage of initiating a broad debate with all the parties involved ( port authorities , sea transporters , freight forwarders , Member States ) on the opportunities for improving the infrastructure and economic efficiency of European ports .
I welcome the fact that the House has had the opportunity to participate in the debate and , as an elected representative from a large port city in the south of France , I should like to make two comments .
The Commission document does not deal with the issue of recognising the notion of general interest services pursuant to Article 90 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
Nonetheless , a large number of installations , services and undertakings in sea ports can be classed under this category .
This omission therefore needs to be rectified .
Lastly , the main objective of the Green Paper is to eliminate the present discrepancies in regulations in the various Member States .
This is to enable European ports to be better adapted to the international context and relates mainly to the establishment of financial and competitive conditions .
We agree with the Commission 's proposal to make an inventory of the financial flows of Europe 's biggest ports before drawing up a proposal for a directive .
This should not be made on the sole premise of banning state aid for this sector , but should aim to correct the imbalances between southern and northern ports in terms of development .
The key role that ports play in local employment should not be undermined .
The need to define and implement a European policy in the area of sea ports and maritime infrastructures has been apparent for some time .
In our opinion , the ports constitute a fundamental part of the European and trans-European transport networks , not only in terms of European competitiveness in the world economy , but also for intra-Community traffic and for the integrated development of the whole European territory .
Particularly in an enlarged Europe , short sea shipping is the alternative to road transport which is causing increasing congestion on Europe 's roads .
The French lorry-drivers ' strike , for example , paralysed a large part of the economy of several regions , and this is a warning that Europe needs transport alternatives based particularly on sea and rail transport .
Also , from the environmental point of view , sea transport offers unrivalled benefits .
An efficient port system can also constitute a local and regional development factor , particularly in outlying and insular areas . In addition to bringing these outlying areas closer to the centre , it is a dominant factor in economic and social cohesion .
We therefore welcome this Commission initiative , in the belief that other measures will follow to finally produce a port policy .
Mr Jarzembowski 's report is a balanced one .
Measuring it against the situation of Flemish ports and my party 's priorities in that respect , I am glad to see that the rapporteur has focused on the right things .
Our priorities for a policy on ports and maritime infrastructure are as follows :
Easy accessibility of ports and better communications with the hinterland .
Better opening up of ports by means of improved rail links with the interior will ease the burden on the road network and lead to sustainable mobility .
I would mention here the importance of modernising the existing ' zeren Rijn ' link which connects Antwerp with the Ruhr .
The port of Zeebrugge also needs better links with the hinterland.-Greater clarity over the financing of infrastructure , whereby it must be clear that port superstructure does not have to be financed by government.-It is essential to have the same operating conditions for all ports .
This should ensure that all structures which distort competition will disappear .
It is no longer acceptable that the Flanders region as a shareholder in the port of Zeebrugge should act as both judge and jury.-I would also stress how important it is for each port to have a strong local base .
Every port must retain its autonomy.-Finally , the success of a port depends partly on the economic and fiscal policy of the country in question .
We must ensure that economic but above all fiscal measures do not have an inhibiting effect , and we must prevent high wage costs and tax considerations from making a given port less competitive than others.I support Mr Jarzembowski 's report and hope that we will follow this example in Flanders too and rapidly approve the maritime ports decree .
Maritime transport and therefore ports play a vital role in terms of both people and goods .
We must increase the use of waterways if we are to achieve a ' policy of sustainable mobility ' .
We are all agreed on that .
At the same time , conditions in terms of coastal regions , climate , population density , fishing and so on differ widely between Member States .
There is still some doubt as to whether ports come within the EU 's field of competence , or even whether they should be regarded as part of the TENs .
However , a significant proportion of the structures , services and operations in ports are not specific to ports , and so comparisons cannot be made .
This also has repercussions in terms of competition and public procurement .
On the whole , the matter needs further discussion , particularly in the Member States and with the players concerned .
The economic importance of European sea ports lies in the fact that more than 90 % of Member States ' trade with third countries and almost 30 % of intra-Community trade is handled by them .
Traditionally considered by governments as growth poles , fulcrums of national and regional development and instruments of regional planning , Member States ' ports and in particular the bigger ports have today become interfaces between trans-ocean sea transport , short distance sea transport ( coastal shipping ) and land-based transport . They are also centres of transshipment , services , distribution and logistics .
Given this development , the most pressing problem concerns finance and charges for sea and port infrastructure .
However , it must be stressed that Member States ' ports differ in terms of ownership as well as in their organisational and administrative structure .
This structural complexity generates a considerable number of problems when it comes to analysing the differences in aid to be given so that the level of fairness in competitive terms can be gauged .
Our group endorses all the points contained in the Committee on Transport 's resolution .
But it must point out that another category of ports exists .
In fact , some ports or port installations , services and undertakings are , by their very nature , of general interest and should therefore be entitled to aid for specific development projects , contrary to the rapporteur 's proposals .
There are a number of modest or medium-sized ports which serve as a good example of this because they enable links to be established with remote islands .
Since these ports enable islanders to receive supplies they are clearly of general interest .
If the motion for a resolution were to be adopted in its present form , this category of ports would be excluded completely , which would certainly have detrimental economic and social consequences .
This is why our group supported Amendments Nos 1 and 3 , which would enable this type of port to receive aid from national and local authorities .
In the name of fair competition , the public service offered by some ports or port infrastructures must not be undermined .
The Commission 's proposal for an EU strategy for Global Navigation Satellite Systems ( GNSS ) deserves the full support of Parliament .
This is a very important area in which the EU already has substantial strategic , political , economic , industrial , employment , security and defence interests .
With a world market for GNSS estimated to be worth EUR 50 billion in 2005 , it is clear that a European strategy must be given high priority .
The action plan proposed by the Commission represents a practical step towards developing a civil multimodal system , fully integrated into the trans-European transport and telecommunications networks .
I assume that the ESA - the European Space Agency - will act as the EU 's technological arm in this area .
I was pleased to note the list of recommendations and proposals made by the committee in its report , and I largely agree with them .
Over the past 30 years the satellite sector has undergone a veritable revolution .
Telephone networks and television channels are the prime users of space technologies , but a great many services based on satellite facilities are also provided to other sectors such as transport , agriculture , fisheries , protection of natural resources , and others .
As regards transport , for example , satellite navigation could help to make more efficient use of existing transport infrastructure , improve safety and reduce pollution .
In the fisheries sector , satellite navigation systems will enable widespread and undisputed implementation of controls within the framework of the common fisheries policy , but also and above all they will improve safety for ships ' crews .
In terms of agriculture , satellite systems will facilitate control over planting perennial plants ( arboriculture and viticulture ) , the analysis of ground water resources , the control of irrigation , and so on .
Over the next few years new applications will be developed to include worldwide satellite communications networks and new research platforms in space .
Everything must be put in place to enable Europe 's Member States to gain a leading position in this highly competitive satellite market which is at present dominated by the United States .
Aeronautical and aerospace activity has developed thanks to cooperation between European companies in these sectors in accordance with their specialisms . As a rule , this cooperation has largely occurred outside the European Community .
It is therefore necessary for European countries to adopt a similar approach to the satellite sector . The success of the Ariane and Airbus projects , which were both developed outside the scope of European institutions , proves that it is perfectly possible to build a high-technology Europe without a heavy administrative technostructure .
The example given of the Ariane and Airbus projects , which used very few Community financial resources and in which the Commission played a purely anecdotal role , should serve as a model for the development of this European satellite industry in years to come .
The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.

Agenda 2000 ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on the reports from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on Agenda 2000 .
Mr President , by way of a point of order , I have a request to make .
We are all busy preparing for important votes .
The Commission has promised to give us the list of the 157 UCLAF inquiries .
Twenty-seven of these concern the work of the Commission itself .
I think it is most important for us to have that list if we are to make a sound assessment of the Commission 's work and its financial management .
May I ask you , as the President of Parliament , to do what is necessary tomorrow to get these documents for us ahead of our important votes on the Commission ?
Mrs Maes , there is no list at present , but your request will be passed on and , if any such thing appears , you will be informed at once .
Mr President , when I spoke on the Görlach report on rural development late last year , I said that this Parliament should be honest as to whether it is serious about reform of the common agricultural policy .
A large number of amendments tabled to the reports we are discussing today sadly demonstrate that some political groups in this House are more interested in short-term political advantage in the run-up to the European elections , than in achieving realistic reforms to create an agriculture policy appropriate for a Europe of 20 to 25 countries in the 21st century , operating in a global economy and subject to World Trade Organisation rules .
It is unrealistic for some political groups to table large numbers of amendments to all the reports calling for increased subsidies year on year , where the Commission is proposing progressive decreases in order to reduce agricultural spending and make EU enlargement possible .
Indeed , events of this week and the last month must make the applicant states wonder just what sort of organisation they have applied to join .
Either we are serious about building up a genuine Europe , embracing all the countries which were separated from western Europe for 40 years by an accident of history , which we must ensure never happens again , and take steps that we know are necessary to make that possible , or a majority of this Parliament votes for amendments calling for subsidies we know are unsustainable and betray this historic moment of change .
Yes , we need to protect our farmers in the short term against too rapid change , so that they can cope with this transition period .
Yes , we should be encouraging the development of renewable non-food crops , though not tobacco , particularly on voluntary set-aside land .
Yes , we should encourage more extensive livestock rearing by adjusting the way premia are paid .
Yes , there should be financial assistance to those farming on the most difficult terrain and to help older farmers to retire .
Subsidies should be targeted to where they are most needed and an upper limit put on the size of individual payments , unless higher payments can be proved to benefit the wider rural economy or the environment .
These reforms are necessary quite apart from the wider context of Agenda 2000 .
Europe needs competitive , but also sustainable , environmentally-friendly agriculture producing the high-quality food our citizens need for a healthy diet , without massive surpluses , without polluting our countryside , and without causing unnecessary animal suffering . We need to support those who preserve on our behalf our rural environment and beautiful countryside , through special environmental payments .
New jobs , not directly connected to agriculture , need to be created in rural areas if we are not to suffer rural unemployment , depopulation and villages reduced to dormitories for towns and cities , with all the attendant transport and environmental problems that entails .
I challenge the groups when they draw up their voting list to look beyond short-term electoral gain and to vote in such a way as to support and improve implementation of the Commission 's reform proposals rather than undermine them .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , there are different ways of discussing agricultural policy : in principle and with a long-term perspective , or in terms of what can be achieved today .
In principle , I would prefer to see a more extensive reform of the CAP than the Commission has proposed .
Our agricultural policy has been handed down to us from the 1950s .
It is out of tune with our wish for a more efficient global market in line with the objectives agreed during WTO discussions , namely a global market with increased demand and where quality and protection of the environment are given higher priority both at home and abroad .
However , there have been many changes since the Commission first devised Agenda 2000 .
In a single year , we have been hit by economic crises , particularly in South-East Asia and Russia , which knocked the wind out of our export market .
It is also interesting to note that the USA has reintroduced significant agricultural support measures .
There is consequently a question mark over what we should do in our present situation .
With hindsight , we know that between 1996 and 1997 the market caused prices to rise .
However , the position today is that the market has depressed prices .
In my view , it is an absurd situation when prices drop so far that they cannot be compensated for by direct payments .
On the question of ' renationalisation ' , I should like to ask the Commissioner for his assurance that compensatory payments and premiums at national level can be organised in a way that will protect farmers from distorted competition in countries whose governments are unsympathetic towards agriculture .
Mr President , taken together , the Commission 's proposals amount to a package of measures designed to make even more suffocating and oppressive the Procrustes ' bed upon which for some time now farmers ' incomes have been sacrificed , with price cuts and the reduction or abolition of subsidies , the abolition of interventions to save resources , amounts which will now be made available for funding the campaign for the colonial exploitation of the Central and Eastern European countries by monopoly capital .
On the other hand , the same measures aim to do away with the inalienable right of farmers and their children to cultivate their land and develop their output , by means of unacceptable and arbitrary quotas , large and savage compensatory fines , so that there too monopoly capital will be able to spread , get its hands on agricultural holdings and throw farmers out of work or , if it allows them to remain and work in the countryside , then to do so as a new type of share-cropper .
Finally , these measures aim to establish economic and trade conditions such that monopoly capital , in negotiating its agreements with the World Trade Organisation , will be able to make concessions in return for benefits from American capital which will be to the cost of farmers .
By speaking for more than half an hour , the Commissioner tried to make all this sound better than it is . But the whole plan will be upset by the angry and orchestrated response of the farming community .
And do not think that such a thing will never happen , that we will not have a repetition of the peasants ' revolt .
We will have a mass agricultural movement with the manpower to brush aside this unacceptable policy .
The President cut the speaker off
Mr President , CAP reform doubtless constitutes a vital stage in Community life because it must pave the way for the third agricultural millennium .
The same can be said of Europe 's economies and cohesion as well as life in Europe 's countryside .
CAP must of course evolve , but let us not too hastily overlook its finer points .
It has enabled the development of modern agriculture , agricultural exports and European markets to be supplied with safe , high-quality products . It has also guaranteed farmers ' incomes and has been the only fully integrated policy at European level .
What form does the Commission propose the reform should take ?
A generalised price reduction in line with the world market , compensation in the form of direct aid , but granted on the basis of the criteria set , and Member States ' participation in the allocation of flexibility envelopes . At the same time Member States are set to become the promoters of animal welfare in an increasingly globalised market .
None of this is acceptable in its current form .
The tough negotiations taking place here in both the Council and Parliament are proof enough of this .
I am particularly concerned about the COM in beef and veal and about extensive production systems in general .
Their role is in fact important in terms of land use and environmental protection and must not be overlooked , but it is above all the interests of farmers and consumers that I should like to protect with this reform .
In this connection , we will support Mr Garot 's position as rapporteur and his request for limited price reduction , increased production controls and quality in terms of taste and health .
We also support his request for public intervention to be maintained .
The difficulty of managing this reform is further complicated by the milk reform and other general measures .
Overall , CAP reform should prepare European agriculture for moving closer to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and their agricultural products , as well as preparing Europe for future WTO negotiations . This should not be carried out by setting European prices and immediately aligning them with world prices , but by asserting our European model which respects human life and life on earth .
Mr President , today we are in the home stretch for the completion of approval for the part of Agenda 2000 which relates to the common agricultural policy - I would say its most important part , given the importance of the agricultural sector at many levels and its multi-functional character , let alone the extent to which the agricultural guideline plays a part in the Community 's budget .
The proposed regulations for financing the markets for beef , cereals , dairy products and the direct support systems constitute a substantial package which relates to the rules and procedures for financing the common agricultural policy , while in parallel it concerns three common organisations of markets which absorb most of the agricultural guideline .
Of course , the fact that those three COMs relate to the main sectors of farming activity in northern Europe indicates the inequality and the degree of preferential treatment they enjoy compared to markets for products from southern Europe , inequalities which the present review - like its predecessors - has been able or has tried to mitigate .
As regards the financing regulations , though the Commission 's proposals are not very far removed from the existing framework , they leave a substantial gap .
The addition of new actions to the EAGGF 's field of intervention in the Guarantee Section , especially the measures concerning the development of the countryside and pre-accession aid to the applicant countries , raises serious questions about whether it will be possible to finance those policies in the future in parallel with expenditure related to the COMs , given the resources available .
A second but very important problem will be created by the proposal to introduce a cofinancing system for direct income subsidies by the Member States .
Commissioner , if cofinancing is adopted under pressure from the Member States who regard themselves as net contributors to the Community 's budget , this will clearly be a first step towards renationalising the CAP and will act as a catalyst to exacerbate inequalities and nullify progress towards economic and social cohesion within the framework of the Union .
The attempt to renationalise the CAP is at the same time an attempt to call into question the fundamental principle of financial solidarity upon which the European Union 's only common policy so far has been based .
As for the COMs for beef , cereals and dairy products , and granted how difficult it is to formulate common policies which will reconcile and satisfy so many different interests , the Commission 's proposals form a good basis and are on the right lines .
This is the first time I have said that to the Commission . I believe , however , that there is still much room for improvement and I have two things to say , one general and one particular .
The general comment concerns the need to increase support for small producers and for producers in mountain and disadvantaged areas .
The particular comment concerns the conditions pertaining to the milk market in Greece , because of the distance from other markets and the existence of a large number of islands .
Those conditions , along with the real need for fresh milk , have created a large discrepancy in relation to the existing reference amount .
I believe the Commission should take another more realistic look at the request to increase the reference amount for Greece by 150 000 tonnes .
The problem is not just a recent one , it began after the 1992 distribution and , unfortunately , though the Commission claims that it is trying to eliminate or mitigate the inequalities between products from different countries and areas , where milk is concerned it is causing this really distressing situation in Greece to continue .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr Santer , despite the efforts of the rapporteurs , it was not possible to find a compromise solution on this reform within the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . This is to be regretted as it does not lend prestige to the role and image of this House .
I want to highlight four priorities with regard to the CAP reform , which were actually contained in the report approved last June .
The first priority is that it is essential for care to be taken when lowering prices .
The proposals of 15 % for beef and veal and 10 % for milk and milk products presented by this House seem more acceptable than those of 30 % and 15 % , respectively , presented by the Commission .
The reduction of 0 % approved by Parliament for cereals seems unrealistic .
The second priority is that it is essential for every effort to be made to achieve the internal rebalancing of the CAP by strengthening its second pillar and particularly by strengthening structural policy , agri-environmental and agri-forestry measures , special aid to disadvantaged areas , support for quality products and , in general , economic diversification and rural development .
Without this , there can be no European model of agriculture and no fair response from the CAP to the various European agricultural systems , which are patently very different .
The third priority is that it is necessary to avoid an uninformed decision in terms of the criteria for establishing different types of quota , premium rights or reference surface areas .
Very special cases , such as in my own country , Portugal , which is lagging behind structurally and which is highly dependent on imported food , will have to be dealt with selectively .
The fourth priority is that it is essential to respond to an enormous European deficit in oilseeds and protein plants .
Therefore , the difference in aid between cereals and the other oilseeds and protein plants must be maintained together with a specific base surface area for maize .
Finally , I want to say that the option of renationalising 25 % of the CAP financing is a matter for debate which must not be considered within this reform .
It is not a prohibited or taboo subject , but the debate must take place on a different level from this one , namely on the level of financing and own resources .
To conclude , I must say something to the President-in-Office , who I would especially like to welcome .
I would remind him that yesterday in this House , his colleague , the Minister for Foreign Affairs , said that one of the main reasons for reforming the common agricultural policy was to reduce the expenditure of the European Union .
Previously when holding the Presidency of the Council , Germany has always defended agriculture .
It now seems that the new German Government has changed strategy .
We would like clarification on this .
Mr President , Commissioner , Parliament deserves no bouquets for its failure to reach a compromise on a number of dossiers .
Personally , I think we have to be realistic .
Agriculture policy must not become any more of a drain on European resources .
So I found it particularly interesting to hear Mr Santer saying this morning in his first speech that he was very sorry that Parliament had not welcomed a partial renationalisation of income support or national budgets .
It is an interesting option .
It would be a weapon in the battle against fraud , and this system would also make it easier to introduce environmental standards in individual Member States .
And I believe this part of the debate must really be conducted on a far broader basis , because I think this is what a majority of Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs wants to see .
Furthermore , I agree with Mr Olsson that we ought really to be far more innovative in agriculture policy .
Eighty per cent of people live in towns .
I do not , I live in the country , but I am well aware that this is so .
So there is a need for good animal health , a sound environment and a policy for quality .
It is therefore extremely important that attention should be focused on these things .
I also believe that any incentives we give should favour the countryside , such as using non-food products as raw materials for construction and energy .
Lastly , I would point to the great opportunities which information technology provides for new initiatives in the agriculture sector .
We have been too prone to see European agriculture as the producing of food in a way we have been accustomed to for years .
At the moment , innovation is the most important thing that we can introduce .
Mr President , when we speak about financing the CAP within the framework of Agenda 2000 , we must remember that the Vienna Council was a Council which put off taking any decisions .
No decision was reached about own resources , nor about the way to divide the cost of enlargement .
The important decisions were left for March in Brussels , and there is no Council position on how much of the cost of enlargement is to be borne by Europe 's citizens .
Meanwhile , the German Presidency 's first concern was to inform us that Germany wants a considerable cut in its contribution to the Community budget .
Here , it is useful to remember that in Edinburgh the Community budget 's own resources were set at 1.27 % of GDP , with the intention of increasing them over the period 2002 to 2006 to 2.5 % against average Community inflation of 2.2 % .
All this simply means that agricultural expenditure will have to decrease steadily if any of the above assumptions are not adhered to , or if , as mentioned in Agenda 2000 , agricultural expenditure should become non-compulsory .
Let us also remember that in the last two Community budgets the upper limit of own resources never rose above 1.15 % , while a limit of 0.4 % of GDP has also been set for the Structural Funds .
This cofinancing for agriculture is really tantamount to partial renationalisation , indeed up to a significant level of 24 to 25 % in accordance with the third solution in the Commission 's report .
We have already accepted some underhand activities vis-à-vis cofinancing , such as the 1996 review of the COM in fruit and vegetables , the recent abolition of intervention for oil and the possibility of redeeming unused individual tobacco quotas .
The proportion of cofinancing must be related to the level of economic strength of the Member State concerned , and in that case special attention must also be devoted to agricultural products in which the European Union is deficient .
We support the ' fair assumptions ' on which the rapporteur at least wishes cofinancing to be determined , but we disagree with the choice of Article 43 of the Treaty as the decision-making procedure to be followed .
We favour Article 209 , granted that what is involved is a financial amendment which requires unanimity in the Council , and we oppose partial renationalisation and the introduction of a generalised structural mechanism .
Now , as regards the reform of the CAP , we call for equal treatment for Mediterranean products and full compensation for loss of agricultural income by direct aid , especially for small producers and disadvantaged regions .
Finally , as regards the persistent more general imbalances between north and south , which have been mentioned already and are quite evident , I would like to remind you that the Cohesion Fund was no more than compensation for the single market policy which mainly benefits the industrial countries in the north .
Mr President , in my opinion the review of the common agricultural policy is largely motivated not by the actual internal dynamics of development and the new challenges to be faced , but by pressures exerted by certain powerful Member States related to the reduction of the European Union 's budget , and especially a reduction of their own national contribution to it .
In that sense , I think we are rapidly moving towards worsening conditions governing the exercise of agricultural policy , which ought not to abandon agricultural production and the countryside to the dictates of the free market , but should take into account demographic and environmental factors and the danger that large areas of agricultural production may be deserted .
I wish to express our complete opposition to any attempt to use financing provisions to renationalise the common agricultural policy in any way , which would be particularly intolerable for countries with the weakest national budgets and financial means , and also to express my opposition to two major imbalances : firstly , between products from the north and the south , and secondly , between large and small producers .
Mr President , I am always delighted to listen to Commissioner Fischler because he has come on several occasions to this House . We are very concerned about the extent of the common agricultural policy reform .
He says that he intends to carry out a reform for the future yet I do not see how the Commission can claim to be carrying out a reform for the future which involves wasting half the Community budget on a sector in which 1 % of the richest people in Europe receive 40 % of this budget .
This is not right , Commissioner Fischler .
It is not right that a few Members and the Commission are speaking on behalf of farmers .
You are talking about a privileged minority who , thanks to the CAP system , will apply for public funds that we should be managing very carefully . This is not happening because we are giving these funds to people who do not need them .
It is impossible to reconcile your speech on the protection of the environment , on the protection of employment , and on the protection of safety and quality with payments for production .
There are currently no problems with production , Commissioner .
Technological developments and biotechnologies guarantee that production will continue to rise .
The problems are with the people .
Due to this policy , the rural population is already seven times smaller than in 1950 .
Under this policy , just 2.5 % of the population will still have links with the rural world .
What you have to do is propose an end to all the production aid .
This aid must be used for research , it must benefit small farmers and it must be used for family-based companies , employment and quality .
This is how the aid must be used rather than for this incredible waste of half the Community budget , which is potentially paid for by those who need it most and distributed among those who do not need it .
I am doing you justice , Commissioner .
You are less of a lobbyist than the Members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development because the three dossiers presented by that committee are worse than the proposal from the Commission itself . In fact , they want more , not to modulate , not to set a fair ceiling , not to keep people in agriculture , but to produce more for the surpluses .
We can then pay ourselves for storage , pay ourselves for not producing , and even pay ourselves again for producing , storing and exporting .
This policy cannot continue Commissioner Fischler . Enough is enough !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at this stage in the debate we have already torn apart each and every one of the legislative proposals contained in Agenda 2000 .
Therefore , please let me comment on a few aspects that have not been touched upon by my colleagues , although I support much of what has been said here by Mr Goepel , as well as by Mr Funk , Mr Cunha and Mr Colino .



I will only mention three specific major points and three minor points .
As regards the major points , I should like to discuss the innovative aspect of Agenda 2000 regarding rural development .
Although it is not an issue under debate today , you said that more than 50 % of the population was over 55 years of age .
Therefore , the main objective in agricultural policy , Commissioner , must be to support the population in the rural environment and here there are two major problems : that of young people , and that of supporting women in the rural environment .
Without women , there is no solution to this problem and that is the truth of the matter , however much we may resent it .
Men follow along behind women and we are left with a rural environment where the number of people is dropping and where we have too many agricultural policies .
Another major point is the issue of cofinancing .
Do not destroy the principle of solidarity .
I believe that in cofinancing direct aid - aid that requires Member States to comply with certain measures - we could be heading towards severe discrimination .
In addition , we must maintain the requirements - and the control of such requirements - for products coming from third countries .
These products must meet the same requirements as we lay down for our own products .
As for the minor points , I cannot forget a few long-standing problems .
I should like to remind you of the matter of past yields , or of the increase in male bovine quotas , which is already over 70 000 and which should once again be increased .
We also welcome the increase in milk quotas although we will continue to protest that it is insufficient .
Commissioner , we have already established a European agricultural model .
Adopt it , fight for it and , along with all the European institutions , fight for those farmers whom you already defend so fiercely .
Mr President , the common agricultural policy , which was set up in the 1950s when there were only six Member States , is now facing change .
Everyone , or virtually everyone , recognises that this policy is not equipped for an enlargement which means that the Union is going to consist of more than 20 countries .
We are therefore obliged to make some changes , whether we want to or not .
We would like to participate in those changes , and we actually think that the Agenda 2000 proposal from the Commission is both elegant and bold .
We know the main ideas : general support schemes are to be abolished and European farmers will have to compete on the world market .
That is something we shall have to accept as a result of the WTO negotiations , and I also believe it is healthy for agriculture that we are going to have this liberalisation in future and that we are therefore also going to move closer to world market prices .
I also believe that , in the slightly longer term , this will make it necessary for us to abolish the whole milk quota system .
Some people will have regrets .
But I have no regrets .
I think it will be a good idea to do this in the longer term .
I believe in fact that people should be aware that the process which will be started by Agenda 2000 will lead to more and more liberalisation in the agricultural sector .
We Danish Social Democrats are very happy with the Commission 's proposal , and we think it is a necessary change both in view of the WTO agreements and also because of the enlargement project and the whole financing situation we are in .
We have tabled amendments to a number of the proposals which have been put forward in Parliament .
We also have some other amendments .
We feel that in many ways the Commission 's proposal is more realistic than what Parliament has been able to agree on , and I hope that Parliament will understand that it is in fact necessary to fall in line with the approach set out by the Commission .
The fact is that a number of the amendments proposed by Parliament - which we have voted against , but which are still on the table - entail an increase in the budget rather than a reduction , which is what the Commission 's proposal is about .
We therefore have to find a solution which can be implemented , and we also have to respect the time factor .
That is why it is crucial for us to be able to deliver our opinion when we vote on this later this month in Brussels , and it is crucial that these things are ready on time . I therefore wish both the President-in-Office and the Agriculture Commissioner good luck , and hope that things will be in place in March .
Mr President , I agree with those colleagues who are concerned that the very valuable debate being conducted on Agenda 2000 might result in low-profile conclusions in terms of CAP reform .
The difficulties are clear ; they emerged during our deliberations in the Agriculture Committee , where we were unable to come up with a uniform view on reforming the major sectors , and they re-emerged this morning during the speech by the President-in-Office , when it was said that a compromise should be sought within the Council of Ministers - and we all know how many obstacles to such a compromise have already arisen .
It would however be wrong to adopt the interpretation which has tended to surface during this debate , namely that on the one hand we have an innovative , reforming Commission and , on the other , a Parliament which is incapable of following the trail marked out by the Commission .
Unfortunately the truth lies elsewhere , as we have said since the outset : the Commission 's proposals are interesting and important , but the resources earmarked are inadequate to sustain them from a quantitative and qualitative point of view .
On one side we have the ECOFIN Council - yesterday morning the German Foreign Minister repeated what the UK Foreign Secretary said at the start of his term of office , namely that we must curb farm spending - and on the other we have the farmers , concerned that price cuts will adversely affect their budgets .
We must get out of this impasse and move forward .
The appeal I would make at the end of my contribution , therefore , is that the high-level group announced by the Commissioner this morning , which is to begin its work very shortly , should make a real effort to find a way of protecting farmers ' interests , somehow seeking an outcome which is in keeping with the declared objectives - very ambitious ones - of the reform .
Mr President , I will speak generally and not to any specific report .
Whatever policies we agree for European agriculture from the year 2000 , they must be easy to understand , easy to administer and easy to inspect .
Our reforms must continue to use the common policy as a social tool .
We argued during the GATT talks that our policies were helping the economies of poorer rural areas , not supporting production .
If we argued this before , we cannot now argue that it is wrong to penalise efficiency .
We must put a ceiling on the aid to larger cereal farms .
We must use modulation but we must use it fairly and sensibly .
We must ensure the local economies do not suffer unjustly .
We must develop efficient and effective complementary national policies but we must ensure the policies remain common to us all and we must retain common financing .
We must resist the move to renationalise funding and policy-making .
If we agree part-national financing the required spending must be mandatory .
There is merit in the proposal for area payments .
This is part of our social responsibility but we must retain benefits for farmers in the hills and other difficult terrain and we must ensure that benefit goes where it is required - not to the large , the rich or powerful .
Re-distribution must ensure fairness .
While we should all welcome proposals to increase extensive farming , we must ensure that we can police the system simply and efficiently .
We must not build a huge bureaucracy living off the back of small farmers .
We must also ensure that health and safety costs , consumer protection costs and abattoir control charges do not escalate to the point where they cannot be afforded .
At present in my country of Wales there seem to be more inspectors than sheep .
We must also ensure that where regional policy objectives apply , they and agriculture policies cooperate rather than compete .
All over Europe we are seeing rural areas getting poorer and losing vitality and urban areas getting richer .
Rural areas need economic aid as well as houses for holiday-makers and relatively rich retired people .
Agenda 2000 through the CAP must be an integral part of the support required for rural economies .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the development of the common agricultural policy is a concern for all of us .
Nevertheless , I would like to make it clear that I personally consider the level of the cuts in intervention prices contained in the Commission proposal to be unacceptable .
I would now like to discuss two points contained in the Graefe zu Baringdorf report .
The first point concerns the concept of good farming practice , which means that farms that are managed in accordance with the principle of good farming practice will in future receive full financial aid .
Of course , this applies only if they also meet the other conditions laid down in this regulation .
Where services rendered by farmers with a view to preserving the agricultural environment go beyond good farming practice , special payment should be given , for example within the framework of Regulation 20 / 78 .
Member States should be able to impose sanctions on the basis of objective criteria if environmental principles are not complied with , and these criteria must also be in accordance with the principle of good farming practice .
This method of farming must be recognised EU-wide and generally accepted .
I believe that Member States should develop codes which they can then promote accordingly .
The second point I would like to discuss concerns the employment situation in rural areas .
We all know that farming families must in future be given more new opportunities for income security .
It is up to politicians to create the conditions so that well- educated , innovative farmers - and this is how I see the farmers of the future - can ensure that rural areas retain their attraction .
An eco-social agricultural policy must be tailored to the multifunctional world of agriculture and rural areas .
The European farming model was agreed at the Luxembourg Council , and this must be the fundamental criterion for the next round of WTO negotiations , as European agriculture is of course considerably different from that of our other partners in the WTO .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , one of the major issues of a future common agricultural policy must be how we are going to achieve an active rural policy and a clarification of roles in the field of agricultural and rural policy .
The countryside must be viewed in its entirety .
There must be diversity in the range of rural occupations , and the countryside has to be developed with respect for nature and recreation .
We must safeguard access to areas of recreation .
We must have access to woodlands , meadows , beaches and the shores of lakes .
The right to roam the countryside must in no case be connected to rights of ownership , and public right of access must be secured .
Agricultural policy demands reform .
Agriculture that is closer to nature must be the norm , not the exception .
It has to be said that the views of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and those of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection are reasonably close to one another here .
Direct subsidies for agriculture must be tied to compliance with environmental standards .
The decisions taken under the Treaty of Amsterdam and later at the Cardiff summit on the inclusion of the environment in all EU policy , based on the principle of transparency , must be taken seriously in agricultural policy too .
Under this principle , linking environmental standards to the payment of aid cannot be left up to individual Member States .
This would not achieve the aim of a more environmentally sustainable agricultural policy and agriculture , whose produce we can rely on as being healthy and safe .
In order for the environmental view to be taken fully into consideration Member States must work with the Commission to develop a code of practice for environmentally sustainable agriculture .
Aid should be paid only to farmers who comply with the agreed rules .
Special agricultural environmental aid should be paid only for projects which either protect the natural environment or improve the present state of the agricultural environment .
Special attention must be paid to the protection of areas of water .
Applying a code of good agricultural practice must be made more effective by being able to claim back our resources .
It is vital that the question of diversity in the European Union is taken into consideration , as agriculture is practised from the north to the south .
For example , in Finland organic meat production is not successful as the animals have to be kept outside the whole year round .
At this time of the year there might be a metre of snow and the temperature could be thirty degrees below zero .
Mr President , I also wish to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council .
I do not want to reiterate what has already been said today but I should like to mention to the President-in-Office one of the points he mentioned : the WTO .
I have long argued within the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development that it is important that Agenda 2000 and WTO dovetail together .
The Americans are no angels when it comes to WTO negotiations and we have to be very careful not to lose out in those negotiations .
I am quite sure that he is well aware of that situation and will make sure that we are in a strong position for those WTO negotiations .
I was delighted to hear the Commissioner say that 50 % of farmers are over 55 .
I just qualify as being under 55 - I am not quite sure whether that also applies to the Committee on Agriculture .
It is a very poignant point : we must prepare for the younger generation because if we allow these young people to wither then the vine dies and with it the industry .
I should like to air one or two things which have already been said .
I agree with Mr Wilson that we must have clear decisions , uniform policies and continuity , because agriculture needs continuity .
There are three main issues in British agriculture which worry us .
We have seen a 40 % fall this last year in our income and yet we talk about such things as national envelopes and a renationalisation of the common agricultural policy , which strikes fear into people 's hearts in the United Kingdom because it allows governments to control the spending on agriculture .
One of my colleagues mentioned modulation .
One of the problems with modulation is that there is genuine concern that it will not be fair across the board .
Modulation is great as long as it is larger than your particular farm .
We are totally opposed to that .
Finally , again , do not allow cofinancing to be a renationalisation of the common agricultural policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we all know that the success of the Agenda 2000 negotiations is closely linked to success in all parts of the Agenda , in other words to a compromise that we must all accept .
The reform of the common agricultural policy is a central pillar of the overall structure , but it is only together with the other pillars of reform that it can support the Agenda 2000 structure .
This means that the course for a successful financial reform must be set now in the context of the negotiations on the common agricultural policy .
It is obvious that proper financial regulations are not possible without appropriate changes in agriculture , the area that accounts for almost 50 % of the European budget . As a financial manager myself , you will forgive me for being particularly annoyed by this .
President Santer rightly pointed out that the negotiations on the future financing of the budget represent one of the key elements of the Agenda 2000 negotiations .
But alongside the financial reforms support must also be given to the necessary agricultural policy reforms .
I do not agree with the assessment given by Commissioner Fischler this morning .
Cofinancing of agricultural policy measures , as proposed in some amendments , should not be dealt with separately from agricultural reform .
On the contrary , in our view it is one of the successful elements of the reform proposed for the agricultural sector , and it is clearly in line with the Commission 's thinking in proposing to redirect the CAP away from price guarantees and towards income support .
If is it correct that we can assist rural areas more effectively by means of this redirection , the Commission should not have applied the brakes halfway through ; not only should it have thought it through logically to the end but it should also have prescribed reform .
This also means that we have to put our faith in the tried and trusted mechanism of the Union and the Member States sharing joint responsibility for structural measures under the agricultural policy too .
In addition , Commissioner Fischler , if I had been you I would not have missed out on the dynamic effect of cofinancing .
There is no doubt that it increases willingness to discuss the scale and structure of the common agricultural policy objectively and in detail .
Awareness of the need for reforms , as proposed by the Commission , will increase rapidly in the Member States if in future the Ministers for Agriculture have to fight with their Ministers for Finance for part of the funding .
The proposed cofinancing is not in fact a means of solving net contributor problems but instead will play a crucial role in restoring the balance between market policy and income policy on the one hand and structural policy in rural areas on the other .
It is not a form of renationalisation , to reply to a fear that has just been expressed .
Like Mrs Boogerd-Quaak , I hope that the Committee on Budgets will find a majority in favour of cofinancing , as we need to show that almost 50 % of the budget is being used efficiently and is achieving results if we are to allow citizens to have confidence in the way their taxes are being used .
Mr President , the common agricultural policy must manage and control agriculture all the way from Sicily to Utsjoki , in countries that have totally different natural conditions .
It will be a tough job , and the fear that the special conditions prevailing in peripheral areas will be ignored in the final decisions that are taken is a very legitimate one .
One of the many problems with the Agenda 2000 agricultural reform is the plan to turn grain policy upside down .
The reduction in the administrative intervention price of grain proposed by the Commission is a problem .
At the same time the Commission is proposing that only half the reduction in the administrative price should be paid back in compensation .
Grain production in the areas that are classed as peripheral in Finland is now very unprofitable , so that any reduction in price would cause production to suffer even further .
Special regional conditions , relatively low yields , and high costs must be taken into account in the reforms .
Rural Europe will need viable agriculture in the future to preserve its vitality and diversity .
Agricultural development will continue to affect the well-being of the entire population of the continent .
If agriculture were left to waste away it would at the same time lead to the decline of the food and agricultural equipment industries and the commercial sectors connected with them , as well as limiting consumer choice .
Agriculture has to move in step with the liberalising world market , but we must be able to impose a change in direction and speed .
The direction in agriculture must not be downward .
Preserving the model of the family-run farm is dependent on the political will of the European Union .
If we can put our trust in the future of European agricultural production and unanimously take the necessary decisions , Europe will have a vital , diverse food and agriculture industry for the next millennium .
Mr President , the proposed reform of the CAP contained within the Agenda 2000 package , to be implemented through the Structural Funds and the draft regulations under discussion today , is an effort , albeit a tentative one , which deserves our support .
But in actual fact , even these tentative efforts are being undermined by the desire for balanced national budget contributions and the lack of any true innovation .
The outcome or compromise , as the President-in-Office , Mr Funke , deliberately repeated several times this morning , must however take account of a long-standing culture which is remote from the real interests of consumers and producers .
High-level groups , diplomatic mediation , informal contacts and claims that the budget is untouchable , on the one hand , and the desire to renationalise expenditure , on the other , make the gulf between economics and politics plain for all to see .
Farm incomes have dwindled .
Price reductions have forced European producers to compete in ways which have often been detrimental to both quality and social conditions , quite apart from having led to a decline in health and hygiene standards .
We shall never forget BSE and what it did to consumer confidence .
But the most immoral aspect here is that the type of production which caused BSE has not been rooted out .
Production for its own sake , to rake in premiums , the misuse of scientific research , the difficulty of monitoring certification standards on the use of transgenic products at consumer level , the use of antibiotics and growth promoters in plants and animals - all of these have continued .
Impenetrable levels of specialisation and sophistication have been reached , and the phenomenon has continued to spread even since the BSE crisis .
How should we respond to these questions and these external costs ?
Mr President , as a Spanish Member , I must express my disappointment at the Commission 's proposal on the common organisation of the market in the milk and milk products sector . As I see it , a great opportunity has been missed to propose a true reform that would redress the balance in this sector of the European Union .
Commissioner , you are well aware that my country has been asking for increased quotas of one million tonnes , but in your plan we are allocated approximately 220 000 tonnes , which is much lower than our needs .
It is clear that there is no real explanation for the fact that a Member State such as Spain , which accounts for 12 % of dairy farms , 11 % of the population and 6 % of consumption , only has 4.67 % of the overall Community milk quota .
In contrast , other Member States receive considerable increases in quotas that they neither need nor have ever requested .
Nor is it acceptable that less favoured areas have been forgotten in the new reallocation of quotas . These areas should have been included , along with the mountain regions .
I also do not believe that the ' virtual cow ' system is acceptable in calculating premiums as , once again , it will clearly penalise those countries that have insufficient quotas and whose production is less than the Community average .
Lastly , Commissioner , I believe too that maintaining the unjust and insufficient fat content referencing quantities , which many dairy farms have , is unacceptable .
There is no explanation for the fact that a Spanish livestock farmer can produce milk with an average fat content of only 3.63 % and yet , in contrast , a Danish livestock farmer is allowed to produce milk with a 4.31 % fat content .
All this , as you know , has serious consequences , not only for profits but also for the quality and viability of farms .
Perhaps , Commissioner , an interim solution would be to allow all dairy production with an average fat content reference quantity under 4 % to be exempt and not subject to an additional levy .
Mr President , Commissioner , regardless of the outcome of the vote on the Agenda 2000 agricultural package and of the decision taken in the end by the Council of Ministers , I think it is clear that we expect - and must expect - European farmers to undergo enormous changes .
However , I have the impression that we are still doing too little both at national and European level to facilitate change and support the farmers through it .
Unfortunately , it is often the traditional farmers ' associations who , in their indiscriminate rejection of reform , forget to draw the attention of their members to new opportunities in good time .
These new opportunities are contained in the Commission 's agricultural reform package , despite all the tough measures it may contain .
For the majority of farmers in Europe - and these are the smaller farmers - the package of reforms is a step in the right direction , even if it is often lacking in vigour and is not sufficiently binding in terms of environmental and social criteria for aid .
Incidentally , it is the smaller farmers who have so far been most willing to accept change and to approach it positively .
But we often neglect them .
By way of comparison , I would point out the important and necessary measures taken by the Commission and the Member States in order to prepare companies and banks for the euro .
Companies and banks are not exactly helpless organisations .
Nevertheless , we have helped them .
Members of Parliament have now even received euro key-fobs from the Commission .
It would be much more important to launch a campaign to support farmers not only with practical matters such as adapting facilities and adjusting to change , but to lend them what we could perhaps call moral support .
It is sometimes easy to understand why farmers feel excluded from European politics and feel that they are always cap-in-hand outsiders .
We must also place much greater importance on farmers ' non-output-related performance in terms of its image as a service and a job , and we must make the transition from price support to direct aid more palatable .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , Agenda 2000 already contains many far-reaching proposals from the Commission for making changes to the agricultural policy .
A reduction in prices to world market levels for milk , beef and cereals has been proposed .
The price reductions would be partially offset by higher compensatory payments based on area and the number of livestock .
In my view , it is important to adhere to the Commission 's principle of basing this compensation on production capacity , for example in the case of milk .
In some cases , Parliament is proposing lower price reductions and thus lower fixed compensatory payments .
I have to say that I think the Commission 's proposals are better and more carefully thought out , and therefore more deserving of our support .
It is true that there will be more pressure on the budget when the compensatory payments are raised , but any extra burden on European consumers and taxpayers would be more than offset by lower food prices .
In all probability , the charge on the budget will lessen over time .
According to most forecasts , the world market prices for current products are going to rise , enabling the compensatory payments to be gradually phased out .
The danger in some of Parliament 's proposals lies in the fact that they go only half way and would make it harder for European agriculture to operate on the world market and achieve the competitiveness that is essential for our long-term survival .
The Commission 's proposals also contain a number of drawbacks .
Countries which cannot grow silage maize should receive fair compensation .
In the debate , it has been said that 20 % of farmers would receive 80 % of the support , but in fact most farmers come within the 20 % band .
This is where we find the family-run farms . The rich minority who happen to farm a large area make up a tiny group .
Mr President , I should like to begin by expressing my regret that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development was unable to come to any opinion on these reports in committee .
It seems to me a sad loss that no-one has mentioned that so far .
However , sadly , the vision of many of my colleagues in the Agriculture Committee appears to be one of national interests and not the global view that has been expressed by the Commission .
The global view must prevail if progress is to be made in this important sector .
The reductions in support prices envisaged by the Commission are not only desirable but vital in the light of expansion and our WTO commitments , not to mention the legitimate concerns of those who have levelled criticism at the level of support enjoyed by this sector .
I have doubts as to whether the proposals will meet the objective of lowering the cost of agricultural products to consumers , but I sincerely hope that the Commission 's forecasts are correct .
The introduction of measures designed to protect our rural environment and encourage more extensive farming practices are welcome , but I would draw attention to the degree of flexibility proposed for Member States to decide their own priorities , namely the national envelopes for the beef and milk sectors , the application of cross-compliance requirements and the labour force criteria .
Whilst the notion of flexibility is commendable , we must caution against creating an uncompetitive situation which will divide Europe 's farmers .
In conclusion , we need reform .
Most people in this Chamber would accept that .
I hope that my colleagues can be realistic in their voting pattern on 28 January and ensure that at least , at minimum , the Commission 's proposals will be accepted .
Mr President , the Commission has quite rightly proposed to extend the role of the European Agricultural Fund , which will in future undertake additional activities aiming to develop the countryside .
In addition , part of the review of the financing system should aim to improve the quality of agricultural products .
This helps both the producer facing international competition and the consumer as the end user of the products .
I also think that the Guidance Section should finance all measures to develop the countryside , including structural , agri-environmental and agri-forestry measures , as well as provide compensatory aid for disadvantaged areas .
The common agricultural policy is a cornerstone of the Union 's European integration and an incentive towards development in the agricultural sector .
The possibility of cofinancing will in essence lead to renationalisation of the CAP , even in part , and will affect mainly those countries which fall below the Community average in economic terms , such as Greece and other countries in the south , while in parallel it will have negative consequences for the development of Community agriculture .
For that reason , I categorically oppose proposals , legislation and amendments which undermine the fundamental nature of the CAP and go against the principles of economic and social cohesion and solidarity .
The Union must not condemn the financing of European agriculture to Procrustes ' bed in order to satisfy the demands of some countries for a reduction of their contributions to the budget .
And on that point it would be useful to examine not just what those countries contribute to the budget , but also the extent to which they benefit from the common market of the European Union 's millions of purchasers .
I therefore believe that the principles of cohesion and solidarity demand that the agricultural policy should remain an undiluted common policy , and that it must be understood that efforts to renationalise it would set us on the slippery slope towards its gradual abolition , with the result that the cohesion of the European Union 's fabric would be eroded .
Finally , I disagree with the proposal for pre-accession financing of agricultural measures in the applicant countries from the Guarantee Section , and I support the entry of a separate category of pre-accession aid , one that is independent of the guideline for agriculture .
Mr President , we waited seven years for this reform of a reform .
Now that it has arrived , the manner of its presentation hardly makes us reach for the champagne .
Let us repeat once again that the Commission 's proposals severely marginalise the countries south of the Alps , that is , on Europe 's southern periphery .
There is no in-depth understanding of the true problems inherent in carrying forward the proposals for the future .
A second reason for dissatisfaction comes from the work which we have done - or rather , I should say , have not done - in Parliament , in that only one of the five reports under discussion was approved in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I dare not imagine what will happen next week , when we begin to discuss the reform of the COM in wine .
It has to be said , all things considered , that the scope of these proposals is very broad , in a territorial sense as well as time-wise .
Reference is made to a target date of 2006 , but the effect of this attempted reform will probably last even longer .
Reference is made to openness towards Eastern Europe , and above all to what is happening in the west , in other words the WTO constraints .
What is perhaps missing , Commissioner , is a little more attention to people , to farmers themselves , who are still somewhat unprepared for all these developments .
The challenge of so-called globalisation affects them directly , but insufficient account is perhaps taken of the persisting uncompetitiveness of European agriculture .
The transition is a harsh one , and for once we can say that bureaucracy has actually outstripped the pace at which Europe 's citizens are adjusting .
I am reasonably satisfied with the particular attention devoted in this reform to peripheral areas , such as mountainous regions , with the raising of milk quotas by 1 % , and above all the attention paid to young farmers .
Farmers are in fact a dying breed , Commissioner , given that 3 % of them are lost every year .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the wake of important events , it seems that everyone wants to have their say on agriculture today .
So I would just like to comment briefly on the Graefe zu Baringdorf report , specifically on direct payments and reductions .
I think it is right that European agriculture needs more long-term stable conditions , but it also needs to become more competitive so that , as well as producing foodstuffs , it can also , in accordance with the European agricultural model , cope with the additional major tasks facing the whole of society , such as preserving the agricultural landscape or generally protecting the environment .
The Commission proposals are logical .
Changes made in one area are balanced by changes in another .
But they are also very blunt .
For example , not enough attention is given to the situation of individual holdings .
Compensatory payments , introduced in the 1992 reform , are almost always really only partial compensation for losses incurred by farmers in the past and still today as a result of price reductions .
They are necessary if we are to be able to maintain extensive farming .
Good farming practice should be a prerequisite here .
However , high payments are often made in the case of farms that have substantial land or a high number of livestock , and these often attract criticism .
I think that reductions are necessary for this reason .
Large-scale holdings find it easier to cut costs than smaller family-run farms .
Reductions are necessary in order to allow the situation to become reasonably fair for family-run farms .
The question is how to we are to carry out these reductions .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , in the two minutes I have been allocated in this important debate I will merely state clearly , in view of the significance of the present reform proposals for the existence of European agriculture , that these proposals could have unreasonable consequences for agriculture and for the European economy and society as a whole .
They are therefore not acceptable unless they are amended as my group has recommended .
In addition , they are incompatible with the decisions made at the 1997 Luxembourg summit .
I would remind you that , following the exploratory debate by the Ministers of Agriculture on the European agriculture model , the EU Agriculture Council on 19 November 1997 unanimously requested that the agricultural reforms should be organised in such a way as to allow the European agriculture model to be maintained .
At the Luxembourg summit in December 1997 this demand was taken on board .
The Heads of State and Government declared themselves not only against unilaterally dismantling European agriculture but in favour of further developing the existing European agriculture model with its multifunctional role in all regions ; this means that the provisions of the reform under discussion today must target solutions that make economic sense and are justifiable in social terms , and also allow farmers to achieve an appropriate income .
Why did the Commission , in presenting its drafts , pay so little attention to these options that were agreed at a high political level ?
It is truly incredible .
In my small country the proposals in their present form would result in income losses of LUF 650 million , and would of course mean that agriculture would , quite unreasonably , be dependent on public finance .
This cannot be allowed .
I would also like to comment on milk production , which is such an important part of agriculture in Luxembourg .
We at least agree that the milk quotas must be retained .
However , the proposals as presented by Mr Goepel are the absolute minimum if we wish to prevent milk production from disappearing in many European regions .
I fear , Commissioner Fischler , that it is a naive fallacy if you would have us believe that the drastic price reductions you propose , which are so damaging to farmers , would allow consumers to enjoy price reductions in the order of EUR 10 to 17 billion .
The collapse of prices in the beef and pigmeat sectors has shown us that this is not the case , and you do not have a monopoly on political wisdom .
Listen to us and to the farmers a little , and then we will be able to find a balanced arrangement .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a long-standing error is restricting the development of agricultural and livestock farming in those Spanish regions that are lagging behind economically .
Galicia is one of these regions , with Objective 1 status under the European regional policy , and it has a clear and long-established history of livestock farming .
The error I am referring to is , of course , the inadequate milk quota Spain was allocated when it joined what was then the EEC .
Spain , and Galicia in particular , is therefore still calling for a larger milk quota .
In our amendments , we ask that special consideration be given to allocating an additional quota to certain regions that suffer as a result of this unfair disadvantage . This would rectify the severe imbalance in the economic and social cohesion of some less favoured areas .
In order to survive and be competitive , these regions need a specific restructuring programme , cofinanced by the European Union .
The structural deficiency of the sector in these regions has led us to ask that premiums be allocated not in relation to the average Community milk production , as the Commission suggests , but rather in relation to the actual national or regional average , which is very different to the virtual Community production .
And to make it worse , beef and veal , which could partially alleviate the problem , are not included among European premiums that do not cover calves .
We ask that they be regulated and included and that the age for the slaughter premium be brought down to a maximum of eight months . This could help rectify the serious and unjust situation experienced by the Galician livestock sector , a sector which could have great potential .
We call on our European colleagues to show some understanding and ask them to support our amendments in a spirit of solidarity and justice .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the belief that persistence will get us there in the end , we hope that the discussion today will achieve something .
The farming families of Europe need a reliable political framework .
The 1992 reform introduced direct payments for farmers as a result of a price reduction .
Commissioner , the criteria for direct payments are explained only in vague terms by the Commission and are even left to the discretion of the individual Member States .
But what we need in this area is equal treatment for all agricultural holdings in Europe .
The level of the direct payments to be made to farmers and the additional conditions to be imposed must not be decided at national level .
This is the only way in the end to ensure that market and competition distortions are avoided .
Farmers must be given a regular sum on which they can rely , and they must also be able to plan economically and successfully .
The Commission recognises the need to adjust to the world market .
This would expose European agriculture to worldwide competition , but it would at the same time be burdened by additional costs resulting from Europe 's high environmental and social standards .
But how can we be competitive if conditions are so varied worldwide ?
Direct payments to agriculture must in my view be considered from the point of view of less favourable natural production conditions .
We must not forget that farming families look after and preserve the agricultural landscape .
I would urge the Commission to use the given criteria as a basis for deciding on any further requirements to be imposed on agricultural production .
We must in future regard the principle of good farming practice as our starting point , a principle addressed by both Mrs Schierhuber and Mr Mayer .
We must establish a framework for European agriculture in which Europe 's farmers can in future also survive on the world market .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it seems that everyone wants to have their say today .
Seldom have such great expectations been held of an EU presidency as of the German Presidency in the first half of 1999 .
Bringing Agenda 2000 to a successful conclusion is almost equivalent to squaring the circle .
You may be able to bring our negative response to the proposals back to the Council in time , Mr Funke .
The content of the new agricultural policy must be finalised quickly , by the end of February , and my question is : are the Ministers of Agriculture still involved in any way in determining policy , or will the Heads of State and Government set the financial framework in advance at the summit in March ?
The time for questions is long past .
Specific options are required , and farmers want finally to know where we are headed .
Yesterday in the House Mr Fischer , the German Foreign Minister , called for a reduction in agricultural expenditure .
However , he also promised support for European farmers .
Mr Funke , I am sure you will be able to explain this confusion .
You speak in a very straightforward way that I really like ; you have not adopted this technocrats ' German , and please do not do so .
But to achieve the same result with less and less money is , in my view , a very difficult task .
Financial leeway is becoming limited in the search for solutions and there is not very much room for manoeuvre .
Perhaps this reform is the last available .
Following enlargement towards the east , the emphasis is increasingly on liberalisation , which our farmers know , but in my view the solutions that must now be negotiated under Agenda 2000 are only an intermediate stage .
In 2005 , following the accession of the first group of applicant countries from Central and Eastern Europe , agricultural policy will be under the microscope once again .
As a member of the farming community , I really cannot endorse the discussion about price reductions .
In twenty years of professional involvement in agricultural policy I have never seen consumer prices fall as a result of lower agricultural prices .
Mr Funk said the same this morning .
We have a German expression : although cereal is becoming cheaper , bread is becoming dearer .
I could also say that although milk is becoming cheaper , yogurt is becoming dearer ; you can be fairly sure of that .
In order to lay down Community rules for direct payments , which was my task as shadow rapporteur , I would also like to ask the Commissioner what these regions must commit themselves to paying their farmers if they can expect higher environmental requirements at the Commission 's insistence , as is currently planned .
I know what I am talking about ; I come from North Rhine-Westphalia and our farmers may be able to handle increased environmental requirements , but the question is : who will pay ?
My second and final question concerns the sliding scale of direct payments to farmers in accordance with the number of workers , as Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf proposes .
Please simply tell me whether you accept Amendment No 27 or not .
Then we will be in agreement .
Mr President , when Mr Andriessen became a Commissioner which was many years ago , I was already a Member of Parliament .
I said to him that the big challenge before him was to make European agriculture competitive .
Since that day there has been no talk about making European agriculture competitive , but I want to thank Mr Fischler for continuing with that theme and at least putting forward the aspiration that European agriculture can take its place in the world and take its share of world markets .
With the world population increasing by 80 million per year , it ought not to be all doom and gloom .
We ought to plan and lay out some sort of strategy by which we can play our part in supplying this market .
It was extraordinary to read this morning that Argentina is importing beef at the moment .
That is an area of the world which we had thought was a great competitor and a threat .
Because of the climatic situation Australia is able to supply them with beef .
It gives us some reason to believe that things do not always remain exactly as they are .
When the MacSharry reform came in we proposed reducing production and increasing importation of food .
Today we propose taking a bigger share of world markets .
I welcome that .
I was a bit disappointed that the President-in-Office of Council talked more about animal welfare , environmental considerations and consumer protection than about the livelihood of farmers .
While I accept the point he made on those matters , we cannot consider those ideas in isolation from the need to provide farmers with an adequate income .
Farmers may complain about the common agricultural policy , but without it we would have a worse situation in Europe .
So I would be seriously concerned about any effort to shift the cost or the policymaking of the common agricultural policy back to Member States .
Under no circumstances can we permit this to happen .
There are so many different countries and climates in the EU and the common agricultural policy has saved us from the tensions that would have arisen in recent years with the great reduction in the number of people on the land .
We have a policy that works .
Farmers suffer from it at the moment but our best hope is to carry out the necessary readjustments and keep it a common agricultural policy for all Europeans which contains all three elements - financial solidarity in particular .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to concentrate mainly on two areas : milk and beef .
With regard to milk and the report by Mr Goepel , which in itself I would like to support fully , I regret that some of the amendments did not meet with approval in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Examples include the important alternative proposals concerning price support and income support for milk producers , particularly in the disadvantaged mountain areas .
These must be given greater consideration and distortions of competition must be avoided or offset .
It is also essential to introduce measures to promote the consumption of milk and milk products , and the necessary funds must be provided for marketing .
I would advocate that the individual reference quantity for milk be divided by the number that corresponds to the average milk yield of the region .
This would be a fairer method for the mountain areas .
Finally , in my opinion the Member States should be paid in accordance with objective criteria , taking particular account of their respective production structures , especially in the mountain areas , so that they are not so dependent on variations in the market .
Fourthly , I also consider publicly-financed transportation aid to be absolutely necessary and indispensable .
As far as the beef situation is concerned , greater consideration should be given to the disadvantaged areas , for example in terms of eligibility for premiums .
Accordingly , young farmers should receive further additional financial support .
Action needs to be taken in this regard , as Commissioner Fischler said earlier today .
I hope that the Commission , in particular the very skilled and able Commissioner Fischler , who comes from a mountain area and knows the situation extremely well , and the Council will give my objections the appropriate consideration .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as you can imagine , it was very interesting for me to attend this debate , to listen to and digest the various speeches as best I could , this morning and this afternoon , and of course to take this with me to the debate we will be having on this subject in the Agriculture Council .
I already indicated in my introductory speech this morning that I place great importance on hearing your opinions and taking part in discussions with you .
I am also of the opinion that what you say and think must carry weight in the discussions in Council .
So I thank you for your contributions .
I should like to look at a number of points that were raised , without dwelling on them too long , particularly as some of them were addressed to me .
Perhaps I might begin by saying that when I compare the various speeches the overall effect seems to me to be equivalent to squaring the circle - to quote Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert - as is so often the case when the subject of farming is discussed anywhere out in the countryside .
Farmers are required to provide high-quality foodstuffs and use environmentally friendly production methods ; at the same time , they are supposed to preserve the agricultural landscape , just on the side , and in addition they are supposed to do all of this economically , preferably at what we call world market prices .
Put in these terms , this is already equivalent to squaring the circle .
Nonetheless , we must put it in these terms , as no other terms are possible in pluralistic societies .
When considering compensatory payments , which I believe we were this morning and this afternoon , we are told by some that these should be as fair as possible and should take the respective structures into account .
I understand and accept all of that .
Yet at the same time calls are made - sometimes in the same speech , but at most two or three speeches later - for these to be implemented as simply and with as little bureaucracy as possible .
Again , this seems to me to be like squaring the circle , if I am judging it correctly .
I would like to begin by making a point concerning a speech that came towards the end .
I believe it was Mr McCartin who said to me that I had talked about animal welfare and environmental considerations but not the issue of competitiveness .
Mr McCartin , this morning I was in an excellent position ; I had been asked not to improvise because the text of my speech had been given to the interpreters , so I kept to the text .
I do not usually do this , I will freely admit , but I can therefore say quite amicably and in all modesty that I know exactly what I said and what requests I made .
I quote : ' Future European agriculture must be competitive in order to hold its ground against international competition . '
I admit that it is possible , of course , not to hear a sentence like that .
But because it is such a crucial one , I would like to quote it here once again to show that it was not the case that I completely neglected this aspect of agriculture .
It would have been terrible , had I done so .
I would like to add the following . We have often been called upon to tell farmers the truth , so in my view we need to make one thing clear over and over again : if we reduce European agriculture - however it may be defined - solely to supplying raw materials for the European market , it will fail .
We have a wealthy internal market , with 80 million inhabitants in Germany alone .
In total , if we include the applicant countries , we will have a large number of consumers throughout Europe who can mobilise enormous purchasing power .
When reference is made to the purchasing power of the European internal market - especially when the other countries join - I must on the other hand continually point out that we have a degree of saturation in Europe and even surpluses , at least in some areas of agricultural production .
How can we hope to develop an image of the future face of European agriculture if we do not recognise that we must also conquer markets outside Europe ?
I do not want to expand on this now , but to my mind this has to be part of European agriculture .
I want to make it very clear that European agriculture cannot function otherwise .
On the other hand , if European agriculture produces under very specific requirements - whether crop or livestock production - because society demands it , but the agricultural systems in other competing countries do not do so because their societies react differently to certain production conditions , then both compensatory payments and a minimum level of protection from foreign competitors must be guaranteed .
This is part and parcel of the fair trade conditions that we want to see , and it is a crucial point .
It also concerns the WTO , which you mentioned , Mr Sturdy .
Of course we must also look at this in detail , including in the debates on that specific issue .
In any case , Mr Sturdy , I agree with what you said .
In view of the Commission proposals , the question arose - or rather I was asked very specifically , by Mrs Anttila , I believe - as to how I , as President of the Council , proposed to prevent farmers from going bankrupt as a result of the price reductions .
Here I must say something about our concept of politics in general .
To believe or claim that politics can prevent bankruptcies - by means of any instrument , action or basic conditions - is an assumption that I would warn against .
Politics will never be capable of this under any conditions .
At best we can ask whether , with a view of the proposed solutions , the basic competition conditions are fair or not .
We must discuss whether this makes sense for the future of agriculture .
But it does not relieve farmers of the business decision ; it does not relieve me , as a manager , of the responsibility of taking the necessary decisions in my company to ensure its long-term existence in the light of the current conditions .
But we should not ask too much of politics .
Indeed , it seems to me that in the past we perhaps too often gave the impression that politics was capable of such things .
Perhaps we should no longer give this impression in future .
I therefore very much agree that we need reliable basic conditions , that we need to be competitive .
I also agree with the view that we must be careful with our money .
Another element of this squaring of the circle is that , on the one hand , we rightly require agriculture to provide a livelihood for as many people as possible , but on the other hand we must constantly explain to the non-farming population , and also to the farmers themselves , that the total sum spent on agriculture is not a small one , when we take into account the European budget , the national budgets and part of the regional budgets in federal Member States .
Nonetheless , we have a correspondingly high drop-out rate in farms , and we have not managed to satisfy the farming population either .
This is a discussion needs to go into more detail in certain areas .
This seems to me to be particularly important .
Perhaps it is true that we spend a great deal of money , but we do not spend it in such a way that it benefits the people working on the farms .
That is putting it very simply , but it is certainly worth thinking about .
It is a point some speakers mentioned , and although I do not want to go into detail because of time constraints , it is certainly a point worth noting .
Yet the call for greater extensification , increased environmental protection , a move away from purely economic considerations , and at the same time reduced expenditure - and such a call was made , if only indirectly , unless I misunderstood - is again asking us to square the circle .
It is important that we realise this is impossible .
It is easy to talk about whether to pursue greater extensification or increased environmental protection , but we must realise that it costs money , either because local requirements make compensatory payments necessary or because the environmental protection is organised as part of an agreement ; it could be either .
One will mean more for one person , the other will mean more for another , but either way it will cost public money .
That is an aspect that must not be forgotten .
I believe I have covered the main points that were put to me .
Perhaps I placed too much emphasis on certain points , as I am new to this , but that should help you to get to know my point of view .
With regard to the view that we should perhaps nationalise the financing of the agricultural policy , which means that we would only receive money from Europe if we had organised national funds in advance or were obliged to organise these funds subsequently , forgive me for saying so , but I think that would be the end of a Community agricultural policy .
For this reason I have great doubts as to whether we should choose this path .
Applause
Mr President , I should like the President-in-Office to clarify a statement by his colleague , the Minister for Foreign Affairs , who yesterday said that we should reform the common agricultural policy in order to reduce the expenditure of the European Union .
The Minister did not give me any information on this subject and he did not answer me , but I asked him if the German Presidency had changed from its traditional position .
This question is very relevant , politically speaking , and I would therefore ask and insist that I am given an answer .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Cunha , it is not just the Germans who have so far discussed financial issues , particularly with regard to the agricultural policy ; we can see from the negotiations in the Agriculture Council in which I was involved , and from the discussions which followed with the various Member States , that financial issues are discussed continually .
I just emphasised in my reply that in my opinion it is of course very important , and indeed it is part of the reason we need agricultural reform , to ask whether the money we spend on agriculture - at European , national and , in federal Member States , regional level - is always spent in such a way , because of the way the system is organised , that it really benefits those on the farms .
To my mind this is not really a question of the level of funds provided , but a question of distribution .
I want to place particular emphasis on this point .
We say that for an indefinite period we will allocate 45 % , or , according to some , 50 % - I do not want to argue this point - of the European budget to agriculture , and at the same time we see that agricultural income is going down , not up , at least in some areas of agricultural production . Surely we have to ask ourselves what we think we are doing ?
We cannot simply accept it and say that the more money we have , the happier everyone is .
I believe we would all , in particular the landowners , be well advised to get involved in this discussion .
I do not know what the Foreign Minister said on this point , but if he thinks , as I understand it , that we can reduce expenditure without saying how and in what area it is to be done , then I would be inclined to say that just as I would come to an agreement with the Foreign Minister before expressing an opinion on foreign affairs , so should the Foreign Minister come to an agreement with the Minister for Agriculture before expressing an opinion on agricultural issues .
But I do not know what he said on this issue so I cannot comment .
I would like to discuss this with him .
In conclusion , I would like to say something that should give cause for thought .
I do not have sufficient information to speak for the other Member States of the European Union , but I can speak for Germany and for its Länder : it makes almost no difference - please note that I say ' almost ' - what instruments we use in agricultural policy or what we focus on , we have had an average drop-out rate of 3 % in farming in the last 50 years since the end of the war .
Note : the last 50 years .
This drop-out rate corresponds exactly to the increase in agricultural productivity .
Scientists have looked into this and the answers are quite clear .
I cannot be quite so clear cut , but I wonder whether we are not going to have to realise that the increase in productivity levels is undoubtedly going to mean structural changes in agriculture , with farms being abandoned , as long as economics is the basis of agricultural policy , I might add .
For me it would be inconceivable not to have economics as the basis of agricultural policy .
The result would be a great waste of resources if this were not the case .
But perhaps we should also discuss this more in public than we have done in the past .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank all those who contributed to this debate .
In my opinion it was very constructive and set an excellent example , as I hope the public will note .
On the many questions concerning specific amendments , I will repeat what I said this morning , which was that I am prepared to distribute a list clarifying which amendments the Commission considers acceptable .
I also realise that I promised to be brief in my final speech , and I would like to keep to this .
Mr Funke has just given a very clear explanation of what is important in relation to the competitiveness of European agriculture .
European agriculture must be competitive in two ways .
Firstly , our products must be competitive , and they can only be competitive if we pay greater attention to quality that we have hitherto , if we realise and act upon our consumers ' new appreciation for quality , and above all if we take into account the strength of European agriculture , which , as we know , lies in using agricultural raw materials to produce high-quality end products .
However , competitiveness in European agriculture also means that services other than the production of agricultural products must be accorded economic value and must be integrated into our market economy system .
A great deal has been said about the extent to which agricultural policy must also be social policy .
We must be realistic here .
Agricultural policy should have a social dimension but should not be purely social policy .
That would really be a mistake .
The question here is surely how we are in future to achieve a reasonable ratio , so that we do not have an imbalance like the present famous 80 : 20 .
With regard to environmental policy , I would like to remind you once again of the principle on which we in the Commission based our considerations .
The issue is not the importance of the environment within the common agricultural policy but the fact that in future we want to emphasise that compensatory payments , as we currently call them , must be linked to the environment .
For us it is essential that all farmers who receive public funds from the Community budget at least observe the principles of good farming practice .
We must certainly discuss the definition further in terms of production system , climatic region and so on .
However , we also consider it essential that other services that go beyond this are compensated separately , but these services must be voluntary .
We do not want to introduce a command economy in Europe by the back door .
I now come to the issue of financing .
The Commission has not made any proposals concerning cofinancing , as was suggested several times . It merely described , in the context of its report on own resources , possible ways of achieving a better balance between the contributions of the individual Member States .
In our view , it is now primarily up to the Member States themselves to say which of these financing models they would favour . I therefore believe that we firstly need the basics to be clarified before any political agreement can be set out in the relevant legal texts .
In the meantime , however , as you know , there are also other considerations such as stabilisation models that are very much worthy of examination .
We are prepared to look into them .
But one point must be clear : regardless of which model we use , we will not be in a position to bring about an agreement between the Member States if we do not have the necessary financing to compensate for changes in pricing policy . As the saying goes , money makes the world go round .
We really must make available the funding that is needed and that is recognised as being needed , otherwise we will not achieve proper reform .

I would like to remind you of one further point : do not forget that with regard to payment for services that will in future be part of rural development , cofinancing has already been agreed and is planned to continue .
This means that the more we push forward rural development and the more importance we attach to payment for environmental services and similar , the more likely it is that cofinancing will become automatic , but in a form that does not allow cohesion to fall by the wayside .
Thank you , Mr Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on 28 January at 9 a.m.
Organic production
The next item is the debate on the following oral questions :
B4-0719 / 98 by Mrs Barthet-Mayer on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , to the Council , on rules relating to organic production ( livestock production ) ; -B4-0720 / 98 by Mrs Barthet-Mayer on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , to the Commission , on rules relating to organic production ( livestock production ) .
Commissioner , Mr President , as rapporteur for the Committee on Agriculture on the extension of Regulation 2092 / 91 to organic production , I would remind you that we obtained very wide consensus in Parliament on this text .
To the great satisfaction of Members , the Commission then took over a large number of our amendments and included them in its amended proposal .
During 1998 , the successive versions of the text discussed in the Council unfortunately resulted in a significant shift .
So the purpose of my two oral questions today is to alert the Commission and the Council on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture , and I want to thank my colleagues in the Committee on Agriculture for their confidence and support in taking this action that meets their concerns .
This shift relates to three areas .
First , the transitional conversion periods are considerably extended .
It does not take 15 years to reduce the number of chickens in a building .
Next , there is an increase in the number of derogations , which could end up distorting the proposal .
This applies , for example , to the sensitive issue of feed . In principle , this should be entirely organic in this type of production , and in this respect the Commission 's proposal is already sufficient derogation in itself , since it recommends 90 % organic feed .
Finally , standards and thresholds going far beyond the Commission 's proposal have been progressively introduced .
There is also a risk of it becoming a form of catch-all regulation authorising intensification in organic agriculture , which is a contradiction in terms .
I am aware of what is at stake economically in connection with consumers ' recent interest in this sector of production in the European Union , and also in connection with potential future exports .
I thus felt bound to react to put the legislators on their guard against the internal risk from such a flimsy and incoherent regulation , which is likely to distort competition according to different national or regional interpretations and methods of control that are not harmonised .
I also want to put them on their guard about the fact that the application of a complete regulation is being delayed even further , with the risk that the European Union - a pioneer in this field - might have only have to meet the general standards of the codex alimentarius , its text being currently under discussion , with all that that also involves in terms of the actual nature of imports from third countries .
As in other agricultural sectors , the lack of a strong common proposal threatens to weaken the Union later on in the World Trade Organisation , because we know the debate is going on in the United States to try to impose GMOs , the use of urban sludge , irradiation of foodstuffs , and even natural hormones on organic farming .
All this is very different from our European conception of this sector .
Organic farming must undoubtedly remain a symbol of the most demanding , the strictest and the most thoroughly controlled quality , to the benefit of all who want it , both producers and consumers .
It is a voluntary approach and everyone is free to adhere to it or adopt another type of quality production .
As a result , I call on the Commission to stand by its proposal , and even withdraw it if it is being excessively distorted by the Council .
But I do hope that it will not be necessary to go that far .
And I am also very hopeful when I call on the Council to have another in-depth look at this proposal , in the knowledge that we are , of course , in agreement with its proposal of last December , which lays down the principles of organic breeding .
But we very firmly reiterate our request that the Council 's text be revised , and we hope , in line with what Mr Funke gave us to understand this morning , that the Presidency-in-Office will heed the combined voices of Parliament and the Commission .
Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , please do not let cut-price organic farming develop .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Barthet-Mayer , we dealt with this issue in the Agriculture Council of 14-15 December and , as you know , agreed on guidelines , but we also urged that it should be adopted as soon as possible in the spring of this year , in accordance with your wishes , as the Council also saw the need for speedy adoption .
Certainly , we cannot currently predict what the substance of the text of the regulation ultimately submitted will be .
We shall have to wait and see , but the opinion of the Council was that , as you requested , we need a clear demarcation between organic production and conventional production .
I fully agree with you on this .
However , on the other hand , we must proceed with the necessary flexibility and simply appraise the situation as we go along .
We must also be flexible in facilitating the transition for those who wish to change over to organic livestock production .
For this reason we also discussed appropriate transitional periods .
One side called for fifteen years .
If I remember correctly , we agreed on twelve years .
I know that there was a lengthy , in-depth discussion about this twelve-year period and - you are shaking your head anxiously - that we can of course also call for shorter periods .
On the other hand , however , we know that it was as a result of practical experience that we decided to favour longer periods .
I assure you that we will implement this quickly in accordance with your wishes and that we will monitor observance of the demarcation very strictly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr Funke has already indicated , there were various problems in the discussions in the Council with the proposal submitted by the Commission following debate in Parliament .
The main problem is really that some of the elements of our proposal cannot be readily introduced in all Member States .
We therefore had a debate on transitional derogations to allow the national provisions that currently exist in most Member States to be brought into line with future Community law .
Some of the amendments concern in particular the origin of the animals , as animals or feedingstuffs can come from conventional holdings .
We must not forget that in a number of Member States organic farming has hardly been practised up to now .
We must give these countries an opportunity to start organic farming if they wish to do so .
This is really why we want a transitional provision of this kind .
I would also like to stress that harmonisation can only progress gradually , particularly if the relevant livestock production has hitherto been governed predominantly by national or regional rules .
Certain amendments were proposed in order to solve this problem .
They concern in particular the tethering of animals and requirements in terms of the lying area and litter area that should be provided for each animal .
Do not forget that for centuries tethering was the normal way to keep animals , particularly on small holdings .
And if a farmer has his small farm in the middle of a village it is not always easy to provide the appropriate litter areas .
Nor should you forget that it is the smaller holdings that today are already recognised as organic farms , but that this recognition would have to be revoked if they did not have a litter pen .
So here we must be prepared to reach a compromise .
In conclusion , I would like to point out that derogations always apply for a transitional period only and that these are by no means unprecedented .
Such provisions also exist for example for seeds and plants or for conventional ingredients in organic foodstuffs .
With regard to future action I would simply like to clarify that the Commission is of course prepared to defend its proposal and if necessary to justify why certain exceptions are necessary on a temporary basis .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , I would like to say briefly that the Social Democrats in the European Parliament are very pleased that you have clarified these matters for us and that common sense has prevailed .
Of course snow falls in the beautiful Tyrol , in the almost as beautiful Allgäu and also in beautiful Lower Saxony , and then the cows just have to be brought into their stalls .
All this - you know that I defend the Commission and also the Council on all important issues - fell victim to propaganda in my home town during the election .
It was said that ropes were banned from cowsheds , so of course people moaned about the nasty Eurocrats again .
I am pleased that this subject is now closed and that common sense has prevailed in Europe . Thank you .
We can now at long last continue to support a very reasonable method of production .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , organic farmers have often been depicted as outsiders , and I believe that if this continues they will continue to be outsiders .
The basic conditions should be created to ensure that they do not remain outsiders , with the exception of ideologues .
Flexibility , which you mentioned , Mr Funke , is right , necessary and sensible , but it should take the right direction and should not be a form of protection for large industrial concerns that wish to maintain forms of production that admittedly lead to relatively low unit prices in economic terms but ultimately harm public health .
I believe this is what you meant by flexibility .
In any case that is how I see it .
In my view , the transition periods are too long .
Pointless conditions that make organic farming much more difficult should be abolished or not introduced in the first place .
But I believe that marketing and promotion are vitally important and necessary , both to change consumer habits and , in the form of commercial initiatives , to create sales opportunities for small farms , as most of the farms concerned are small holdings .
Four weeks ago a study was presented to us by the chamber of commerce in Bozen in the south Tyrol . It was a comparative study of 1 500 cooperatives in the Alps , from France to Slovenia , and we learned that the farms that were involved in these cooperatives fared much better than the others in terms of income security .
Since mainly small farms are involved we would need to introduce greater support for cooperatives in this area .
If you do not yet have this study , I would be glad to provide you with a copy .
In Austria we have learned that almost 20 % of current production comes from areas of organic production .
I believe we are moving in the right direction .
It is an advantage for our consumers , for health , for better extensification of farmland and , I believe , it offers good future prospects for young farmers too , particularly as the average age of more than half of those employed in agriculture is over 55 years .
Mr President , in terms of our subject this afternoon , we all agree that there is a steadily increasing consumer demand for organic products .
There are already rules in Europe on fruit and vegetables , and almost everyone knows what the definition of these is .
This is far from being the case with animal products .
I think it is very important that we should allow as few derogations from the rule as possible .
If there are derogations , I think consumers will lose all confidence , and it will also mean that there is no proper competition .
I think that Mr Funke 's suggestion just now that we should look at all this again in the spring is a very welcome one .
Certainly not all countries will be able to start at the same time .
But that is not the issue here .
The issue here is whether we can sell customers things which satisfy their expectations and which are able to meet certain standards for organic production .
Other countries can join in later .
But it is important that consumers should have the assurance that there is a specific definition consistent with their expectations , and that producers should know the requirements to which they must produce .
That is it , really .
Anyone who cannot meet those expectations will not sell these products and will not produce them either .
Once again , we look forward with interest to the spring .
Mr President , the history of the regulation on organic farming began in 1992 .
Initial discussions led to the regulation on plants , then followed the commitment by Parliament and then by the Commission that animals would be covered a year later .
It is now 1999 , and as the President-in-Office said earlier , all we have to do now is to adopt it .
But please , Mr Funke , do not put urgency before quality since we have been working on this for so long already !
What is the current situation ?
We are now at the stage of the legislative procedure where Parliament has adopted a position on this issue .
The Commission has adopted some of Parliament 's amendments .
The Council requires a unanimous vote to reject this modified proposal containing Parliament 's amendments , if the Commission keeps to its proposal .
I would like to discuss two points : tethering and gene technology .
Tethering is not mentioned at all in the Commission 's proposal .
This means that it will have to be inserted later and the Commission will have to be prepared to compromise so that this problematic issue can be covered , because it is a subject that has been neglected completely , at least for cattle .
I would ask you not to insist excessively on animal welfare , which essentially has nothing to do with appropriate ways of keeping animals .
Appropriate tethering is perfectly possible , but exact details must be given , and we must not throw the baby out with the bath water .
For the use of genetically modified organisms the principle is different .
The Commission adopted the proposal that we do not want the use of genetically modified organisms to be included in this regulation and therefore in organic production .
This is therefore a ban .
There is a ban on using genetically modified organisms , and it should remain .
Yet we have the problem of what to do with potentially contaminated organisms .
This is where we begin to weaken .
With regard to tethering I am in favour of a moderate approach , but here I am in favour of a strict approach , because if we allow contamination and then in the novel foods regulation , to which it relates , allow a certain percentage that need not be labelled , we are allowing the use of genetically modified organisms through the backdoor ; if tests then show that products do indeed contain such organisms , we will lose our markets .
Here I would ask that we proceed with caution .
Furthermore , the question of contamination is dependent on what measures are taken to ensure that other areas are not contaminated during release experiments .
I would ask for a very strict approach to be adopted here , Commissioner .
It is in your hands .
If you do not seek a compromise with the Council on this , the Council 's hands are tied .
We may postpone the matter once again , but then we must not act in haste but give priority to quality .
Mr President , the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations has also signed the joint motion for a resolution on organic livestock production because the Commission 's proposal is much too lax .
It provides for far too many derogations and it is in contradiction to the rigour of the national standards established by a number of Member States , including France .
Even if the final revised version allows Member States to maintain stricter national provisions than those to be applied at European level , we are bound to fear a levelling down .
Our group is aware of the potential of organic livestock production for the agriculture of Member States .
After what has happened with BSE and GMOs , the consumer wants a level of food safety that organic production can guarantee .
But before signing the joint motion for a resolution , the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations called for the incorporation of a certain number of points that it considers essential .
Derogations must be strictly and entirely limited to production subject to the external constraint of extreme and exceptional climate conditions . Transitional regimes must be limited in terms of their duration to allow producers to adapt their system of production to European standards that are stricter their own specifications .
With the codex alimentarius due to determine the rules relating to production , labelling and marketing of organic products as from the end of June 1999 , the Union needs to adopt a clear position that incorporates strict standards .
Finally , as regards labelling , our group is opposed to the harmonised European logo for organic products that some people want .
As national specifications are different , the harmonised European logo would be a source of confusion for the consumer and would involve a levelling down of the health standards of organic livestock products .
Through its national legislation , the United States has tried to authorise the incorporation of GMOs into feed for animals intended for organic production .
American consumers have succeeded in getting this proposal withdrawn and our group welcomes that fact .
Thanks to the constraints it imposes in terms of specifications and the traceability of products , organic farming represents an attractive opportunity for some producers .
It represents one means of linking agriculture closely to the land and permitting an agricultural price differential higher than standard world prices .
Mr President , this dual advantage must not be abandoned to the benefit of the purely mercenary approach adopted by certain Member States towards organic production .
Mr President , two types of farming coexist today .
The first is one that responds to the demands of the multinationals , which are mainly American , that poisons the ground and foodstuffs , and that intends , for the first time in history , to patent living creatures and alter genetic heritage .
It also plans to market non-reproducible seeds , has been spreading cancer for the last 50 years and has cut human sperm production in half through pesticides , herbicides and fungicides .
Then there is the other kind of farming , the form of peasant , traditional farming , which respects employment , the environment and human health , but which has been systematically marginalised by the lobbies , right down to its very name - organic - which is an ambiguous and opaque term as far as the general public is concerned .
The National Front prefers to talk about traditional and natural farming and chooses the farming that has shaped our civilisation down through the millennia .
Farmers are the main victims of chemical methods .
The socialists are the leading accomplices of this system : in France , for instance , they only grant FRF 100 per farm per year for conversion to organic farming .
For the leading agricultural nation in Europe , faced with the challenge of a rapidly expanding market , this is ridiculous .
Consumers want something other than mad cow disease , hormones and GMOs . These substances should be banned .
In the face of the challenges of pollution , urban overcrowding and the destruction of the countryside , organic farming makes only a vague appearance in Agenda 2000 and that is unacceptable .
So what should be done ?
Firstly , we must increase the level of resources set aside for conversion .
Secondly , we must oppose all levelling down and any derogation that will endanger the quality and credibility of organic farming networks of any kind .
French standards are excellent in this respect , and must not be undermined .
We say ' no ' to cut-price organic farming !
Thirdly , it is scandalous that in 1999 , products that guarantee jobs and protect the environment and public health are taxed at the same rate as doctored products that are full of hormones and that are the result of chemical , transgenic methods that are tragically destructive for consumers and for natural environments .
So no tax or VAT should therefore be levied on organic farming .
Mr President , the UK currently lags behind most EU countries in its production of organic food .
Currently only about 1 % of our farm output is recognised as organic .
However , the demand for such produce has risen enormously over the last few years , and not just because of the BSE crisis : our supermarkets simply cannot obtain enough organic produce to keep pace with this rising demand from their customers , even when looking to other Member States to meet the shortfall .
The demand is there and consumers are prepared to pay high prices for what they regard as a healthier and higher-quality product .
However , the transitional period for farmers switching to organic production is often very difficult , as they incur extra costs for some years before being able to obtain recognition as a fully organic producer and so able to command the higher prices .
On the other hand , consumers need to know that they are paying more for a genuine organic product .
Here I want to join my colleagues in urging both the Commission and the Council to take speedy action to implement the measures to further organic husbandry , as recommended by the Committee on Agriculture , for which Mrs Barthet-Mayer has been such an eloquent spokeswoman on this issue .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will help to save us some time .
I think we can say that the EU Agriculture Council has essentially succeeded in dealing with the new EU eco-regulation .
In our opinion the Federal Government has found acceptable compromises , particularly from a national point of view , in order to achieve vital objectives relating to livestock farming , feedingstuffs and veterinary medicine .
I consider this intermediate step to be an initial reaction .
An acceptable basis has been found for sustainable basic conditions for improved ecological livestock production .
Several speakers considered this to be long overdue .
It is now possible to conclude the amendment of the EU eco-regulation under the German Presidency in the first half of 1999 .
I have another question concerning the quality mark .
But perhaps I am simply not well enough informed .
Are we again to have all the different national quality marks and an additional quality mark that can be recognised EU-wide , as Mr Mulder requested before in his report ?
I think it would be helpful to have an answer from you on this issue .
But perhaps it is already in the text .
Will there be different national quality marks or a harmonised EU quality mark ?
Mr President , I would like briefly to answer two questions .
In reply to Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert 's question , the Commission is working towards developing an EU-wide logo , as called for in the resolution .
The second question concerns GMO .
For us it is not problem - and we stand by this - that we do not want to allow the use of GMO .
But as Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf rightly said , there is a problem with contamination .
However , we wish to be as restrictive as possible here , so we would rather talk about unavoidable contamination than just contamination .
The details have yet to be worked out , however , so that there can be no excuses .
Thank you , Mr Fischler .
I have received eight motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B4-0004 / 99 ) .
I should like to welcome Mr Verheugen , and we look forward to working with him and having the pleasure of his company in the days ahead .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Question No 1 by Patricia McKenna ( H-1172 / 98 ) Subject : Convention on mutual legal assistance and lawful interception of telecommunications
Will the Council report on the outcome of the Justice and Home Affairs Council of 3-4 December 1998 with particular regard to any discussion on the Draft Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance , and the protocol thereto , on any debate or conclusions reached on the lawful interception of telecommunications ( ENFOPOL 98 , 10951 / 98 , and 10951 / 1 / 98 REV 1 amending the Council Resolution of 17 January 1995 - ENFOPOL 87 ) , and on any ongoing discussion taking place at the K4 Committee and its working parties ?
How can the Council justify the secrecy and lack of consultation surrounding these initiatives when the documents become available anyway , and the only result is a lack of democratic debate , either in the European Parliament or in the national parliaments ?
Why do not the Member States debate the matter openly in advance before agreeing in the ' group of twenty ' countries , since these are such crucial and far-reaching measures , with enormous potential impact on the realm of privacy ?
What exact legal redress is available to citizens , should they wish to challenge either these rules , as being in breach of rights enshrined in the Treaties , or the decisions taken under these rules ?
Question No 2 by Inger Schörling ( H-1236 / 98 ) Subject : ECHELON
One of the subjects discussed during a debate in Parliament on 14 September was the ECHELON surveillance system .
The Commission said on that occasion that it had no knowledge of the existence of ECHELON .
It would , therefore , be valuable to know what emerged during the Council meeting on justice and home affairs of 3-4 December 1998 , particularly with regard to covert listening and monitoring of telecommunications and how that relates to ENFOPOL 98 , 10951 / 98 and 10951 / 1 / 98 REV I amending the Council resolution of 17 January 1995 .
Why does the Council not find it appropriate to discuss these matters openly with Parliament , particularly in view of the fact that they concern the individual 's right to a private life and that any agreements concluded may be in direct conflict with Member States ' national legislation ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer the questions by Mrs McKenna and Mrs Schörling , and would like to welcome him once again .
Mr President , in reply to this question , the Council has already pointed out on several occasions when answering questions on this subject in the House - and I can only repeat this - that it has never been involved with issues concerning the matter which the honourable Member refers to in her latest question .
I would therefore ask her to appreciate that the Council is not in a position to provide an answer on this .
I would also point out that the interception of telecommunications , which is the subject of the proposal for a Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in criminal matters , seeks to promote international cooperation in order to control international crime .
This type of interception does not pursue any other objectives apart from that of fighting organised crime .
I might add then that the honourable Members ' questions are concerned with the interception of telecommunications for the purpose of solving crimes .
The relevant Council bodies are currently dealing with a draft Council resolution on new technologies which is clearly connected with both the Council Resolution of 17 January 1995 on the lawful interception of telecommunications , and the discussions on the interception of telecommunications within the framework of the Draft Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in criminal matters between the Member States of the European Union .
The requirements of the competent authorities with regard to the technical implementation of lawful interceptions in modern telecommunications systems are summarised in the 1995 resolution .
It should be noted that this resolution does not deal with the legal basis for authorising interception ; it deals solely with the technical requirements for the monitoring agencies with regard to monitoring telecommunications on the basis of a valid authorisation .
The 1995 resolution is applied in principle to current and future telecommunications systems .
In view of ongoing progress in telecommunications technology , however , it is being considered whether the resolution needs clarification on a series of points , pertaining to satellite systems and the Internet in particular .
This draft resolution seeks to provide the necessary clarification .
As regards the Draft Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in criminal matters , the possibility of adopting rules on the interception of telecommunications for the purpose of solving crime has been carefully examined both by experts and by the Council itself .
Conventional telecommunications systems operate within one country and are based on the assumption that a target in any one country can only be monitored by means of the telecommunications system in that particular country .
However , these technical restrictions do not apply to the new satellite systems .
New forms of cooperation are therefore necessary .
The ongoing discussions involve a series of highly sensitive political issues .
Moreover , the issues concerned are of a highly complex technical nature .
Naturally , due respect should be paid in this connection to the human rights angle and in particular to the relevant provisions of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
At its meeting on 3 and 4 December 1998 , the Council examined the most difficult political issues .
These concerned cases of monitoring for the purpose of solving crime , where the technology could be made available for a country to monitor a target in another country without this country providing the technical support to do so .
A broad majority of Member States took the view that the country in which the target is located should be informed in these cases and should be in a position to demand that it is not monitored , or that it ceases to be monitored .
One Member State declared itself in favour of providing for exceptions for reasons of national security .
Some other issues were also discussed , in particular the question as to what extent the Member State in which the target is located should be in a position to demand that material already seized be destroyed .
In this connection , however , the question that requires urgent clarification is whether it is sufficient to merely inform the country in which the target is located , or whether this country should arrange for the target to be monitored under the mutual legal assistance arrangements in accordance with its legal framework .
This issue is also particularly important because the result of an obligation to merely inform the country in which the target is located would be to shape technology in such a way that individuals could be monitored in their own country by another Member State .
What we are talking about here is that the Internet would be forced to put facilities in place so that the police can come in through the back door .
If these plans were implemented ENFOPOL would be able to monitor almost every communication mode .
This would be a gross abuse of people 's right to privacy and of basic civil liberties .
There is an internal Council document which was to be discussed .
It has been put on the Internet in German .
In the interests of transparency , this document should be available in all languages so people can see what is going on at these K4 meetings .
Even though you talk about the justification for this , you do not mention what the consequences are or the cost effect for the Internet providers to provide such a facility .
They are going to be asked to pay for this so that the police can , without warrants and without any justification , bar this bland statement by yourself , say that this is done to fight crime . We need openness and to know what is going on .
Parliament should be informed , Member States should open up this discussion so that people in the Member States know what is going on before it is too late .
Mrs McKenna , I would point out once again that the interception of telecommunications , which is the subject of the proposal for a Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in criminal matters , seeks to promote international cooperation in order to control international crime .
This type of interception does not pursue any other objectives apart from that of fighting organised crime .
I should like to ask if the President-in-Office can comment on the memorandum or protocol issued by the K4 Committee , which states that work on the overall structure of a global surveillance system , as agreed in the scheme arranged between the EU and the FBI , should take place outside the third pillar .
This is rather an interesting piece of news , since it could be that discussions do not take place within the Council itself but elsewhere , for example in the K4 Committee and in other committees and working groups .
However , the question still remains : why does the Council not find it convenient to discuss the matter openly with the European Parliament , particularly in view of the fact that it has a direct bearing on the public 's right to privacy ? There is also the possibility of any agreement turning out to be in direct conflict with national legislation .
A reply would therefore be much appreciated .
Mrs Schörling , I fully understand your concern , and I can assure you that the Council takes this seriously .
However , the discussions which you mentioned have not been concluded and , therefore , the outcome you indicated is not the case either .
If the Council were to achieve an outcome , everything necessary would of course be done to safeguard the rights of Parliament , but also of course to give the Member States the opportunity - which they will also have during the discussions that take place beforehand - to explain their interpretation of the law , and to see to it that fundamental questions concerning the legal culture of the European Union are not adversely affected .
I have two supplementary questions .
The first concerns the 1995 resolution on the lawful interception of telecommunications .
My question is as follows : what kind of cooperation has taken place with the USA and other non-European countries in this area ?
Equivalent legislation already exists in the USA .
My second question concerns illegal telephone tapping and more precisely the Echelon system , which is a global military surveillance system without any legal base .
Has the Echelon system ever been discussed in the Council of Ministers , and is there any link between Echelon and the system of lawful interception that exists in the EU ?
Mr Sjöstedt , I would gladly answer your question , but I am unable do so because it is so far from the original question that I was unable to prepare for it .
I therefore hope it is acceptable if I reply in writing to both these questions .
Question No 3 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-1174 / 98 ) Subject : Changes in the system of EU own resources
The Commission report on the operation of the EU 's own resources system includes a proposal that the Member States should continue to pay direct aid under the common agricultural policy based on Community legislation as they do at present , but that instead of receiving a 100 % refund from the EU budget , they will receive only a partial refund of 75 % .
Since , according to the Commission 's data , such a change to the own resources system will not only harm the ' cohesion countries ' , and particularly Greece , but will also undermine the basic principles and rules governing the common agricultural policy , will the Council confirm that no proposals will be adopted which deprive the cohesion countries of some ECU 1.2 billion annually , while the unacceptable refund arrangements enjoyed by the UK since 1984 , amounting to some ECU 1.3 billion , are retained ?

I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Alavanos 's question .
Mr President , the negotiations on Agenda 2000 have entered their final phase and are to be brought to a close at the European Council meeting on 24 and 25 March 1999 in accordance with the undertaking given at the Vienna European Council .
Mr Alavanos will understand that the Council cannot comment on individual points mentioned during the discussions , given that the negotiations are still taking place and full agreement has not been reached .
However , the Council can at this stage indicate that it was specifically asked at the Vienna European Council to carefully examine all the issues raised and viewpoints set out during the discussions , so that full agreement can be reached .
The European Council has also asked all Member States to participate fully in helping to achieve , on the basis of solidarity and careful budgetary management , a fair and balanced outcome that is acceptable to all .
Mr President , I thank the President-in-Office for his answer , though it cannot be categorical since the negotiations are still in progress .
More particularly , I should like to ask whether this proposal for the substantive renationalisation of part of the funding of the common agricultural policy is still on the negotiating table , because in negotiations some initial proposals are lost , other new ones appear , and so on .
Is the proposal for the nationalisation of part of the common agricultural policy still up for negotiation ?
Mr President , Mr Alavanos , the situation is such that all proposals which were made by both the Commission and the Member States during the discussions up to now are still on the negotiating table .
An important prerequisite for the German Presidency was to make it clear that in this final stage of the discussions all proposals are on the table for the moment .
This does not mean that the package which is to be adopted as a final compromise will include everything that is currently on the negotiating table , but that all proposals which the Commission has made , and which have in the meantime come from the Member States , are part of the negotiations which the presidency is currently holding .
Moreover , I can assure you that solidarity in financing the European Union and making decisions on the European Union 's budget is a matter which is of crucial importance for the German Presidency in particular .
Question No 4 by Eva Kjer Hansen , which has been taken over by Mrs Spaak ( H-1176 / 98 ) Subject : Institutional problems on enlargement
Do the unresolved institutional problems really mean that there will be no enlargement of the EU before 2005 ?
There are still no plans as to how enlargement will take place : Firstly , the protocol on the institutions with the prospect of enlargement of the European Union reduces the number of Commissioners to one per Member State provided that the weighting of votes in the Council is modified , but 20 new Commissioners are to be appointed in January 2000 for a 5-year term of office . Secondly , Article 137 of the Amsterdam Treaty lays down that the number of Members of the European Parliament must not exceed 700 , but at the next elections 626 MEPs will be elected for a 5-year term of office .
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer this question , which Mrs Spaak has now taken over .
Mr President , the Council would point out to Mrs Spaak that the protocol on the institutions with the prospect of enlargement of the European Union , which is intended to form the basis of a plan for adapting the institutions , has not yet entered into force , since the Amsterdam Treaty to which this protocol is annexed has not yet been ratified by all the Member States .
As soon as all the instruments of ratification have been deposited in Rome , the treaty and the protocols in the annex , which constitute an integral part of the treaty , will enter into force on the first day of the second month following the deposit of the final ratification instrument .
Mrs Spaak , this last sentence was so incomprehensible even in my own language that I should prefer to clarify it .
In other words , if everyone has ratified the treaty by the end of March , it will enter into force on 1 May , and if everyone has ratified it by the end of April , it will enter into force on 1 June .
I had trouble understanding the sentence myself .
At the Vienna European Council on 11 and 12 December , it was agreed that the ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty still constitutes our first priority .
When it meets in Cologne the Council will decide when and how to tackle the institutional problems which are not resolved in the treaty , and which must be resolved before enlargement takes place .
The important question which you raised , Mrs Spaak , must be considered in this context .
Moreover , the Council would point out that , until now , there has been no formal confirmation of the date on which the current accession negotiations with the applicant countries will be brought to a close .
The case considered by Mrs Spaak is therefore not on the agenda .
As regards the question on Article 189 , formerly Article 137 of the consolidated treaties , it should be noted that the number of 700 Members of the European Parliament from the entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty is valid for the number of Member States in the Union at that time .
Apportionment amongst the individual Member States following enlargement will be negotiated at the appropriate time .
Mr President-in-Office , I would just like to point out that the Amsterdam Treaty resolves none of the institutional problems raised in Mrs Kjer Hansen 's question .
Waiting for ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty seems to me to amount to a long delay , especially for the applicant countries .
My supplementary question is as follows : has the Council yet considered the various proposals and the various problems highlighted by Mrs Kjer Hansen in her question ?
Mr President , I consider the question to be a completely legitimate one , and I also share the concern which underlies it .
The Council has not yet dealt specifically with the proposals you mentioned , but has merely discussed the question of how the unresolved institutional problems are to be tackled .
As you know , the German Presidency was instructed only a few weeks ago to make a procedural proposal for the summit in Cologne .
We are currently holding the necessary discussions on this , and I have just pledged within another parliamentary body to ensure that the discussion within Parliament and the opinion it forms will be duly taken into account , because Parliament has a particularly important role to play , especially concerning the development of the institutional character of the Union .
We will therefore not be able to reach a decision on the core issues regarding institutional reform during the German Presidency , and do not even wish to , because for the moment we have only been instructed to make a procedural proposal .
I must draw your attention to the fact - and you of course know this - that agreement on a particular procedure is often already halfway to reaching overall agreement in the Union .
In connection with enlargement , I should also like to tell you that in the opinion of the presidency , there is full agreement on the need to resolve the institutional problems by the time the first accessions take place .
That the presidency also wishes to speed up the decision-making process on institutional issues is a positive signal to the applicant countries , and I think it is in our mutual interest that this positive signal can actually be given as well .
I found the President-in-Office 's reply very helpful and encouraging as far as it goes , but it does not fully address some of the points that are made in this question .
I am a member of the Joint Parliamentary Committee with Poland .
The Polish Government has indicated that it believes it will be ready for accession in January 2003 .
They may not be able to achieve that .
But are we , in effect , shutting the door to any enlargement within the period of the next five years ?
It seems to me that if Commissioners are to be appointed at the end of this year on the same basis as they are at the moment , it would present serious problems .
The same , to some extent , applies to Parliament .
I wonder if some thought is being given to these issues .
If we are going to wait until next year or later before we begin to think about these factors , you can see the difficulties that will arise .
Mr President , I am very grateful to you , Mr Elliot , for asking this question because it gives me the opportunity to clarify a point .
A date has not been fixed for the accessions .
Neither a later nor an earlier date has been indicated , but rather the date fixed will depend solely on how the negotiations progress . As you know , there are altogether 31 packages for negotiation .
You are aware of the current situation .
Three of the 31 negotiation packages have been concluded provisionally , and four more are about to be concluded .
We intend to start negotiations on six to eight more packages during the German Presidency , so that about half of all the packages are in the process of being negotiated by mid-1999 .
By then we will have perhaps almost reached the stage where we can see how much longer we actually need . We will then have to decide whether or not to fix a date for the accessions .
I do not see the danger you seem to in the effect that institutional reform would have on enlargement .
According to the consensus we have established within the Member States , the institutional problems should be resolved by the year 2001 .
However , I would see this as the latest date for this . It is highly unlikely that an accession treaty can be agreed upon and concluded with any one applicant country by 2001 .
To answer this question very precisely , I do not believe that we will be in a position where the negotiations on accession have been concluded , but the European Union is not ready for enlargement because the institutional issues have not been resolved .
This matter is of the utmost importance for the German Presidency , and I am grateful to see that this is also an extremely important issue for Parliament .
I firmly believe that the credibility of the entire enlargement process also depends on how seriously we work towards completing the institutional reforms .
Question No 5 by Paul Rübig ( H-1183 / 98 ) Subject : Security in cities
During the European Parliament 's May part-session in Strasbourg , the representative of the British Council Presidency , Mr Douglas Henderson , agreed to the immediate establishment of a group of experts who were to deal with the topic of the increase in crime in European cities .
Could the Council give me some indication of the composition and the activities to date of this Council group , as well as an insight into the further priorities of the German Presidency in this field ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Rübig 's question .
Mr President , security in cities is certainly one of the areas in which only a coordinated approach extending across authorities and disciplines can be successful .
Experts within the Council group on police cooperation are dealing with crime in European cities .
In the past , their work focused on violence in cities , police cooperation and violent gangs in urban areas .
In order to improve the exchange of information on proven methods , increase the exchange of experiences and extend practical cooperation , the group has agreed on an exchange programme for officials active in the area of violence in cities .
One of the first exchange schemes for police officers who are active in the campaign against violence in cities took place in France in October 1998 .
Such exchange schemes will also be run in the future .
Mr President , a few days ago Mr von Wogau 's press officer was attacked at Place Schuman at 7 o 'clock in the evening .
He was taken to hospital with a cut .
However , this is by no means an isolated case .
In the last year , Mr Voggenhuber , Mrs McCarthy , Mr Schiedermeier , Mrs Pack and many others have been attacked in Brussels .
My office carried out a survey of 300 offices in the European Parliament ; over a third of them reported an incidence of criminal assault in Brussels within the last year .
I believe that the European institutions need to be made safer .
The Belgian national parliament is kept under surveillance by the army and the police force .
As far as I know , the European institutions are not kept under surveillance at all .
There are more than 10 reported cases of theft on average each month in the European Parliament alone .
How does the Council presidency intend to improve this situation ?
Mr Rübig , you will understand why I have to point out firstly that maintaining public law and order on the territory of the Member States is primarily a matter for the police forces of the individual states .
Having said this , the facts which you described are to be taken seriously , and I will use this as an opportunity to address the issue at an appropriate time .
Question No 6 by José Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra ( H-1185 / 98 ) Subject : Communication on the First EU-Latin America and Caribbean Summit
The First EU-Latin America and Caribbean Summit of heads of state and government is to be held in Brazil in June 1999 . The European Parliament has already participated in the Ministerial Conferences of the San José Group and the Rio Group , in both the opening ceremonies and the various work sessions .
On what basis does the Council intend to include the European Parliament as a participant in this summit ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Salafranca 's question .
Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , I must say right at the outset that you will be disappointed by my answer , but you will appreciate that as we have only been in office for 12 days there has not yet been a Council meeting during the German Presidency .
The Council has therefore not yet had any opportunity to examine the question of the European Parliament 's possible participation in the meeting which you mentioned , and indeed has not done so .
I should like to say to the Council representative that the disappointment in his response does not mean that the Council 's action should be disappointing .
I would like to point out that at the last Ministerial Conference in San José , held last February under the British Presidency , the way in which the European Parliament delegation was treated was obviously wrong . It was in fact treated worse than the delegations from third countries .
I would like to ask the Presidency-in-Office to ensure that the European Parliament delegation is treated correctly at this important summit , in accordance with the institutional role it plays and in accordance with its importance in maintaining momentum in relations between the European Union and Latin America
On that particular occasion , a rather serious incident occurred at the beginning of the Conference . I would therefore be grateful to the German Presidency if it would guarantee that the European Parliament will be able to fulfil its corresponding institutional role , as I have requested .
I am grateful to Mr Salafranca for expressing these concerns .
They give us a reason to make an effort to ensure that complaints of this kind are no longer necessary during our presidency .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Question No 7 by Freddy Blak ( H-1192 / 98 ) Subject : Ending of duty-free sales in the EU
As a vice-chairman of Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control , I was astonished to read the answer I received from the Council to my question of 1 October concerning the ending of duty-free sales .
I am a directly elected Member of the European Parliament , and the people I represent expect the questions I submit to be treated seriously , as do I. What I received on 19 November 1998 is not a serious answer .
I therefore have no alternative but to resubmit my original question , and I expect that , this time , a proper answer will be given .
Duty-free sales in the EU will come to an end on 30 June 1999 .
The 22nd recital of Council Directive 92 / 12 / EEC states that before their abolition ' a certain period of time will be required to take the necessary measures to alleviate both the social repercussions in the sectors concerned and regional difficulties ... which might arise ' .


In a reply to the Ombudsman , the Commission takes the view that it is not required to carry out an analysis of these problems , stating that it had never been the Council 's intention to impose such an obligation on the Commission and that this was confirmed when the Ecofin Council discussed the question in November 1996 , adding that , as these were informal discussions , the conclusions were not recorded in the official minutes , but that the matter was again discussed by the Ecofin Council on 19 May 1998 with the same result ( Commission 's observations in response to a request from the European Ombudsman for further information ( complaint by Freddy Blak , ref .
0879 / 97 ) ) .

Will the Council confirm the Commission 's reading of the Council 's conclusions and explain how this view is in keeping with the above Directive ?
Question No 8 by Gisèle Moreau ( H-1227 / 98 ) Subject : Postponement of the abolition of intra-Community duty-free shopping
On 19 May 1998 the Council confirmed that the decision it took in 1991 to abolish intra-Community duty-free shopping would indeed be implemented on 1 July 1999 .
All the studies that have been carried out highlight the very large number of job losses which will result from the abolition of duty-free shopping in airports and on ferries .
In France , for example , more than 12 000 jobs would disappear in regions where unemployment levels are already very high .
Is the Council prepared to draw the appropriate conclusions from these impact studies and postpone implementation of the decision abolishing intra-Community duty-free sales ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer these two questions together .
Mr President , the joint answer to both questions is as follows : I should like to refer to the conclusions of the European Council on this matter , as my predecessor did in a written answer to the questions asked by Mr Cushnahan , Mr Watts and Mr Wibe at Question Time in December last year .
The conclusions read as follows : With regard to the decision taken in 1991 on duty-free sales for travellers between the Member States , the European Council has asked the Commission and the ECOFIN Council to examine by March 1999 the problems which may arise with regard to employment and , on the basis of proposals from the Commission , to look at how these problems can be dealt with , including the possibility of extending the transitional provisions for a limited period .
From the Council 's point of view , it cannot say anything further on this matter at the present time .
I should like to welcome the new President-in-Office and say that I was extremely pleased with his reply , in which he said that it would be sensible for us to decide to postpone the matter .
I am particularly pleased that you say that the Council has directed the Commission to carry out this study and produce an answer by March 1999 .
I have received an answer from the Commission in which the Commission denies any responsibility and says it is not its job , so I would like to ask you as President-in-Office of the Council to kick the Commission up the backside and ask it to start carrying out the study , which should be ready in March 1999 .
I am extremely pleased with your reply , which is what we would have liked to have heard from the Austrian Presidency , which gave a completely unintelligent reply last month .
I really think this is a good start .
We would really like to thank you for that .
Mr President , Mr Blak , I am grateful to you for your kind words of acknowledgement , though I must add that we do not deserve them .
The praise should go to the Austrian Presidency , because the decision which I referred to comes from the communiqué of the Vienna summit .
It was agreed in Vienna .
The European Council has asked the Commission to present a report on this by March 1999 ; this is therefore not very far away , and it will of course be the presidency 's task to ensure that the deadline set by the Council is observed .
I can promise you that we will not wait until the end of the year before asking whether the report is on its way and when it will be made available .
Mr President , first of all I want to emphasise that the Commission 's study ought to be carried out objectively , given the serious consequences the elimination of duty free could have on employment , and I have an article here , an interview with the President-in-Office , Mr Schroeder , which highlights those serious consequences for employment at a time when the Council is , in fact , stressing the importance of employment issues .

So my question is as follows : do you not think that the Council use as a basis the precedent of the extension of excise duty exemption for the Nordic countries , which was justified on economic grounds and accepted by Mr Monti in 1996 , and the opinion expressed by the European Economic and Social Council last September in favour of an extension of this system ?
Mr President , Mrs Moreau , as you can imagine , the opinion of Mr Schröder , the President of the Council , is well known to me .
Your information is indeed correct .
However , I am still not in a position to report any conclusions ; the Council cannot of course draw conclusions until the reports it commissioned are actually available .
I would ask for your understanding in this matter , but once again I specifically refer to the last phrase in the Council decision I quoted , which mentions that the possibility of extending the transitional provisions for a limited period is also to be reviewed .
Mr President , at the start of this afternoon 's sitting , I asked for the list of the 27 cases referred to UCLAF so that Parliament could deliver an informed opinion tomorrow .
I received an answer in writing to a note in German from someone who is a French speaker - so it was a truly European conversation - and I was assured that this list had been given to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
All the time we have been sitting here , my colleagues have been trying to track down this list which we were supposed to have been given .
It could not be found .
Mrs Theato , for whom I have the utmost respect , refers us to the secretariat of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
But we have been talking all afternoon to this committee and to Mr Darras , the head of division .
The list is nowhere to be found .
I would ask you as President to take the necessary steps to procure this information for Parliament before we vote .
Thank you very much , Mrs Maes .
The Bureau 's services will set to work immediately as you are indeed right and we must find out where this list is and bring it here .
I therefore share your concern in this matter .
The Bureau 's services will look for this list so that it is in fact available before the vote .
I should like to underline the words of the President-in-Office when he emphasised that the Vienna European Council spoke only of a possible extension of the duty-free regime and said that this would be for a limited period of time .
I would like the Council to pay due attention to those two conditions .
I should like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council if he is aware that many Members of this House do not share the view that an extension of duty-free is a good idea ?
The duty-free regime is a tax break mainly for the benefit of the alcohol and tobacco industries .
If the Finance Minsters of the Member States have some money to spare , I would submit that there are better ways of spending this money than allowing a tax break to continue for the benefit of the alcohol and tobacco industries - available , incidentally , only to international travellers .
Mr President , I can answer this question in the affirmative .
The Council is aware that opinions on this issue vary a great deal both in the Member States and in Parliament .
The Council is also aware of the fact that the decision which was taken in Vienna commissions a review and nothing more for the moment .
Does the Council share the view of my own Prime Minister , Tony Blair , that the loss of duty-free could lead to the loss of thousands of ordinary people 's jobs across the European Union ?
Does he consider it helpful as part of this examination that there is consultation with the industry , with the trade unions and indeed the regions to make sure that the concerns of local people are addressed ?
Would he agree with me that a suitable limited extension could be five or six years ?
That is a figure that Messrs Blair and Schröder were contemplating during the Vienna Summit .
Regrettably , during the whole of Mr Watts ' intervention there was no interpretation because his microphone was not switched on .
Yes , it was interpreted .
Perhaps you could not hear it but it was interpreted .
I could hear Mr Watts and I believe Mr Verheugen could too .
Mr Verheugen , I would invite you to reply to Mr Watts ' question .
Mr President , Mr Watts , I understood the question in both languages .
I am assuming that the Commission and the ECOFIN Council will naturally be using all relevant sources as a basis for carrying out the task which they have been given .
I believe the sources you mentioned are relevant and should therefore be taken into account when collecting data and estimates which are really important for this .
You will understand that in my present capacity I cannot and may not comment on the political opinion of a Member State 's Head of Government . However , I can of course assure you that conclusions from the reports which have been commissioned will not be drawn until the reports are made available , and that no conclusion is excluded for the moment ; neither , therefore , is the one to which you referred .
Question No 9 by Anne McIntosh ( H-1193 / 98 ) Subject : Third country poultry hygiene inspections
What inspection measures is the President-in-Office taking to ensure that EU hygiene standards are being met in imported poultry from third countries ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mrs McIntosh 's question .
Mr President , on 15 October 1990 the Council adopted Directive 90 / 539 / EEC on animal health conditions governing intra-Community trade in , and imports from third countries of , poultry and hatching eggs .
This directive has been in force since 1 May 1992 , and Articles 20 to 28 in Chapter 3 include provisions for imports from third countries .
As you know , Mrs McIntosh , it is the Commission 's task to ensure that the standards laid down here are complied with .
If in your view there is cause for complaint , the presidency would be grateful if it were to be duly informed of this .
However , I also believe that it would be better to address your question to the Commission .
I have put this question to the Commission on a number of occasions .
The last time was yesterday .
Is it really the Council of Ministers ' and the Commission 's intention to put our own poultry producers out of business in favour of third-country imports ?
My question relates in particular to the implementation of the directive on fresh meat , which dates from the 1960s , which states that checks on poultry can be made only on a through-put basis , which would help producers .
In fact , they have to be done on a one-hour inspection .
The increased cost to the United Kingdom alone is deemed to be £ 40- £ 50 per inspection of each factory .
I cannot believe that it was the Council of Ministers ' and the Commission 's intention to do this .
There is also a 1972 poultry meat directive which makes EU and UK producers equally uncompetitive .
I just want an assurance from the Council of Ministers tonight that it is not its intention to put our own poultry producers out of business .
Mrs McIntosh , I fully understand your concern , and I think that it will be necessary for the Commission to propose a solution to the problem which you have rightly described .
Question No 10 by David Martin ( H-1195 / 98 ) Subject : Democracy and human rights in Burma
In the light of continuing reports of human rights abuses and the detention of democratically elected MPs in Burma , would the Council raise with the Burmese Government the issue of the 182 elected MPs and 701 members of the National League for Democracy ( NLD ) who are still held in detention in Burma ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Martin 's question .
Mr President , the Council 's position on this issue is clear .
It has repeatedly called for the immediate release of all political prisoners in Burma .
It was because the Burmese Government did not respond to this demand , nor to the Union 's appeal to the SPDC to promote democracy and national reconciliation , that on 26 December 1998 the Council reformulated its common position on Burma , extending its scope and expressing it in stronger terms .
The Council has also made an attempt to discuss these issues with the Peace and Development Council .
The presidency proposed a visit of the ministerial troika to the Burmese Government in the margins of the United Nations General Assembly in September 1998 . However , the Burmese Foreign Minister turned down the proposal .
I thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
He is quite right to say that the Council has been consistent in its opposition to the regime in Burma .
I would ask him to consider , during the German presidency , putting this matter either on the informal Foreign Ministers ' meeting or on the Heads of State agenda so that we can look at further measures for tackling this regime .
I agree that it is very difficult .
We are getting no cooperation from the SLORC regime in Burma but the European Union must continue to put pressure on that regime and the Council should continue to monitor and look at new ways of applying pressure .
Mr Martin has hit upon the presidency 's intentions completely with the suggestion he made in his question .
We consider it to be quite an important matter .
Our concern over the continuing human rights abuses in Burma is so great that I am able to add that the situation will be discussed further among the Foreign Ministers .
We will also have other opportunities to discuss this issue during our presidency , and also with the countries in the region .
The aim of promoting the European Union 's clear position on human rights and human rights issues in the area of international relations and wherever possible , to not only convey our concern regarding human rights issues , but also to take action to remedy the situation , is an absolute priority for our presidency .
Question No 11 by Gerard Collins ( H-1199 / 98 ) Subject : Expanding voluntary care programmes at EU level for children with disabilities
In the mid-west of Ireland , a voluntary ' Have a Break ' scheme - aimed at enabling children with disabilities to have a holiday in the home of another family while their own family can have a break from constant care - has been running since 1987 .
Does the President-in-Office consider that such schemes should be extended to other EU countries and , if so , in what way does the Council consider such schemes could be promoted and developed at EU level ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Collins 's question .
Mr Collins , I regret to have to inform you that the Council has not received a Commission proposal on the promotion of a scheme similar to that which you described , where families provide care for children with disabilities .
I can therefore only suggest that the information you require can be obtained from the Commission , if anywhere .
Arising from the reply from the President-in-Office , would he consider requesting a proposal from the Commission on this important matter ?
Mr Collins , your suggestion is certainly worthy of consideration , but you know the procedures .
It must firstly be discussed in the Council , and only then can such a decision be made .
Question No 13 by Liam Hyland ( H-1207 / 98 ) Subject : Reversing rural depopulation
Does the President-in-Office of the Council consider that the extent of rural depopulation is a cause for serious concern at the level of the European Union and that a comprehensive strategy to safeguard the common agricultural policy and promote new rural development policies should be considered as an essential way of reversing this decline ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Hyland 's question .
Mr President , the Council has always shown a special interest in matters in connection with maintaining a healthy population structure in rural areas .
I should like in particular to point out to Mr Hyland that the employment problem in the rural areas of the European Union is the subject of a letter which the President of the Agriculture Council sent to the President of the European Council in November 1997 in the context of the special employment summit .
This letter focused in particular on the possible ways of maintaining a healthy rural population structure throughout the European Union .
A European agriculture model was drawn up in the context of work previously carried out by the Council on the Agenda 2000 proposals . This model , which is to be further developed in the future , is for a multifunctional and competitive form of agriculture throughout the European Union , and also in the regions with specific problems , which is viable in the long term .
It is a programme which should in particular be able to make an important contribution to the survival of rural areas .
I would like to ask the President-in-Office whether he perceives the role of family farming as representing the backbone of the rural economy .
Does he agree that the contribution of farmers to a society cannot always be evaluated in purely economic terms and that their role as environmental managers and guarantors of food security and quality puts them outside the economic realm of other professions ?
Finally , does he agree that rural development policy will not achieve its full potential in isolation from integrated regional policy ?
Is it intended to make it mandatory on national governments to implement such a regional policy , thus providing jobs in the regions to sustain rural communities and provide off-farm employment for farmers who do not have viable farms and other rural dwellers ?
I can assure Mr Hyland that I fully understand his question , because I , as a Member of Parliament myself , come from such an area and see the problems at first hand everyday .
I can therefore say in principle that the task of maintaining sustainable rural areas is a matter of priority for the Council .
We must really make sure that the people in rural areas have the chance of a future .
This future need not necessarily be in the traditional areas of agriculture .
Opportunities for the future can of course also be created through structural change , as you know very well .
I firmly believe that we will manage to target European Union funds in the area of regional and structural policy even more efficiently on this objective , not least within the framework of the reforms which are being carried out under Agenda 2000 .
This is a really important objective of the Union 's regional and structural policy , in the opinion of the presidency at least .
It not only involves making standards of living more equal , but it means that important agricultural landscapes in the rural areas of Europe will continue to offer people quality of life and job prospects in the future as well .
I welcome Mr Hyland 's question and the Council 's reply on rural depopulation .
Would the Council accept that agricultural policy is only one method by which we can assist rural areas ?
In particular , looking at reform of the structural funds , will he bear in mind that we should not just look at per capita income or unemployment but also at levels of population density and depopulation in determining areas that should qualify for Objective 1 ?
I have in mind here - to be parochial - particularly the Highlands and Islands in my own country .
On per capita income , it would not qualify but - given its other problems , particularly depopulation - it should in my opinion remain in the Objective 1 zone .
I completely agree with Mr Martin .
The problem which we have just discussed can naturally arise in any of the assisted areas of the European Union , with the exception of urban agglomerations , of course .
It can arise in Objective 1 , Objective 2 and former Objective 5b areas , and we now need a coherent policy which coordinates and uses all our funds in such a way as to limit the effects of the problem we are discussing .
Moreover , I am firmly convinced that the reform proposals which are under discussion within the framework of Agenda 2000 will considerably improve the quality of life in the countryside as well .
The adoption of Agenda 2000 is therefore also a matter of priority for the German Presidency .
In connection with the Employment Pact which Europe is seeking to achieve , it will depend to a great extent on not only bearing in mind the traditional areas of industry or the development of new technologies , but also taking into account in this context the specific problems of rural areas .
I am able to add that the German Presidency will give this matter its fullest attention .
Following on from the President-in-Office 's two responses to my colleagues , Mr Hyland and Mr David Martin , I would like to ask whether you have any proposals with regard to more focused coordination between the regional funds and the rural development funds as a way of ensuring that people in rural areas who suffer because of a drop in income can gain off-farm income through job creation and so on ?
Would it be possible to see , through the presidency , whether this type of coordination will take place and would it be possible for the President-in-Office to come back to Parliament and present a proposed model of the type of integration which would take place , at the same time ensuring that there is no reduction in the commitment towards rural development , but also guaranteeing that all of the funding towards employment creation - which is so important for all of us here in Europe - is not just focused on urban areas .
Mr Crowley , I agree with you that this is a very important issue . I can therefore assure you that the presidency is convinced that it will be possible , on the basis of the forthcoming reform of the agricultural policy and as a result of the new impetus which the rural development policy will be given , to develop a second pillar of the common agricultural policy ; this second pillar will then be the foundation for a comprehensive and coherent policy for the benefit of the rural population in the European Union .
In order to achieve this , it will actually be necessary to achieve greater coordination between the different policy areas and also to establish clear priorities .
However , I must ask you to appreciate that we cannot be more precise about this until Agenda 2000 has been concluded and we have started to implement its objectives .
Thank you , Mr Verheugen .
As the author is not present , Question No 14 lapses .
Question No 15 by Pat Gallagher ( H-1211 / 98 ) Subject : Fisheries
Will the Council , under the German Presidency , state what importance it attaches to developing the fishing potential of the less-favoured regions , such as Ireland , which have to contend not only with competition from within the EU but also from outside the EU and how it intends to conduct future negotiations with the applicant countries as regards fishing policy ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Gallagher 's question .
Mr President , first of all , on the issue of Community structural policy , the Council should like to point out that its discussions on the Commission 's proposals with regard to reform of the Structural Funds , including the future of structural policy in the fisheries sector , have not yet been brought to a close .
Mr Gallagher will be aware that in view of the whole background to these discussions - that is , Agenda 2000 - decisions on these issues are being taken on a comprehensive basis .
These decisions will include the future status of regions in the Community from the point of view of their classification according to different objectives and the corresponding financial support provided by the Community in the area of structural measures .
At the same time , the Council would point out that Ireland will continue to enjoy the Community support it currently receives until the end of the next programming period under a phasing out arrangement , no matter what the outcome of these decisions .
On the issue of future enlargement , I should like to remind you of the general position of the European Union regarding the accession negotiations in the area of fisheries when the accession conference was opened on 31 March 1998 .
According to this , there will be no exceptions whatsoever for the acceding countries when adopting and transposing the acquis communautaire .
If transitional arrangements are agreed , then these must remain the exception , and they must be for a limited period of time and restricted in their scope .
They must have a plan that clearly establishes the individual stages of application of the acquis communautaire .
It is therefore obvious that these accession negotiations do not involve negotiating mutual concessions , but rather guaranteeing that the applicant countries adopt all of the acquis communautaire , and are also in a position to transpose it effectively .
So that the applicant countries are completely aware of the obligations which membership of the Union involves , an analysis of the acquis communautaire , which is known as screening , is carried out by the Commission prior to the accession negotiations .
The applicant countries are currently presenting their negotiating positions on fisheries .
The Union will analyse these positions and prepare its response in the first half of 1999 .
As usual , the Commission will make a proposal for a common position to the Council , and the Council will establish the Union 's common position for the negotiations .
The content of the common position cannot of course be anticipated at present .
First of all let me thank the President-in-Office for his response .
In short I presume it can be said that , in the negotiations , any applicant country will have to comply with existing criteria , and that any transitional arrangements will have to be limited .
Unfortunately that is the situation .
But can I say this to the President-in-Office : I am sure he will appreciate that in the region I represent - the west and the north-west of Ireland - and indeed the entire Irish coast , we had at one time prolific fishing grounds until these were plundered , not by Irish fishermen but indeed by our partners in Europe .
We have learnt a sad lesson from this and I would not wish this on any of the other countries who in future may join the Union .
In the regions and the coastal area of our country , an island state , we have no alternative source of employment .
Priority should be given to this in any future negotiations .
We will deal with the Irish case in the review of the common fisheries policy , but other small states should learn from the serious situation in Ireland , as a result of fisheries not being treated on the same level as agriculture or indeed industry .
Let us learn from the past and let other smaller states benefit from our sad experience .
Reference was made to the Structural Funds , and I should like to ask the President-in-Office whether he believes that Ireland will qualify for the transitional arrangements .
He will be aware that we are an applicant for Objective 1 status for the west coast of Ireland , which is very much part of the region that I referred to , but will he also let me have his view on having an Objective 5 or 6 or a specific objective for regions highly dependent on fishing , whether or not the country in question has Objective 1 status ?
Mr Gallagher , I am very grateful to you for the advice and information you have offered , and we will naturally take it into account during the current accession negotiations .
Also , your country , Ireland , is participating in the accession conference and has every possibility to raise the national and supranational viewpoints you have described during the negotiations .
I also firmly believe that this will be done .
However , I am not in a position at present to tell you anything about the implementation of the redefinition of assisted areas , or the criteria which affect assisted areas , as the decision of general principle has not yet been taken .
The individual Member States have obviously established their own positions .
However , as you already know , the Council has not yet stated its common position with regard to Agenda 2000 .
I would therefore have to rely on assumptions at the present time , and making assumptions unfortunately serves no purpose in this case .
We must continue to be patient and wait until Agenda 2000 can be concluded .
However , it might be important for you to know that the presidency has agreed to exchange information and cooperate closely with Parliament on a particularly intensive and regular basis during the current decision process .
I should like to thank Mr Gallagher for the question and the President- in-Office for the very positive response .
As you are a new and fresh man in this particular position , may I also remind you , concerning the question of conservation , that somewhere in a cupboard in the Council or the Commission there is a very important scientific report concerning seals and the living resources in the North Sea .
I appeal to you , President-in-Office , that during your six-month presidency you take that report out , have it reviewed , its consequences applied , and hold a very fresh and open debate on this most serious matter .
It is a reliable fact that the seals in the North Sea are eating more white fish than the total allowable catch by the European Community .
It is a very serious matter .
It is a matter which necessitates immediate consideration and an open and frank debate , before all the stocks are taken by the seals .
Mr Killilea , I see that your question is an attempt to help the presidency carry out its task .
I am grateful to you for this , and I can assure you that the information which you have just given me , and the political problem to which you refer , will be taken into account during the current negotiations .
Thank you , Mr Verheugen .
As the author is not present , Question No 16 lapses .
Question No 17 by Brian Crowley ( H-1215 / 98 ) Subject : The fight against organised crime
Will the President-in-Office of the Council provide an outline of the policy issues which it proposes to pursue in relation to the fight against organised crime , its position on the consumption of drugs , and the way it would like to see EUROPOL 's role developed ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Crowley 's question .
Mr President , as far as organised crime is concerned , it is the presidency 's intention to actively promote the implementation of the action plan approved by the European Council at its meeting in Amsterdam in June , and to start discussions on stronger measures to fight organised crime in accordance with the request made at the Vienna European Council , as well as to guarantee the unrestricted protection of civil rights .
In connection with this , the Council will examine measures to step up the fight against fraud and counterfeiting .
On the basis of the Communication from the Commission on a framework for action on combatting fraud and counterfeiting of non-cash means of payment , discussions on an instrument of criminal law in this area have already been started .
The work begun under the Austrian Presidency on the protection of the euro under criminal law is being continued and intensified .
Moreover , the German Presidency will take an initiative under criminal law against fraudulent activity in awarding contracts in the internal market .
Particular attention is being given to creating a European legal and judicial area in accordance with the Amsterdam Treaty .
This European legal and judicial area will be , or is meant to be , equipped with instruments which are necessary for effective judicial and police cooperation .
The presidency will arrange initiatives which will make it possible for the Council to closely examine to what extent and in which priority areas some form of approximation or harmonisation of the Member States ' laws could help to fight organised crime .
Furthermore , the presidency will actively continue the discussions on the Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance , which will be an important instrument for officials working on the ground to fight organised crime .
The effective operation of the European judicial network and the mechanism set up by the Council for mutual assessment will also be priority issues for the presidency .
The German Presidency is particularly concerned to see Europol take up its duties .
As the agreement entered into force on 1 October 1998 , we are making every effort to remove the remaining legal obstacles so that Europol can take up its duties .
In this context , it is of prime importance to clarify the questions which remain unresolved in terms of the adoption of rules for the joint data protection monitoring agency .
Europol will take up its duties on the basis of a mandate which in the end was extended to include terrorism and certain aspects of trade in human beings .
Its mandate is soon to be extended to cover criminal offences such as counterfeiting of coins and banknotes and of other means of payment .
The German Presidency also intends to make a start with the discussions on the development of Europol in accordance with the Amsterdam Treaty .
In connection with this , consideration needs to be given to the role and duties falling to the judicial authorities in their relations with Europol in view of the extension of Europol 's powers .
As regards the drugs problem , the German Presidency will actively continue to pursue the current initiatives , particularly in connection with Latin America and Central Asia .
In addition , great importance is attached to the development of a strategy for the period following 1999 , under which measures to reduce demand will play an important role .
This role was confirmed at both the recent meeting of the United Nations General Assembly and the conference which followed it in Vienna in December 1998 .
The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction is a very important player in the campaign to reduce demand .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his response .
Indeed , I am delighted to hear that he sees Europol 's role as being central to the development of the fight against organised crime on a pan-European level .
I hope that the presidency will have the opportunity to expedite the removal of the remaining difficulties , by bringing fully into play the role and opportunities available through Europol 's operational capabilities .
However , I was somewhat disappointed at your lack of response on the matter of consumption of drugs .
The increasing use of drugs is one area where there is common concern across all Member States .
Bland statements such as ' reducing demand is an important aspect ' is not good enough .
What we want to hear from the President-in-Office to day are specific measures for a common European strategy to save the future generation from dying from the effects of drug abuse .
This is a very difficult issue .
Mr Crowley , you know of course that a special summit of Heads of State and Government on the subject of organised crime is planned for the second half of this year under the Finnish Presidency , and that the issues you mentioned in connection with the fight against drugs will also play a central role in the preparation for this special summit .
However , in cooperation with the Finnish Presidency we will do our bit so that the preparatory work for this is under way and so that the decisions we are currently in a position to make can be made at this special summit .
This limitation relates to the fact that we can obviously only make decisions which are in keeping with our capabilities , our resources , our instruments , and our institutions .
The presidency wholly shares the political assessment on which your question was based .
We consider the fight against drug abuse to be a key task of domestic policy in Western countries , and indeed in all countries .
It is naturally also a joint task which we should tackle - as far as possible - within the framework of the European Union .
Question No 18 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-1217 / 98 ) Subject : Agenda items for the forthcoming Euro-Mediterranean Summit in Stuttgart
What measures or proposals are being prepared in order to give substance to the ' new impetus ' to be applied to the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership , as referred to in paragraph 116 of the conclusions to the Vienna European Council ?
What new suggestions are likely to be put forward at the Third Euro-Mediterranean Conference , to be held in Stuttgart in April 1999 ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mrs Izquierdo Rojo 's question .
Mr President , please excuse the fact that this answer will also be relatively long , because it is a very complex issue .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , the Foreign Ministers ' meetings which are held regularly generally serve to examine whether the Barcelona Declaration is being applied , and to define measures which make it possible to achieve the objectives of the partnership , as laid down in the Barcelona Declaration itself .
The work of the conference in Stuttgart will therefore cover all three chapters of the partnership .
As at the previous Euro-Mediterranean ministerial conferences , the participants should confirm their total commitment to the partnership , examine the results which have already been achieved , and give new impetus by laying down new guidelines .
The importance of the partnership 's balanced development in all three chapters of the Barcelona Declaration and its work programme should also be emphasised .
As in the case of the second ministerial conference , the Council expects a Commission communication this time as well ; this should be available at the beginning of March , and will serve as the basis for establishing the EU 's position for the conference in Stuttgart .
Close cooperation with our Mediterranean partners will continue to be necessary in order to guarantee a successful outcome at the conference .
Within the framework of the economic and financial partnership , particular importance should be attached to the work carried out by government experts on economic transition and the overall view , which covers issues of free trade and the effects of economic transition in the region in accordance with the conclusions of La Valetta .
This will serve as a basis for the discussions on the future strategy .
In this context , the Council continues to hope that the negotiations on an association agreement with Egypt and Libya can be concluded before the ministerial conference in Stuttgart , and that progress can be quickly made on negotiating agreements with Algeria and Syria , in order to achieve the objective of creating an area of shared prosperity .
Moreover , the Euro-Mediterranean Conference on regional cooperation , which is being held on 28 and 29 January in Valencia , will prepare for the discussion of various aspects of regional cooperation at the conference in Stuttgart .
The EU 's programme for these discussions will essentially be based on the Council 's conclusions concerning the Communication from the Commission on the Euro-Mediterranean partnership and the single market .
The Council continues to expect proposals for the renewal of the MEDA regulation , MEDA 2 covering the period 2000-2004 , including proposals for the simplification of MEDA procedures , which the Commission should present before the conference in Stuttgart .
The Council pays particular attention to achieving the political objective of creating a Euro-Mediterranean area of peace and stability .
At the ad hoc ministerial meeting in Palermo on 3 and 4 June 1998 , an integrated approach for regional stability was adopted , and it was made clear that we need to devise a common understanding of the factors which can , according to general consensus , contribute to a regional stability programme of this kind .
These factors include terrorism , organised crime , proliferation of weapons , illegal entry of immigrants , socio-economic challenges , prejudice , racism and xenophobia .
Furthermore , the Euro-Mediterranean partners will concentrate their efforts on drawing up a charter which contains the elements mentioned , and which will help to create a stable political and institutional framework for the whole region .
The creation of an area of shared prosperity will make it possible for the Council to firmly support common values that should be recognised and applied by all Mediterranean partners .
With this in mind , the Council will work to ensure that greater attention is paid to human rights and fundamental freedoms as crucial elements of security in the region .
Without a political framework , the economic , social and cultural progress in the Euro-Mediterranean region will not be sustainable .
The Council will work energetically towards the adoption of the charter which I have referred to .
The conference in Stuttgart could give a lasting impetus that allows us to move a little bit closer to achieving this objective .
It seemed as if the President-in-Office was talking and was saying something , but in fact , he said absolutely nothing .
He did nothing more than make empty general statements that we had heard before
It is truly disappointing , Mr President-in-Office , to listen to a question from Parliament being answered in this meaningless bureaucratic tone .
As someone who , in just over four minutes , said nothing , please now answer a question for me , and I only have one minute to ask this question . I want you to be more specific about something that is extremely important in the Mediterranean .
I would like to know what the German Presidency is going to do , as far as Algeria is concerned , to combat fraud , corruption and abuses of power . Above all - and this is a very important matter - how is it going to defend the human rights of the Algerian people ?
How are you going to safeguard the right to life of the dying rural population in Algeria - where 20 people died today , 20 yesterday and 40 the day before that - if the Council of the European Union does not take the hint , not even to say that it will take some action ?
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , I am sorry that you are so unhappy with my answer .
However , I would ask you to understand that I must report the positions which are supported by 15 countries .
Surely you realise as well as I do that one of the Union 's problems is that we do not have a common foreign and security policy in the stricter sense .
Answers such as that which I have just given you are the result of this situation .
Such an answer does not reflect the capabilities or intentions of the presidency ; it reflects the state of affairs in the European Union in the area of foreign and security policy .
I assume that you see this in exactly the same way as I do .
The presidency is obviously not in a position to change internal relations in Algeria .
It is merely in a position to exert an influence - by continuing the intensive political dialogue which has already been started with Algeria - on the improvement of relations with regard to democracy , human rights , rule of law , and fair social development .
I can assure you that the German Presidency will work towards this in this dialogue .
Thank you , Mr Verheugen .
Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentleman , we have reached the end of , and indeed gone beyond , the time set aside for questions to the Council .
I should therefore like to thank Mr Verheugen for being here and for his political contribution .
I wish him the very best for the coming year , particularly the six months we will spend together . That concludes Question Time .

Questions Nos 12 and 19 to 29 will receive written answers .
The sitting was suspended at 7.10 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m.

Application of Article 93 of the EC Treaty
The next item is the report ( A4-0418 / 98 ) by Mr Areitio Toledo , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation laying down detailed rules for the application of Article 93 of the EC Treaty ( COM ( 98 ) 0073 - C4-0160 / 98-98 / 0060 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , this evening in the privacy of this Hemicycle we are going to debate an issue with the Commissioner which , in spite of the fact that there are very few people present , is very important .
The issue of State Aid and the need to control it has been a longstanding objective for the Commission and for the whole European Union .
Such aid distorts competition and free trade , hinders industrial restructuring and impedes the achievements of the stability pact .
The total volume of State Aid awarded is by no means insignificant , and I should like to remind you of the amount involved .
We are talking about figures approaching 1.5 % of Community GDP .
We are talking about 2.6 % of public spending in national budgets which , compared with the Community 's own budget , is even higher .
And I believe that this cannot be tolerated within the framework of monetary union .
Unfortunately , due to the Treaty , the Commission only has the necessary authority to control such aid on an individual basis , analysing the compatibility of each case with the Treaty .
It is obvious that the resources available to the Commission to carry out such controls on each situation where aid is granted or on each aid scheme are clearly inadequate .
As I was able to point out on other occasions , I believe that in the long term there will be a need to put a global limit on the total volume of aid awarded by each Member State . Indeed , Parliament has already approved this approach in various resolutions .
If this does not happen , then tensions will develop within monetary union .
It is true that if there are weeds growing in a garden they can be pulled up one by one , but if there are too many weeds , then it is best to use weedkiller .
In any event , the Commission was aware of this problem and it began to reorientate the State Aid control policy at the end of 1996 . The aim was to reduce the number of cases to be investigated and to improve the efficiency , transparency and coherency of the control procedure .
To this end , the Council adopted a financial regulation in November 1997 which allowed the Commission to exempt the Member States from declaring certain categories of aid , such as for small and medium-sized enterprises , for research and development , regional aid , aid for employment , aid for training , and so on .
The Commission 's proposal for a regulation that we are considering today is the second stage of this reorientation which the Commission 's new direction is based upon .
The aim of this regulation is to establish a clear procedure , which has never existed before now , to be applied to the Commission 's control procedures for State Aid .
In short , it is a matter of increasing the transparency of this procedure and the legal certainty of those involved .
I must say that the Commission should be congratulated on this initiative that will undoubtedly make the control procedure easier , both for those who enforce it as well as for its victims .
With this very objective in mind , the rapporteur has suggested three amendments to the text which the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has adopted and which simply seek to strengthen the guarantees of transparency and legal certainty and to eliminate some aspects of the proposal which we believe to be of a discretional nature .
In any event , the need to give the Commission prior notice and the principle of suspensory effect , laid down in Article 93 ( 3 ) , remain central to the control policy .
I am not going to go into detail on the amendments .
I believe that the Commission is already aware of them and , in addition , they were also debated in the Council .
I trust that the contribution we have made with this report will help towards improving the State Aid control policy and I trust that State Aid will be more strictly controlled .
But I cannot fail to highlight , as I have said before , that when weeds grow too wildly in a garden , pulling them up one by one is ineffective . I must also point out that , sooner or later , this issue will also have to be dealt at macroeconomic level within the stability pact .
Thank you very much .
That is a good example from colleagues .
Perhaps we will not go beyond midnight .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , looking around me I realise that my three minutes would still be pretty much intact even if I were to greet everyone in the Chamber individually !
But time is precious at this late hour and I shall not be needing to use up my ample allowance of minutes on too many questions of substance .
Let me explain why .
Firstly - as we have seen on many similar occasions - there is no fundamental disagreement among the big political groups in Parliament on the substantive issues of competition policy .
Unanimity reigns .
As to this particular matter , we may have argued in committee over a few minor points , but in the end we reached a uniform , consensual view .
We all share a desire to see procedures clarified and decisions taken in a transparent way.The Commission needs to see its position as a competition authority consolidated and its supervisory role in the field of aid strengthened .
I can go along with the rapporteur on all these issues .
I would make one point , however .
Not surprisingly - looking at the clock - no one from the Council is to be seen .
Our much-esteemed Competition Commissioner is with us , however , and perhaps he can enlighten me .
I am keen to establish what precisely we are doing here tonight .
It is not the content of the debate that worries me , but the form .
We have come together to deliberate over a text ; tomorrow we shall be voting on our amendments .
As far as I can see , however , we have been overtaken by events . The actual decision was taken two months ago in the Council .
So I am wondering where we as a parliament come in .
Perhaps it is true that our views have been taken into account , but what about the points which were not heeded ?
Article 14 - in the Council 's version of the text - contains a paragraph which refers to the suspension of recovery proceedings .
This paragraph was unanimously rejected in committee .
I happen to know , because the relevant amendment came from me and , as shadow rapporteur for my group , I managed to get all my points through .
The committee expressly voted against this paragraph , but it figures in the Council text .
What happens now , Commissioner ?
Could it be that we are simply engaged in intellectual gymnastics ?
This is what concerns me .
Maybe we need to rethink our own procedures . The horse would appear to have bolted ; it seems rather futile for us to be discussing the angle of the stable door .
Mr President , the time when my group thought state aid was the ideal solution is long past , and we now support the Commission 's current view that state aid should be allowed only in special cases , such as for regional aid or research .
But even here we must be careful .
Regional aid must not be allowed to lure jobs from one area of the Union to another , and research support must not become state aid for businesses by another name .
However , it has to be said that state aid is still being granted on a considerable scale , even to firms that do not represent the public interest .
Some of it is traditional aid that the Commission has tolerated or even approved up to now , and some is illegal support .
I have to say that it is very hypocritical of the Member States to support the generally rather restrictive policy on state aid , but then to make difficulties about claiming back aid that has been granted illegally .
As I see it , punishing abuses is all about showing credibility and effectiveness .
This also applies in my view to state aid in the form of tax concessions .
Demanding repayment means of course that the state has to get money back from individual firms , and it is rather ironic that the governments should be worried about this .
Regarding the fiscal aid that the Commission has tolerated up to now , I would heavily criticise the Commission decision published in the Official Journal of 18 December last year , which classifies Ireland 's extremely low corporation tax that applies only to foreign undertakings as aid for exploitation and distortion of competition , but at the same time allows it to be extended until 2003 or even 2010 .
The Commission is clearly being far too lax and inconsistent .
It is time to put an end to these sorts of practices .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I shall be brief .
As previously mentioned , the matter has already been discussed in the Council , but I would like to mention something that was also touched on by Mr Metten , namely that there can be extenuating circumstances in connection with state aids .
What we are talking about is employment . I would like to emphasise that aid should be given during periods of restructuring , and that it should always be temporary .
I would also like to emphasise that it has been found that when people decide to remove the aid and to develop businesses instead , then jobs are in fact created .
So some of our competition money could well be used for development rather than aid .
I hope that when the Commission comes to simplify the administration of Article 93 , it does not turn a blind eye to problems .
I realise that Mr Van Miert does not have so many people at his disposal , but I hope that it will be a good and effective simplification .
I am particularly pleased that on-site checks are being proposed .
I think that is a good thing , which could make this more effective and transparent and improve legal certainty . I also think it is good for countering national bureaucracy and bad faith .
It is very difficult for a country to admit that it has made a mistake .
I know that from Denmark and from Germany .
We have had a lot of cases in shipbuilding , but as politicians we must all commit ourselves to looking forward .
I believe that what is on the table , even if it has now been dealt with in the Council , is a good way forward .
I also believe that , year by year , we should look at how it can be improved .
What the Council has arrived at this time could perhaps be improved next year , because we are always becoming better or more skilful at administering these rules .
I would therefore like to wish the Commissioner and the Commission good luck in future , and point out that Parliament supports the Commission in this area .
Mr President , as the rapporteur said just now , we are discussing this dossier here , which is nevertheless an important one , in what is almost an intimate atmosphere .
Firstly , my sincere thanks to our rapporteur , Mr Areitio Toledo , and those who have spoken in the debate .
In a way , we are discussing this subject amongst ourselves , amongst people who are familiar with it and want to improve things , a desire which is not new .
We have been trying for years to work together to achieve better discipline in the monitoring of state aids , to improve the procedures , to be more transparent and better balanced .
On this or that point - and I shall reply to Mr Metten presently - we do of course have differing views .
Opinions will not necessarily be the same on how this or that affair should be managed .
But I think I can say , generally speaking , that despite the sensitive nature of the subject of state aids , there is - if not a consensus - at least the feeling that by and large things are moving in the right direction .
This is our second initiative on the basis of Article 94 , and you will remember that we made one attempt before without success .
This time we have managed to agree two proposals and , between ourselves - since we have been debating privately among friends , as the rapporteur said - we have done it far faster than I had expected .
And , Mr Rapkay , that rather explains our problem .
A proposal which was put forward several months ago was in the end dealt with very quickly by the Council of Ministers .
I was very surprised by this , because initially there had been disagreement on it .
I had myself been present at the Council meeting when the Council considered this matter for the first time , and I threatened to withdraw our proposal because there was no support for it .
And now , a few months later , to my astonishment , the Council of Ministers adopts our proposal on the substance in five minutes flat .
There are lessons to be learned from all this - for Parliament first of all , in that it might perhaps work rather faster in cases of this kind , and for the Council of Ministers too , which might sometimes be encouraged to work more quickly .
Having said that , I think in essence that what was agreed in principle by the Council is very broadly consistent - and I stress very broadly , Mr Rapkay - with what Parliament has always said .
For the first time , in fact , we shall have a truly transparent procedure .
So this was a kind of inaugural act , an act which was necessary .
It will enable us to work against a background of greater clarity and transparency and will enable others to understand the procedures better : I think that is in everybody 's interest .
I should now like to reply to one or two specific comments .
One problem in particular , Mr Rapkay , is of great concern to us .
Once the Commission has decided against , which as you know it is doing more and more often , the Member State or authority which granted the state aid has to recover that aid .
Most Member States do just that , but in some of them it is extremely complicated .
In Germany , for example , the matter may be referred to the national courts and can drag on for years .
This leads to a certain discrimination between Member States .
We have tried to correct this , because there has to be consistency in implementing Commission decisions throughout the territory of the European Union .
This is why we have battled over this .
Another point concerns on-the-spot checks of compliance with the conditions which are sometimes attached to the decision to grant state aids .
Such checks are carried out , for example on shipyards .
But in other sectors too , it is sometimes necessary to be able to check whether the undertakings given are indeed being respected .
These are a few examples which prove that things are improving .
That said , I know that the question arose in Germany as to whether the Commission can do something which is not in accordance with national law .
That needs to be discussed , because once again , if the Commission 's decisions are implemented in most Member States but not in one or two others , there is a problem .
Those who do carry out the decisions will say ' yes , but look at what these other countries are doing , payments wrongly made are not being recovered ' .
I come up against this problem more and more . I have to say that in all honesty .
More and more I am asked ' if the others are doing that , why shouldn 't we ? ' I feel I have to point that problem out .
My time is limited , Mr President , so I must finish , and in concluding I would address myself particularly to Mr Rapkay .
I think most of the amendments were agreed in the end so that we have reason to be satisfied , even if it is somewhat after the event .
On one or two points , I cannot allay your concerns , because we do not agree , as is sometimes the case .
But overall , I think I can say that this arrangement satisfies the wishes of the European Parliament .
In reply to the last question put by Mr Metten it is true that we were in a special situation because in the past , rightly or wrongly , the Commission accepted this system .
It goes back to the time of Ireland 's accession .
So the situation was , I repeat , one which the Commission accepted at a given time .
It could not be ignored .
And there are established rights .
What we tried to do was to end that system after a transitional period .
And that is what was agreed .
Another question is what the rate will be for companies .
This is a more general debate which is part of the issue of fiscal harmonisation , because once you are talking about a general measure you are no longer talking about state aids .
Thus we told the Irish authorities that the system as applied in the past was no longer acceptable , just as we shall have to tackle a whole series of other fiscal aid dossiers , some of which were also accepted in the past .
So there too , solutions will have to be found for other dossiers which have never been notified , which have never been accepted by the Commission .
We shall have to be tougher , stricter , that much is obvious .
But I am sure that we shall discuss this again on future occasions .
My last point , and the rapporteur raised it , is that this lovely lady sitting next to me is part of the team of officials who handle dossiers of this kind .
But as you know , we are seriously short of staff to do all the work .
There are 30 or so ' fiscal aid ' dossiers pending , and I do not have the human resources I need .
We have to find taxation specialists to administer these dossiers .
So once again I make the plea , but I know that you share my concerns here : when you have a new field to cultivate , but not the means to do it , you cannot work miracles .
We are faced with a mountain of dossiers , and the human resources available to us are laughably inadequate .
I have to say : do not be angry if we cannot process all these dossiers in a period of a few months .
But I know that I am preaching to the converted here .
All I can do is restate the problem in the hope that you may perhaps , in other places , give us a helping hand to get the minimum of personnel we need to manage our dossiers .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at at 11 a.m.
Right to deduct VAT
The next item is the report ( A4-0490 / 98 ) by Mr Garosci , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on
I.the proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 77 / 388 / EEC as regards the rules governing the right to deduct Value Added Tax ( COM ( 98 ) 0377 - C4-0474 / 98-98 / 0209 ( CNS ) ) ; II. the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) on verification measures , measures relating to the refund system and administrative cooperation measures necessary for the application of Directive 98 / xxx / EC ( COM ( 98 ) 0377 - C4-0475 / 98-98 / 0210 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , I am pleased that Mr Van Miert has called for a human and social interpretation even of fiscal and economic problems .
This House will undoubtedly provide the assistance he is seeking .
Besides , the matter under discussion this evening , concerning value added tax , is of no small consequence for the harmonisation which we are seeking at this very time in launching the single currency .
The Commission 's document contains two closely related proposals , both aiming to improve the common VAT system .
The present lack of uniformity in this system directly results in the fragmentation of what should be a single market , or rather an internal market , as we prefer to call it .
The fact that it is impossible to know about all the VAT provisions in force in the other Member States means that taxpayers have to operate in a situation of legal uncertainty , which provides those who know how to exploit it with the opportunity of creating a competitive advantage , which in effect constitutes a distortion of competition .
It is important to stress that these proposals are merely provisional , pending the entry into force of the definitive rules governing the common VAT system based - as we all know - on the principle of a single place of taxation and deduction .
The Commission takes the view that at present the best way to simplify significantly the common VAT system is to authorise taxable persons to deduct the VAT paid in another Member State in the periodic VAT declaration submitted in the state of residence .
This proposal requires an amendment to Article 17 of the sixth VAT directive introducing a regulation governing relations between Member States as regards compensation and VAT refunds and revoking the special VAT refund procedure described in the eighth VAT directive .
The effects of this proposal for taxable persons residing in the Community are that , if the taxable person is identified for VAT purposes in a single Member State , the VAT is deducted there , irrespective of the Member State in which he incurred the VAT-bearing expenditure .
If the taxable person is identified for VAT purposes in several Member States , then if he is identified in the Member State in which he has incurred the VAT-bearing expenditure , the VAT is deducted in that state .
If the taxable person is not identified in the Member State in which he has incurred the VAT-bearing expenditure , the VAT is deducted in the Member State where he supplies goods or services for which the expenditure is used .
Hence , the amount of VAT eligible for deduction will be determined in accordance with the rules of the Member State of residence , rather than of the Member State which collected the tax .
This proposal introduces a derogation from the eighth VAT directive by establishing that the Member State of purchase will be responsible for verifying that the VAT has actually been paid , whilst the Member State of deduction will be responsible for monitoring the actual deduction of the tax .
The second part of the Commission proposal concerns expenditure which is not eligible for full deduction of VAT .
This is expenditure which , even when incurred as part of the normal running of a business , is often intended to meet private needs too , because it has the characteristics of final consumption .
At present , most Member States exclude or limit the right to deduct by simplifying the administrative procedures and limiting the opportunities for tax fraud .
Only three Member States - Germany , Luxembourg and the Netherlands - guarantee the right to full deduction , the only exception of course being expenditure which has no business element .
The Commission is proposing harmonisation of the different national rules , whilst leaving the individual Member States a margin for discretion .
As regards expenditure relating to passenger cars , generally speaking the normal deduction rules apply .
The only exception provided for is if it becomes difficult to ascertain the non-business use of the vehicle , in which case the Member State is entitled to limit the deduction to a maximum of 50 % of the total VAT applied , thereby obviating the need to monitor whether a vehicle is actually used for business purposes or not .
If the percentage of business use is not as high as the percentage of the ceiling for deductible VAT , the deduction is made according to the normal rules .
Finally , so-called ' business tourism ' - conventions , congresses , business travel and so on - accounts for approximately 20 % of the total turnover of the tourism sector and plays an increasingly substantial role in it .
The business sector is of both economic and social importance , and makes tourist activities and resorts less dependent on holiday seasons .
In other words , the choice of a seaside , mountain , lake or other location for a business congress outside the tourist season enables such locations to be revitalised even in the off season or low season .
The national legislation of only eight countries out of the 15 allows use of the option provided for in the Sixth Directive No 388 of 1997 .
It would therefore be logical to make VAT deductions the same in all the Member States with regard to hotel and restaurant expenditure .
Finally , the Commission considers that expenditure on luxuries , amusements or entertainment should be totally excluded from the right to deduction .
I believe that we and the Commission should be guided by this logic , given that a single currency ought to dovetail with a single fiscal , taxation and banking system .
That is true harmonisation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I warmly commend the way in which the Commission has used this proposal for a directive to simplify significantly the procedures governing the right to deduct value added tax .
This will assist the further harmonisation of VAT in the Union . In future , taxable persons registered in one country only for the purposes of value added tax will quite rightly be entitled to enter the deduction directly on the periodic tax returns which they complete in their country of residence .
The actual place of supply of the services to which the expenditure relates is not the key element here .
The level of the deduction depends , as one would expect , on the rules applicable in the Member State of residence .
If , however , a company is identified for VAT purposes in several countries , and has outgoings in one of them , the right to deduct value added tax will also be granted in the country of purchase .
Where the company has no VAT registration number in the Member State in which the expenditure is incurred , the deciding factor will be the place where the services to which the expenditure relates were supplied , bearing in mind that the deduction is linked to that expenditure .
Henceforth , value added tax will no longer be deductible solely in the Member State in which turnover is taxed .
Businesses and tax administrations alike are set to gain from this new situation .
The current reimbursement procedure under the eighth VAT directive is far too complicated and bureaucratic .
It has meant that companies were generally obliged to hire local tax consultants and endure a long wait for refunds .
Every application outside the framework of the standard tax return has to be considered individually at the moment ; this takes up the tax authorities ' time and creates additional red tape .
Against such a backdrop , the bilateral approach to debt compensation and refunds envisaged in this proposal certainly promises to be more efficient .
Member State ' A ' notifies Member State ' B ' of the amounts it has deducted over the previous six months .
The two states then work out what they owe one another ; there is no need for a costly and time-consuming clearing procedure .
The multi-phase monitoring system ensures that tax administrations are not called upon to take an immediate and final decision on deductibility .
The first stage corresponds to the assessment performed by the Member State granting the VAT deduction .
This state electronically informs the state in which the expenditure was incurred of the amount of turnover for which a deduction was allowed pursuant to Article 17 ( 3 ) ( a ) .
Provision is rightly made for eventual irregularities to be reported ; the Member State uncovering a problem must notify its counterpart within three months of having obtained the relevant information .
The authorities which granted the deduction will then check whether this was legitimately obtained .
I welcome harmonisation of the rules governing deductions for expenditure of a dual business and private nature - on company cars or business trips , for example .
There are currently many different yardsticks used in assessing borderline cases - witness all the various provisions in national law and the different ways in which they are interpreted nationally by the tax authorities .
A single market cannot afford these variables ; too often the result is that the tax due is not paid .
In future , outgoings on cars will be covered by the standard rules , which is right and proper .
I also think it wise that Member States should be allowed to limit the deduction to a maximum of 50 % of the tax applied . Where problems arise with establishing levels of private use , this ceiling will be calculated on the basis of maximum estimated business use .
The other solutions envisaged succeed in addressing the problems .
With business travel in particular , it is certainly the case that action is required on the flat-rate deduction of 50 % in respect of accommodation costs .
While it is to be welcomed that this proposal for a directive remedies some of the shortcomings of the transitional system , I would not wish that fact to be used as a pretext for shelving the idea of a definitive new regime .
The Union needs uniform arrangements in terms of structures , definitions , procedures and monitoring .
The country of origin principle must become the basis for taxing turnover everywhere ; we also need a single clearing procedure .
This is essential , given the differing interests of the various Member States .
The dawning of the age of economic and monetary union does not necessarily demand total tax harmonisation , but VAT is one charge that can be dealt with in a uniform fashion .
As we speak , untaxed goods are circulating through the commercial channels , effectively depriving the EU exchequer of over 700 billion euros .
That is too high a price to pay .
Mr President , I wish to begin by expressing my support for this proposal and congratulating the rapporteur , whose arguments I fully endorse .
I should like briefly to explore three points .
Firstly , I believe that - as has already been said - this proposal has the great merit of helping to simplify the VAT system by allowing the right of deduction in the country of residence in certain cases . In one sense , therefore , over and above the advantages already highlighted , it also represents something of a bridge towards the definitive system .
Secondly , I would take up the rapporteur 's point concerning the right of deduction and the need - especially in certain areas - to harmonise the different Member States ' systems .
I too would emphasise the fact that business tourism is penalised in Italy - but not only there - from this point of view .
Such tourism is clearly at a disadvantage , in that the existing rules are not only incompatible with the elaboration of a broadly harmonised , definitive VAT system in Europe , but they are also unable to compensate for the serious distortions currently burdening a sector which can provide a large number of jobs , to the benefit of local economies adversely affected by seasonal factors .
My third point ties in with what I have just said , namely the need to step up our efforts to make the VAT system more compatible with the aims of job growth and economic development .
Because time is short , I would merely draw attention to the fact that the proposal to introduce on an experimental basis a reduced rate of VAT for non-commercial activities - ones unlikely to distort competition but likely to boost employment - has faded away .
Quite frankly , I find it increasingly difficult to understand the inactivity in this area .
Mr President , at the outset I should like to congratulate Mr Garosci on the preparation and indeed on the presentation of his report .
We live in an internal market operating within the Union , with the free movement of goods , services and capital across the territories of the 15 Member States , covering a population of nearly 250 million people .
There is no common VAT system operating within the Union at this time and this lack of uniformity at this time has led to the fragmentation of the working of the single market across the 15 different fiscal areas .
The fact that it is impossible to know all about the VAT provisions in force in other Member States of the Union means that taxpayers have to operate in a situation of legal uncertainty as well as having to work with different bureaucratic structures .
VAT is one of the areas covered by the second phase of the SLIM initiative , in which the Commission has shown considerable interest .
In particular , SLIM has identified the need to bring in more simple VAT refund procedures , which would assist businesses across the Union in the payment of refunds for the sale of goods and the provision of services .
This is to be welcomed .
As part of the ongoing work to improve the common VAT system the European Commission has put forward proposals concerning the rate for deducting VAT costs that have been incurred , seeking to change the current system by which traders have to go through exceedingly complex and costly procedures to ask for a refund from the tax authorities in the Member States in which the VAT was incurred .
This will be replaced with the simpler system under which companies can use their regular VAT returns to deduct VAT incurred in another Member State .
I support measures which help businesses to prosper and operate more effectively within the territories of the Union .
The European Union must introduce fair and definite rules governing a common VAT system based on the principle of a single place of taxation and deduction .
Any proposal to simplify the tax procedures does not necessarily mean harmonisation of taxes .
To simplify tax procedures is indeed to be welcomed .
Mr President , my group also supports the Commission 's proposals for simplifying the VAT system among the fifteen Member States .
But as far as deducting VAT is concerned , we actually think the Commission 's proposal is more sensible than what the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy is proposing .
We believe we have to distinguish between business travel and private travel and recognise that travel is very often dual-natured .
So we support the Commission 's proposal that there has to be a limit to any deduction , for example 15 % .
The hotel and catering sector has obviously appealed to the parliamentary groups that business travel hotel and restaurant expenses should be deductible in full , but , in our opinion , that is not reasonable because of the possible dual nature of the expenses , as I said .
However , the hotel and catering sector in itself is vital for employment and Member States should now be able to experiment with lowering VAT to give support to employment in these areas .
In our opinion , the Member States should undoubtedly seize this opportunity .
It is quite clear that jobs in the future will be created ultimately in service industries and the hotel and catering sector is an important example of this , but it would be a mistake if business travel costs were made entirely VAT-exempt .
Mr President , in this case my group supports the Commission rather than the rapporteur 's amendments .
We recognise the importance of VAT as a possible way of promoting employment , but we do not support a policy in which certain sectors are promoted on an ad hoc , arbitrary basis .
We are certainly in favour of objective and transparent experiments to find ways of using VAT to promote employment .
The Commissioner knows what I am getting at here .
After Parliament 's innumerable calls for this to happen , the European Council in Vienna finally asked the Commission to put forward proposals on experimenting with low VAT rates for labour-intensive services .
I would ask the Commissioner when Parliament can expect to see this proposal .
You know that this is a subject to which Parliament attaches great importance , and I would urge you to ensure that before this Parliament is dissolved we are given the opportunity to approve a Commission proposal on experimenting with low VAT rates for labour-intensive services .
This means that you would have to come up with something concrete either this month or next , which you could do perfectly easily , because we have already had extensive negotiations on this issue and we are , I think , largely in agreement that it must be limited to a number of very labour-intensive sectors .
We already agree on the approach , so I think the proposal is actually already there .
I would therefore urge you most strongly to ensure that we receive the proposal in the next few weeks .
Mr President , in an internal market where borders no longer exist and where we have now had a single currency for thirteen days , it is not logical that traders wishing to reclaim their VAT should have to apply to each separate Member State where they have spent their money .
The result , as we know , is that because of all the red tape involved many of them give up their right to deduct VAT , which is certainly not the intention .
Business people have been waiting for a long time for the rules on reclaiming VAT in other Member States to be harmonised , and harmonisation is certainly something to be welcomed , so we agree with the Commission 's proposals here .
They represent genuine progress .
The principle of harmonising the rules on expenditure for which VAT cannot be deducted in full is also a step in the right direction , but here we support the amendment tabled by the rapporteur , Mr Garosci .
The proposal to make VAT on hotel and restaurant costs fully deductible not only responds to what the business community wants , it is also a logical fiscal approach .
Entertaining business partners is often the only way to publicise a company 's products and services , particularly for small firms , so it is therefore logical to classify the actual costs incurred , whether in a hotel or a restaurant , as business expenses from which VAT is fully deductible .
In my opinion , the Commission could come up with more than these specific proposals , and then we can show businesses that the European institutions are concerned not just with the problems of the multinationals , but also with the problems of small firms and more besides .
This is why I support Mr Metten 's question about what progress has been made with the idea of experimenting with low VAT rates for labour-intensive services .
It is a question asked many times before , Commissioner , but one that is not going to go away .
Mr President , Mr Garosci 's report has my full backing .
Serious distortions of competition arise because of the differences in the way Member States treat tourism companies in respect of the right to deduct value added tax .
This affects ' business tourism ' - in other words , conferences and congresses - as well as private business travel .
As the rapporteur says , business travel accounts for approximately 20 % of total turnover in the tourism sector .
Expenditure per guest is by far the highest , since many overseas visitors - especially from North America and Japan - attend these business events . Competition between the various congress and conference locations is consequently extremely tough .
Business tourism deserves our support as a valuable source of jobs .
Hence the particular importance of Amendment No 7 , which advocates full deduction of expenditure on accommodation and food or drink , as well as on entertaining business partners .
Mr President , the main objective of these two initiatives is to simplify the complex and extremely diverse procedure that exists in Europe regarding the refund of VAT as specified in the Eighth Directive .
Due to the lack of time , I will concentrate on the amendments on tourist activities , which I fully agree with .
These amendments relate to so-called ' business tourism ' - conventions , congresses and business travel - which already accounts for nearly 20 % of European tourism and is highly likely not only to increase significantly in the medium term , but also to compensate for one of the most complicated phenomena in the tourist sector , namely seasonal variations .
Business tourism is therefore a way of helping to ensure that employment in the tourism sector remains stable throughout the year .
In fact , business tourism occurs in particular outside the high season , thereby contributing to a more balanced and more profitable operation of tourism businesses throughout the year .
Eight EU countries are fully aware of this .
Belgium , Germany , Spain , Finland , Luxembourg , Holland , Sweden and the United Kingdom already allow the deduction of VAT on hotel and restaurant expenditure in the case of business travel .
This is a real incentive from the authorities of these countries to the development of business tourism , both for nationals of these countries and in order to attract congresses to the respective markets .
It must be borne in mind that competition in this sector is quite tough , despite Europe having exceptional conditions in terms of its supply .
The seven countries that have not adopted this principle , namely Austria , Italy , France , Greece , Portugal , Ireland and Denmark , are at a disadvantage due to both the competitive edge of the other eight EU countries already mentioned and the growing number of non-European destinations in the tourism sector where VAT does not even exist .
I am therefore personally in favour of the proposals included in the amendments tabled by Mr Garosci , who I must congratulate , as they seem to me to make a very important contribution to the future of European tourist activities .
Mr President , this proposal does not entirely seem fitting in this turbulent week , since it is all about trust , trust between countries and between institutions .
The tax authorities in the Member States are going to have to work with each other to make this proposal successful , and it must be a success because the current state of affairs is a recurring source of irritation for the business community .
The legislation on which we are delivering our opinion today has great potential .
European businesses are heavily burdened by the red tape involved in claiming back VAT paid abroad , and if the VAT is reimbursed it often takes months or even years until it actually reaches the company in question .
It seems fitting that we should have an Italian Commissioner and an Italian rapporteur here , because the longest wait that I have ever heard of was twelve years for a VAT repayment from Italy to reach the firm entitled to it .
The proposal solves a number of existing problems , but this change to the VAT directive is not enough .
Our ultimate aim must still be to achieve a definitive VAT system based on the principle of the country of origin .
This proposal from the Commission is an important intermediate stage and should improve confidence between the various Member States and their administrative systems .
This confidence will be needed if we are ever to have a definitive VAT system with a sort of repayment clearing house similar to the repayment system now on the table .
The definitive VAT system will involve infinitely greater sums than is currently the case , since the VAT reclaimed from abroad , which is what we are discussing here , forms only a small part of the total VAT payments in Europe .
I very much support Commissioner Monti 's proposal , and I congratulate the rapporteur on his report .
This first step should bring us closer to the definitive VAT system , which will make a world of difference to the non-exporting small and medium-sized companies that unfortunately make up the majority of those affected .
I agree with what Mr Metten said .
I think that from now on we must insist on lower rates of VAT for labour-intensive services in all our reports on taxation .
Mr President , the Belgian National Front , a national and European movement , has always believed that introduction of the single European currency , of which we were in favour , would require the harmonisation of social and taxation systems within the Union .
The Council 's proposal to simplify the system for deducting VAT expenditure incurred in a Member State in which the taxable person is not established , a proposal which was improved by the amendments of Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , is a small step in the right direction , a very small step , since this simplification will make life difficult for the fraudsters .
A pity the Council does not have another , equally effective magic formula for preventing the corruption regularly perpetrated by one or two European Commissioners who cheat , scheme and fiddle with impunity .
So much for that footnote - I have finished , Mr President .
Mr President , Commissioner Bangemann , ladies and gentlemen , in principle I welcome the proposed changes in the deduction and refund system for VAT .
These procedures are particularly cumbersome in certain Member States ; we repeatedly see the adverse effect on businesses of the time and costs involved .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy is therefore expressly in favour of simplifying the procedures .
We would even go a step further in some areas .
Accommodation and food or drink expenses incurred as part of a person 's business activities should , we believe , remain fully deductible .
It is hard to see why money spent in hotels and restaurants for purely business purposes should be treated differently from any other business expenditure .
The business lunch or dinner is valuable when it comes to fostering contacts and building up client confidence - especially for small companies , who can also use the occasion to present their products .
In Austria , we have found that reducing the tax deductibility of business entertainment can harm the gourmet restaurant sector .
We therefore believe that Parliament 's amendment offers an appropriate way of resolving this problem .
We also have a proposal on translation costs .
Tax administrations are quite entitled to ask for the details on an invoice or whatever to be translated .
We do know , however , that this can cause difficulties for SMEs , who often do not have the necessary language expertise to hand .
Some countries even require officially certified translations ; this can mean bringing in a ' sworn ' translator or court-recognised interpreter .
Consequently , it would make sense for the costs of external translation to be borne by the requesting administration .
I am delighted to see that the Commission 's commitment to a leaner and fitter regulatory system at single market level is now bearing fruit in the VAT sector too .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased to be discussing with you one of the first legislative initiatives on VAT which derives directly from the SLIM exercise , and to be doing so on the basis of such an excellent report as the one by Mr Garosci .
The work of the SLIM group has led to a series of important recommendations which we are following up as a top priority within the Commission 's work programme , so as to improve the operation of the VAT system .
Therefore I am always happy to hear observations to the effect that , as Mr Secchi said , this is one stage on the way towards the definitive VAT system , to which Mrs Randzio-Plath also referred .
This proposal contains two parts : the first relates to the procedure for refunding VAT to non-resident taxable persons ; the second relates to harmonisation of the rules governing deduction .
As regards the first aspect , the refund procedure - the purpose of which is to allow a taxable person to recover the VAT paid in a Member State in which he is not resident - has been identified as an area where simplification is urgently needed .
The procedure set out in the eighth directive has proved very unsatisfactory in practice , both for national administrations and for operators .
The latter criticise in particular the cumbersome administrative formalities and the delays in obtaining refunds .
The Commission has concluded that the only modification likely to bring about true simplification consists of abolishing this procedure altogether and replacing it with a mechanism enabling a taxable person to deduct , in his regular returns , tax paid in a Member State in which he is not resident .
This system requires the introduction of a bilateral refund and compensation system for debts between Member States , as well as a clear-cut division of the Member States ' responsibilities for verification , presupposing that a relationship of trust exists .
The Commission notes with satisfaction that Mr Garosci 's report supports its proposal concerning this first aspect .
The second aspect is harmonisation of the rules governing deduction of VAT paid on expenditure which is of both a business and non-business nature .
The proposal relates first of all to the deduction of VAT applied to expenditure relating to passenger cars , our aim being to end the total exclusion from the right to deduct which currently applies in certain Member States .
Furthermore , the Commission is proposing a flat-rate deduction of 50 % of the VAT payable on expenditure on accommodation , food and drink , and a total exclusion for expenditure on luxuries , amusements or entertainment .
I note that Mr Garosci 's report basically endorses the Commission 's proposed approach .
The amendments put forward relate mainly to the provision for a 50 % flat-rate deduction in the case of expenditure on accommodation , food and drink .
Even when incurred in the context of an operator 's business activity , such expenditure is , by its very nature , intended to satisfy personal needs .
Application of the normal rules requires a discrete assessment of the business and non-business elements of expenditure ; this assessment often gives rise to awkwardness between tax administrations and operators .
Consequently , the Commission is proposing a flat-rate deduction of 50 % , with a view to simplifying - that is the key word - verification , especially in view of the obvious risk of improper deduction .
Moreover , a flat-rate deduction makes it easier for operators to prove the business nature of such expenditure .
For these reasons , we cannot accept the proposed amendments .
Nevertheless , I can assure you that the Commission will take your observations into account during the forthcoming negotiations on this proposal in the Council .
Indeed , were the Council not to agree unanimously on flat-rate deduction but to argue that the application of the normal rules creates no insurmountable problems of verification , the Commission would then be prepared to suggest a practical solution , allowing a Member State to apply either a deduction in accordance with the normal rules or the flat-rate deduction of 50 % .
As well as thanking you for your support , which I consider particularly important in persuading the Council to adopt the proposal , I wish to close - in this very welcome climate of confidence between our institutions , referred to by Mrs Peijs - by answering the question concerning the possibility of a reduced rate of VAT on labour-intensive services , a subject touched on by Mr Secchi , Mr Metten and Mrs Thyssen .



As has been pointed out , the Commission presented a communication to the extraordinary European Council in Luxembourg in November 1997 , asking the Council to back this proposal .
As you know , there has since been some inconclusive discussion in the ECOFIN Council .
The Vienna European Council invited the Commission to authorise the Member States to apply the reduced rate on labour-intensive services having no cross-border content .
Naturally , under the existing legal system , the Commission cannot authorise the Member States to do this ; that would require an amendment to the sixth VAT directive .
I know that this matter is of great concern to Parliament , and I am pleased to take this opportunity of announcing that I intend to present the relevant draft amendment to the Commission in February , in order that Member States wishing to do so may , on an experimental basis , apply a reduced VAT rate to labour-intensive services .
I believe that the best way for taxation to help employment is to move towards fiscal coordination , and Parliament has always supported this major undertaking of recent years .
One specific contribution which may well be worth trying out is the one to which we have referred : the possibility of a reduced VAT rate on labour-intensive services .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Globalisation and the information society
The next item is the report ( A4-0366 / 98 ) by Mr Malerba , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission on Globalisation and the Information Society - the need for strengthened international coordination ( COM ( 98 ) 0050 - C4-0153 / 98 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the two Commission communications which are the subject of my report - one on the need for strengthened international coordination in the information society and the other , related to it , on the problem of an international framework of management for the Internet - raise specific points and also outline a method for addressing the challenges , legal ones in the main , which the Internet revolution has brought about .
What is new about the Internet that cannot be regulated merely by extending the rules already in force for the other media ?
This is a valid question .
My answer is that the Internet really is a new , revolutionary technological product ; its advent is on a par with the invention of the printing press .
Television , print and radio messages are one-way , broadcast indiscriminately to an audience without the means to interact .
In contrast , the Internet changes the way we distribute information in two fundamental respects : every message can become highly participatory , while the distribution costs of information , on a worldwide basis , fall almost to zero .
Whereas in general the traditional broadcasting media are tightly regulated , on the Internet anyone can become a publisher and engage in dialogue with his readership .
There are no central points of control and no access barriers ; no special licences are required to get on the Internet .
The Internet is still in its infancy , but statistics show that participation is growing exponentially .
Whereas a few years ago it was predicted that by 1998 there would be three million users in Europe , when 1998 came we realised that there were already 18 million , and this growth is still continuing .
As the new method of electronic data interchange develops , so do new forms of corporate organisation , looking ahead to the economy of the future .
Hierarchies are disappearing , production plant and physical processes are no longer concentrated in a fixed location , as was typical of the industrial era ; a new knowledge-based society is emerging , one which is more mobile both geographically and culturally .
It could be argued that highly complex organisations , such as the information society and interactive IT networks , should be regulated not from the centre but from the periphery , as happens in the biological world .
Simple laws are imprinted into every cell of an organism without there being a single central control unit .
Order is maintained through the interaction of a huge number of individual entities , linked together by a close network of connections and reactions .
A pragmatic and flexible approach to the Internet phenomenon would therefore appear judicious .
I believe that Mr Bangemann deserves credit for his far-sightedness and perseverance in pursuing the policy of liberalising telecommunications services in Europe .
It is for this reason that we are not now fazed by this new challenge .
When , at the Bonn Conference in July 1997 , the Americans proposed the promotion of world-wide electronic commerce , Europe was able to respond in the same vein , reasserting the principles of user protection and free access for all citizens , personal data protection and security of communication , fiscal non-discrimination where new technologies are used for electronic rather than traditional commerce , and intellectual property rights .
There is ample evidence of the need for international coordination , ranging from domain name management to the risk of a US monopoly , to the German judiciary 's initiatives concerning providers ' real or presumed responsibilities , not forgetting the risk of a proliferation of dissimilar legislation from one country to another as electronic commerce gradually gains ground .
I would stress that our aim here is certainly not to define and list all the crimes to which the Internet potentially lends itself - although the media tend to focus mostly on these aspects - but rather to draw up a code of conduct making this new tool more secure and reliable to use .
On this basis , dialogue can be established at various levels , involving industry and content providers , and multilateral agreements can be sought not only with the United States but also with Japan , India and any other countries embarking on electronic commerce .
This multi-layer , multilateral dialogue must recognise the competence of international organisations in individual fields , and the private sector and professional and users ' associations must be involved in laying down the new rules .
What can Parliament do ?
As well as giving encouragement and support to the Commission 's international initiatives , I believe that Parliament should place this item on the agendas of its interparliamentary delegations , especially the one with the US Congress , and should continue working to raise public awareness .
As for the Commission , it must finalise and put forward for adoption in 1999 - before the end of this parliamentary term - a substantial set of rules governing electronic commerce .
We have observed the Commissioner 's initiatives with industry in Brussels , at the OECD conference in Ottawa and at the Aspen Institute meeting in Lyons .
I should now like to hear him comment on the state of play .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on External Economic Relations welcomes the Commission 's proposal on international coordination , since this is the interests of both the public and private sectors .
The committee has already said in earlier opinions that it is the authorities ' task to achieve agreement on an international legislative framework that is transparent , clear , technology-neutral , non-discriminatory and likely to stimulate competition .
It is important that the entire business community should be involved , as at the round-table conference on 29 July last year in Brussels .
The business steering committee set up recently by Commissioner Bangemann fortunately recognises this principle and includes representatives of firms from around the world .
There is a tremendous amount of work to do when you think of protecting intellectual property , the problems of encryption , data protection , liability and so on .
Parliament must be closely involved in drafting legislation , whether binding or not , and in particular must be closely involved in any future conferences on the subject .
The information society has enormous implications for the public and for businesses in terms of well-being , employment and prosperity , so democratic controls are absolutely vital .
This brings me on to my final point .
The Commission 's proposal for a new directive designed to improve the climate for electronic trade on the Internet in Europe has come not a moment too soon for the European Union , or perhaps even a little late .
If we compare the European Union 's performance in the field of electronic trade with that of the United States , we are forced to concede that the European Union is already lagging behind .
In December alone online spending in the United States grew by 230 % , the sort of figure that many firms in Europe can only dream about .
I thank Mr Malerba for his excellent report .
Mr President , Commissioner , as the information society has begun to use new technologies in trade , one of the problems that has emerged is the need to establish a system of general legal guarantees for supranational transactions made on open access networks .
The fact that transactions are increasingly international has led to certain conflicts over jurisdiction . These involve matters such as the terms and conditions to be used in cross-border contracts , liability for third parties , the labour laws affecting teleworkers - even in cross-border transactions - copyright , and so on .
These are all matters that affect the reliability of transactions .
Without doubt , establishing a safe framework for businesses and consumers to operate in is essential in resolving these conflicts .
But it should be possible to achieve this objective if , on the one hand , the open access nature of the Internet is preserved and , on the other hand , the plurality and diversity of the network is maintained .
Introducing controls , barriers or licences for access to the Internet could be dangerous , and the jurisdiction of one sole country such as the United States becoming too widespread would be equally dangerous .
In my view , security must be compatible with freedom and limits should only be set in order to protect the public interest , with all that this entails .
The proposed International Charter would be a good idea , but Parliament should be involved in the debate surrounding it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I must apologise for my colleague Winnie Ewing , who cannot be here this evening to present the opinion she drew up on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media .
In adopting Mrs Ewing 's opinion unanimously , our committee showed itself to be less keen on this project to create an Internet charter than the European Commission and Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
Whilst our committee agrees with the European Commission on the universal nature of information networks , which transcend regional , national and European borders and require an international response , it does not agree with the Commission 's analysis of the legal and technical nature of the problems created by the globalisation of the information society .
The Committee on Culture believes that our approach to the development of these new digital technologies is a mistake .
We believe the current approach , which seeks to make the regulation of electronic commerce a priority in the development of the information society , is effectively giving preference to a constricting policy which is geared solely to competitiveness and which fails to appreciate the extent of social and cultural change .
How can you think the new information technologies will benefit the greatest number of people , will help to reduce inequality of opportunities , if you do not take account of the risks they create ?
I am thinking in particular of the dangers we have already mentioned in many of our resolutions in this House : the danger that cultural and linguistic diversity will be marginalised , the danger that inequalities between urban areas and rural and peripheral regions will widen further .
As regards the plan to create a world economic area , barely disguised in the electronic commerce sector , it seems to me that the European Commission and our Economic Affairs Committee underestimate how far ahead the United States is in the technology and how far it is commercially dominant in the information sector and the Internet , accounting for more than 80 % of the world market in computers , software and electronic banking services .
Presenting this draft agreement to you as legally non-binding , whether it is or not , will not change the current situation in any way .
It will only benefit the multinationals , Microsoft today , Netscape or Sun Microsystems tomorrow .
To conclude , the Committee on Culture believes - you can shake your head , Mr Bangemann , but this is what our committee believes - that the priority for the European Union should be to address the technology gap between itself and the USA , and to put in place not an umpteenth policy of protectionism , as some Member States are tempted to do , but a coordinated and dynamic European multimedia policy by stimulating a market centred on European products and services , facilitating their spread throughout the territory of the Union , in association with the most innovative small businesses - in short , by using European skills in this area to maximum advantage .
After this first stage , these new technologies should also be placed at the service of the citizen , to encourage cultural and linguistic diversity and to further the development of general-interest networks .
Only in this way will the myth of a European model of the information society become reality .
The 12 amendments which the ARE Group has tabled to Mr Malerba 's report reflect the main concerns expressed by the Committee on Culture and seek more broadly to offer concrete proposals to ensure that the European Union does not continue to lag behind in this battle .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are not yet living in the information society ; we are still on the way there .
It is a matter of information , which is refined into data , then perception and realisation , and finally culture and education : information is only a raw material .
Its content , however , is of the essence .
Our problem is no longer one of transmitters or receivers , computers or hardware .
Content is the area where the European Union has fallen behind , compared with its competitors .
Content also provides employment and is very profitable .
You could say there was no end of uses for content , just as with food , such as the sausage , for example .
People can in practice enjoy content in an infinite number of ways .
I support the Commission 's initiative for international action and a charter for the Internet and electronic commerce .
The Internet cannot work beyond the reach of the law and standards .
A crime is a crime on the Internet too , and that we must be aware of .
Apart from that , one advantage of electronic commerce is that the location is safe .
Rules , however , must not hinder developments , but lead and alter , and be flexible .
Obviously , there must be cooperation .
I believe that the United States is very keen to reach an agreement with us , as they have both economic and political interests .
Apart from companies and consumers , it is important that everyone should have access to this system .
It is a modern European Union 's civil right and we will hold on to it .
Nevertheless , it cannot be exempt from taxation .
Mr President , this is the new computer age and it is here to stay .
The myth of an information-based society has become a reality .
Information is now the key to everything , turning us into listed consumers of classified products .
Virtual reality is the order of the day , mesmerising us into accepting our collective loss of freedom on a global scale .
We are now ruled by the drug of information and all its consequences .
Thinking is in binary form : I buy - yes or no ; I sell - this or that ; my opinion - left or right .
The information drug has invaded our daily lives and we are now even calling for computer police .
The Internet revolution , due to its extraordinary potential , has developed into a massive free-for-all involving every type of deceit , fraud and abuse .
Consumers are being violated and the applicable law is contradictory , incoherent or even non-existent .
The central issue now for an information society in which electronic commerce is assuming a previously unimaginable dimension is to urgently establish , by worldwide consensus , the main economic groups of the world and the respective leaders .
The objective is to provide a solid and coherent legal framework that can regulate the activity of the information networks .
Using the argument of American supremacy in the electronic commerce sector to exclude Europe from being a pioneer in the creation of this new global economic space , as recommended by the opinion of the Committee on Culture , Youth Education and the Media , is an unrealistic attitude . It implies that we should stick our heads in the sand and ignore or refuse to understand the major changes in the world today .
The risks of cultural and linguistic marginalisation and of outlying or rural areas becoming more isolated are real .
It is obvious that the disparity between north and south has increased in the last few decades despite economic growth .
Nothing can prevent the world of one-way messages becoming a world of two-way communication via the Internet where everyone can be a publisher and broadcaster simultaneously .
Trying to ignore this change is as futile as trying to stop the tide coming in .
Mr President , this is actually a very interesting item on our agenda this evening .
In my view , the problem lies in the fact that we are trying to find a balance between the right to freedom of information and the difficulties we are facing in connection with the right to freedom of information , the right to freedom of electronic commerce , etc .
And we are facing difficulties , as everyone must agree , to do with tax , liability , the protection of information and information of a harmful or illegal nature .
The proposal before us is to introduce a non-binding international charter .
The fact that the charter is non-binding indicates where the seat of the problem lies .
We want to regulate a number of matters , but it is precisely in trying to establish the right to free trade and freedom of information , as I said earlier , that it is extremely difficult to restrict a number of things that we do not want .
I think that we should all welcome the fact that this proposal has been made and that we are going to reach a number of agreements , but agreements must never be so strictly defined that they infringe the rights of the individual .
As I see it , the information society is partly a way of encouraging individuals , states and so on to make responsible choices .
What we now have to recognise is that a number of countries that have up to now been accustomed to regulating certain matters within their own borders are now no longer able to do so because of the Internet .
I wish the Commissioner success with this charter .
It is a very brave effort , but it is going to be extremely difficult to find a balance between what we want and what we do not want .
Mr President , the Green Group , including myself , agrees with the Commission and its Members when they say that there is no need for a global regulatory framework , nor a new international authority to regulate the Internet .
Above all , we do not need an information police .
We now have the chance to come up with a viable solution , as I believe the rapporteur , Mr Malerba , has also recognised in his report when he calls for cooperation .
That is what is needed , not legal regulation .
Any agreement reached between the different countries should not be legally binding , but more on the lines of a code of conduct or , in the words of the rapporteur , a kind of highway code for the Internet .
I think that such an approach would find support , since a code of this type is needed to safeguard privacy , copyright and security .
We have also tabled some amendments which address the need to resolve this issue , not only from the point of view of the international organisations , but in a way that takes account of the interests of commercial undertakings , consumer associations and so on , and which also protects the interests of the general public .
Moreover , the ARE Group has put forward a proposal with which we absolutely cannot agree , since we regard it as protectionist .
However , they have also tabled some amendments relating to the interests of the general public which we can support .
We would also like to remind you that this is not just about Europe and the USA ; we must ensure that the Internet becomes a truly global and democratic highway that everyone can use .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I compliment Mr Malerba on his report , which enables us to consider the issues surrounding the Internet and the information society .
It enables the people and the elected representatives of Europe to engage in a debate which , as we know , has major implications for society and I know that Commissioner Bangemann is personally very aware of that .
So for me the proposed text is a starting-point for our shared deliberations , but we all know that it cannot be an end in itself .
The idea of a global charter is interesting and I am in favour of it , even if it cannot answer all the challenges entailed in developing new communication tools .
The priority for all of us is to move our European cooperation forward as fast as we can , so that we are better placed to negotiate from a position of greater strength with our major partner , the United States .
I also agree with the rapporteur on the question of electronic commercial transactions and his desire to protect the consumer or user by means of secure systems of payment and the respecting of civil liberties .
At the same time , I think our European debate has to go further than that .
The faster pace of economic processes , new forms of work , is creating complex problems .
These are challenging the systems of social relationships we have in Europe .
The information revolution is breaking down the ways in which society orders itself , and at the same time communication , the degree of information , is breaking down all the hierarchies , including those within businesses .
So although international agreement is necessary , I believe we must do more to ensure consistency with social and business legislation .
We must never forget , Mr President , that the new technologies and the Internet are tools .
After that comes the question of knowing what to do with them , and to what end .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the single market is now almost complete .
A few days ago , the euro was introduced ; frontiers are disappearing .
These are good signs , I feel .
Nowadays we can use our European-manufactured mobile phone to ring home from Moscow or Malaysia ; we can link up directly to the Internet . The world is in fact coming together faster than some people are willing to accept .
Regulatory systems vary around the globe , so we need to come forward with ideas on how best to strengthen international coordination in this area too .
Markets will want to know what the rules of play are .
Drawing these up is primarily the job of policy-makers , but it is essential that we involve users and manufacturers . All three sides will need to sit around the table .
We must first of all establish the current state of play and then move to develop ways of achieving our chosen goals . Mr Malerba illustrates the situation very well in his report .
Member States have considerable scope for shaping the information society , but need to bear in mind the extent to which previously separate sectors are moving closer to one another . This is where the challenge lies .
We should be envisaging setting up virtual libraries - places open to everyone , just as traditional libraries are . A click of the mouse will suffice , but people must be aware that the virtual library exists .
The benefit in terms of knowledge and experience will be enormous . And think of the boost for industry if concerted efforts are put into making this vision a reality .
Mr President , Commissioner , it seems to me that a great deal has happened since the Commission first began work on its initiative nearly a year ago .
I am referring in particular to resolving the problems posed by the Internet domain names , and here I believe the Commission has chosen the right way forward .
Furthermore , our approach to the whole issue has changed since the initiative was first introduced .
We are not just dealing with a highway , there are many other areas where regulation is needed , either by means of legislation , rules or standards .
In my view , we have also taken forward the debate on the information society .
We should therefore avoid statements like the one we heard last night about Europe being so far behind America .
In fact , Europe has also made progress in this field .
Two issues that were agreed and discussed recently give some cause for concern .
Why did Europe go along with the so-called amendment of the Wassenaar Convention which makes it more difficult for us to export encryption techniques , and what part did the Commission play in this ?
And the second is , of course , that there has still been no agreement on the UMTS standard .
What is needed here is continued vigilance and discussion .
We cannot accept that protecting our interests is the answer ; there must be a solution that is to everyone 's advantage .
We are told that the transatlantic dialogue has been useful and that there has been some degree of convergence .
Many people believe that it is important to combine the European and American approaches .
We have also seen that there is not always total independence in the USA , but that there is possibly more administrative regulation because of the federal system , which raises more obstacles than there are in Europe .
Finally , I should like to say that Commissioner Bangemann has done a very good job in this field simply by encouraging dialogue .
I am one of those who hope he will keep up the good work .
Mr President , an Internet Charter makes very good sense . We are confronted daily with new communications technologies ; these are penetrating ever deeper into all areas of our lives .
Care must be taken with regard to competition law , however .
We do not want to see it undermined . Globalisation and the information society influence not only industrial and cultural policy ; the impact on human rights is considerable too .
I am disappointed , therefore , to see that combating Internet crime is accorded such marginal treatment .
The Internet is being misused for the purposes of spreading child pornography ; child abuse is happening online ; and trafficking in children is even being organised over the net . Society has a massive problem here .
The European Union should be giving its full attention to this baser side of globalisation . Greater international cooperation between administrative authorities and more financial resources are called for .
Thank you very much , Mr Lukas .
Mr Torres Couto is now due to speak but he has not graced us with his presence .
Therefore , we have reached the end of the speeches by Members and I would ask Commissioner Bangemann to take the floor .
Mr President , may I begin by thanking the House for this debate , which has confirmed that there is no fundamental disagreement between Parliament and the Commission on this issue .
There is in fact a broad consensus and my thanks go to the rapporteur , who has made a big effort to absorb the logic and rationale of our proposal .
As a result , the analysis given in his report is very much to the point .
I should perhaps remind people , however , that today 's discussion touches on only one element of the information society .
Just because we are focusing at present on electronic commerce and the Internet does not mean that other important aspects are being neglected .
What a pity that , yet again , the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media is coming out with the same old clichés . Its members preach their blinkered cultural pessimism and then depart , depriving anyone else of the chance to lighten their darkness .
Culture and open debate go together ; in German , we even speak of a ' culture of debate ' .
The information society has now entered that debate , and committees such as Economic and Monetary Affairs , or Research , Technological Development and Energy , or Foreign Affairs - with its Subcommittee on Security and Disarmament - are demonstrating more receptiveness towards this new cultural phenomenon than the culturally-challenged Committee on Culture , which cannot seem to grasp what is at stake .
The same old arguments have been wheeled out regarding the negative impact on minority languages and small or medium-sized companies .
But if ever there was a ' small-friendly ' technology , it is the Internet . The new developments offer global exposure to smaller languages and small businesses at a fraction of the previous cost .
Much to my dismay , however , the Culture Committee fails to see this .
I have attended their meetings two or three times and , on each occasion , I came up against a brick wall .
We also hear repeated reference to US domination . Mrs Thors rightly pointed out that this a red herring .
Thanks to the Internet Charter , Europe has taken a global lead .
We have been successful on domain names , as Mrs Thors also noted .
There is a danger , however , that people will begin to believe all this constant talk of how America has got poor little Europe pinned against the wall .
But it has not , and our progress can only be undermined if this is the message coming across .
I am therefore grateful to you for having stated clearly that you believe we are making headway .
Mr Malerba asked about the current state of play and where we go next .
Of course , Parliament will be involved in the whole process .
Anyone wishing to attend the conferences has an open invitation to do so .
Mr Malerba and other Members have participated in such events in the past , and we very much hope that this practice will continue
The familiar problem raised by Mrs Boogerd-Quaak has to be seen in the light of the speed of technological advance and the inherently global nature of the Internet .
When things are happening fast , legislation is not easy .
Regulations which we adopted at the outset are already in need of review ; keeping pace with these developments is extraordinarily difficult .
That is why we are seeking to devise alternative-style legislation .
The second element in the equation is the global dimension of this technology .
Even if we do decide to enact directives at EU level , these have no impact beyond the frontiers of the Member States ; hence the need for political agreement with other legal areas on equivalent approaches .
The Internet Charter is a move in that direction , and it has taken off internationally .
We have also been involved in promoting the Global Business Dialogue , which has been officially launched in Brussels .
A management board has now been appointed and is currently , as I understand it , holding a two-day meeting in New York .
Moreover , a conference will be taking place in September at which consideration will be given to the possibility of self-regulation .
The interested parties will either agree to sort out the problems amongst themselves or , where this proves impossible , will seek to find the most appropriate solutions .
The OECD meeting in Ottawa produced a list of some 12 to 15 problem issues , many of which can only be resolved through political decisions .
Taxation matters obviously cannot be left to the parties directly involved .
Nor can we afford to leave questions such as encryption to the sectoral players alone .
And I would point out that no decisions have so far been taken on which of the various possible systems will be authorised .
Some thought was given to the matter at a meeting of justice and home affairs ministers , but no statutory provisions have been adopted .
Until Parliament and the Council have been consulted on a Commission proposal , no legislative act can be envisaged . We all know that .
And there is as yet no Commission proposal .
There are similar issues with regard to intellectual property ; legislative decisions are required .
The idea is that this conference should prepare the ground ; we will then come forward with proposals for decisions .
The Japanese are already convinced of the need to initiate a political process to parallel the one whereby private interests are working to find a suitable accommodation . It now remains for us to win over the Americans ; we shall then be in a position to respond at international level to the ideas emerging from the private sector 's deliberations .
All in all , I think it is fair to say that we are satisfied with the progress of events .
May I once again express my gratitude for your understanding and positive input .
I know that you have high expectations of me over the coming months - and thank you for your good wishes .
I take it that I may hold out some hope for tomorrow 's vote !
Laughter and applause
Thank you , Mr Bangemann .
We all share in that hope .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Commercial communications in the internal market
The next item is the report ( A4-0503 / 98 ) by Mrs Larive , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee on the follow-up to the Green Paper on commercial communications in the internal market ( COM ( 98 ) 0121 - C4-0252 / 98 ) .
I give the floor to the rapporteur , Mrs Larive .
Mr President , this report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on cross-border commercial communications also considers that the Commission is failing to do its duty .
As the guardian of the Treaties , the fact that it regularly flouts Article 169 - the infringement procedure - is a major democratic failing that cannot be tolerated in a democratic constitutional system .
The public , businesses and organisations are often rightly furious when their complaints take years to be dealt with , such as on France 's Evin law and Greece 's ban on the television advertising of toys .
I was also not exactly pleased to be handed just two minutes ago Commissioner Monti 's reply to the letter that Mr Cox and I wrote to him about the infringement procedure .
All I have been able to read of it is the last sentence , which says ' I am nevertheless interested in the suggestions made by Mrs Larive in her draft report on commercial communications and will take them into consideration when they will be adopted by Parliament ' .
I have not had time to read the rest , but I will hold him to his word .
In his eight-point plan last Monday , President Santer promised the European Parliament greater transparency and more information .
If he is to remain - or become - credible , therefore , the demands made in our resolutions must be met .
This means that the Article 169 procedure must be applied scrupulously and transparently , with time-limits for decisions to be reached and the compulsory proportionality assessment of all pending and new complaints .
Complainants must also be able to appeal against negative decisions .
Parliament is also calling for a public register of complaints accessible via the Internet , with the complainants ' agreement , naturally , giving all the relevant information on the progress of the cases , or lack of it .
Parliament must be informed on a very regular basis , perhaps through its Committee on Legal Affairs , and I would propose that the committee should set up a working party to monitor infringement procedures , and not just those relating to commercial communications , of course .
The Commission can no longer be allowed to put unverifiable political considerations before legal arguments behind closed doors and without being answerable to anyone .
Commercial communications are a very delicate area .
On the one hand , they too should be able to take optimum advantage of the European single market , an extremely important consideration for this rapidly expanding , new technology-led sector which already employs more than one million people .
On the other hand , we naturally have great respect for national values and cultures .
This is why , Commissioner Monti , we are extremely happy with your proposals to liberalise the European market for commercial communications too , first in the Green Paper and now in the follow-up communication .
We support the proportionality assessment you propose .
Objective criteria can be applied in each case to determine whether a national restricting measure is in the public interest , or whether the intended public health or consumer policy objective , say , could be guaranteed by less drastic measures .
Unlike the Commission , however , we would like to see all new infringement cases subject to this assessment with clear time-limits , not just upon request , because then we would be back to the situation that I just described .
We also support the Commission 's proposals for a central contact point , a website and a database , along with the expert group .
In this group too , the watchwords must be transparency and accessibility , so the agenda , minutes and minority opinions must all be made public .
We feel it is very important , as you know , Commissioner , that other people concerned should be included in the group alongside national officials .
I know you are a brave man , so try to persuade your colleagues to introduce what I call the ' European polder model ' for the first time .
By this I mean participation on an equal footing , with one representative from the government , industry and consumer organisations in each country .
It is time to stop civil servants from having absolute power here .
Finally , the principle of mutual recognition and the country of origin principle must be the keynotes for commercial communications too .
Only if the proportionality assessment establishes that a national restricting measure is justified can these principles be overridden .
The industry must be given the chance to solve problems through self-regulation and a European code of conduct .
In my view we should set to work on this now , and only as a last resort should we consider harmonisation legislation to supplement the dozen or so directives that already apply to this sector .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , commercial communications should certainly be broadened further .
They are a source of employment and are going through immense changes .
Advertising has also made progress as far as content goes , but not necessarily only for the better .
Commercial communications are becoming increasingly image-orientated .
They are more and more often manipulative and carry value-related messages .
This is the basis of my own viewpoint here .
Today advertising creates society 's opinions .
The consumer is not always able to resist the image of the world created in advertising , which is often a very unrealistic one .
A good example is a certain brown drink made from a plant extract .
The drink is no longer advertised as a drink in itself , especially on television , but the lifestyle that goes with it is : youth , beaches , freedom and beauty .
This means that we have gone from advertising the product to advertising the image , and the social issues that go along with it .
Some things are regarded as desirable , others not .
Problems are caused by advertising which is targeted at children and others who are vulnerable .
We have to protect the weak .
The rapid spread of sponsorship , for example , in schools , is a good example of this .
Similarly , sports sponsorship and its sometimes negative associations , including the business of the Olympics , show what can happen when there is inadequate control and a criminally-inclined element .
A key aim of the Union is that the workings of the internal market should remain untarnished .
By making it easier to market goods and services we are giving support to our own objectives and , at the same time , providing opportunities for growth and , obviously , employment .
Good , flexible advertising is therefore an important goal .
Commercial cross-border communications must be founded on recognising the importance of reciprocal action .
The rapporteur suggests that if this is not going to be possible , we will have to resort to self-regulation . I do not believe , however , that that would be a satisfactory approach .
Mr President , I should like to start by congratulating Mrs Larive on her report and welcome it on behalf of the European People 's Party .
For some time Mrs Larive has steered the opinion of Parliament in this area on liberal economic principles and the fact that there is a lack of amendments to her report testifies to the hard work she has done and the support she has received .
I should like to emphasise four points which arise from her report .
The first is the emphasis on mutual recognition in this area .
The second is the approach based on emphasising self-regulation as the first resort and , as Mrs Larive said , the addition of further directives only as a last resort .
The third point which strikes me as arising from this report is the importance of a mandatory system to assess the proportionality of further legislative initiatives .
This is a constraint on legislators , but it seems to me a proper constraint .
We must fasten rules around ourselves .
If I may associate myself with Mrs Larive 's broader points , the Community prospers the greater the more it is a Community of law , rules and of predictability .
This leads to the fourth point I should like to mention , which is about complaints .
The Commission has built constructively on its Green Paper , but if there is one obvious area where it might usefully make some further vigorous progress , it is in the area of handling complaints .
Strict time-limits would clearly be very useful here .
Also , the idea of a complaints register accessible on the Internet links the last debate with this one rather nicely and empowers those who have difficulties in this area .
It makes the Community systems more accessible to them . That is something I believe we can all support .
Mrs Larive emphasises the importance of the expert group and the need to bring in true outside experts to it at an early stage .
We in the EPP would support that too .
I conclude by encouraging Commissioner Monti to continue his work in this area . It is a rather messy and confused one .
Not all the directives which currently exist promote the aims which we would support together in this Parliament .
Perhaps Mr Monti might be able to apply his skills in bringing order and synthesis to a number of subjects to this particular area .
Mr President , along with the single market comes transfrontier commercial communication . Huge amounts of money are being deployed by the advertising industry , affecting the behaviour of ordinary people and conditioning their needs .
Through sponsorship , product placement and image transfer , the influence of advertising and marketing has long been felt throughout the world of communication and interpersonal contact - in feature films and schools , for example . The net result is de facto dominance of the mighty and powerful over the smaller and weaker .
This applies at both state and company level .
The report is basically very sound , but it could be more explicit in advocating protection of those traditions and customs which are rooted in our historical psyche and form part of our cultural heritage .
More emphasis could also have been placed on protecting human rights and the interests of minors . These are important elements - and not all parts of Europe are necessarily on the same wavelength in this respect .
Mr President , Commissioner Monti , ladies and gentlemen , the notion of commercial communications might initially seem a rather abstract one .
Thanks to the Commission 's Green Paper and Mrs Larive 's report , however , we can appreciate the true range of the subject .
At issue are all forms of communication where suppliers - in order to enhance their product 's image or promote sales - set about targeting consumers . The scope is that wide .
The term commercial communications therefore covers advertising , direct marketing and sponsorship , as well as sales promotion and - significantly - public relations .
The sector already provides over a million jobs , and that figure is constantly increasing .
More importantly , we are dealing with a market of the future , which will eventually employ even greater numbers in other areas .
Since the single market will have a special role to play here , we need to ensure that its completion in this sector is speeded up .
To my mind , the section in the report on mutual recognition is therefore of paramount importance .
One of the cornerstones of a common market is that once an activity has been authorised in one Member State , transfrontier communication must be permitted .
This brings to mind the directive on buses , as dealt with by Mr Murphy in his celebrated report .
Buses are not our topic today , but we did give priority to the principle of mutual recognition when considering that report . Let us then hope that the Commission and the Council will rise to the challenge when pursuing their legislative agenda .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
Mrs Larive has asked for the floor as rapporteur .
You have one minute , Mrs Larive .
Thank you for your reply , Commissioner Monti .
It offered reassurance on a number of points , but it was also disappointing on certain others , particularly the composition of the expert group .
There were another two questions of mine that you did not answer .
Are you prepared to allow complainants to appeal against negative decisions ?
And are you prepared to apply the time-limits referred to in the resolution for the infringement procedure ?
Mrs Larive , as I said in general terms and also with particular reference to these last two points of yours , I reserve the right to carry out a more in-depth assessment .
As regards the first aspect - complaints - I believe that a modification of the Treaty would be needed there .
I would recall that , at the Intergovernmental Conference leading to the Amsterdam Treaty , both I myself and the Commission as a whole supported the proposal from certain Member States to strengthen these powers in order to streamline the appropriate procedures .
As for compliance with time limits , I think I said before that we are doing our utmost to comply with these time limits ; I can stress this once again .
As you will in fact have noted , in some cases I have hesitated to take up your proposals immediately for the very reason that , although they seem good in themselves , they could slow down the procedure to some extent .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
European postal services
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B4-0718 / 98 by the Union for Europe Group , to the Commission , on European postal services ; -B4-0006 / 99 by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , to the Commission , on postal services ; -B4-0007 / 99 by the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Commission , on the liberalisation of European postal services.Mrs Moreau has the floor for three minutes .
Mr President , with one million five hundred thousand employees and a hundred thousand post offices serving the public , postal services play a leading role in employment and social cohesion .
The European Parliament , after eight years of work seeking to involve the social players , did much to slow down the process of liberalisation which the European Commission sought in its initial proposals .
How , therefore , can we fail to take a keen interest in the Commission 's stated intention of stepping up the liberalisation of postal services , even before Directive 97 / 67 has been transposed into national law ?
Such important matters require a full understanding of the options for future developments , and the consideration of precise information .
Our group is therefore urging Parliament to reject any new liberalisation measure and asking that any revision of the regulatory framework provided for by the directive should be preceded by a review of all the consequences of implementing it .
Is it not time , in this sector as in others , that the Commission abandoned its blind insistence on inflexibly and dogmatically applying principles which are based on one theory alone : that liberalisation is the right thing and must be taken as far as possible ?
On the other side of the fence from dogmas of this kind there are men and women who want a quality service , and others who work in it .
One cannot fail to note a number of common trends in sectors which have already been liberalised .
In transport in particular , for example , thousands of jobs have been lost and staff earnings and conditions of employment are under threat .
Everyone will agree that it is essential to have the proper information at one 's disposal before taking any new decisions .
For this reason , there is an urgent need for serious and thorough studies of the consequences of liberalisation , in the area of jobs , regional development , the economic and financial balance of operators , and the quality of the services provided .
Recent studies of this kind carried out by the Commission have been strongly criticised by the European Joint Committee on Postal Services .
If there is to be proper transparency and the conclusions of these studies are to be fully credible , they must be carried out with the cooperation of all the players , operators , trade union organisations and postal service users in the Member States .
Looking at the commercial and financial offensive currently being mounted by private multinationals in the postal services market , one can be forgiven for thinking that their prime concern is not to provide a public service .
Given this situation , we stress the need for everyone to have equal access to postal services , under the same fair conditions , regardless of location , and consequently the need to foster the development of cooperation , of understanding , and not war between national and European operators .
In emphasising the importance of these services , I must stress that the service they provide to users cannot be treated simply as a commodity governed by the laws of the market , because it is part of a fundamental human right , the right to communicate .
Mr President , Europe 's postal services are big business : with a turnover of 360 billion francs , they handle a total of 108 billion items , their network comprises more than 106 000 contact points , but above all they employ 1 400 000 people and have more than 370 million potential users .

The main question is therefore whether there can be a single formula , a harmonious formula , for situations which are different : different in population terms to start with , because the areas and densities are not comparable , and four countries account for 60 % of the population ; different in economic terms , with a per capita GDP ranging from less than 90 000 francs to over 150 000 francs and four countries accounting for 75 % of the turnover ; different in financial terms , with a basic charge varying from 1.70 francs to 3.20 francs ; and lastly , different in legal terms , with very different geographical situations and products covered .


In other words , a number of principles have to be upheld : the principle of a fair and just universal service , the principle of economic effectiveness , and the principle of cohesion and maintenance of the public service .
In other words , we must not give hallowed status to competition on the pretext of transparency , which would penalise the most deprived and the most remote users .
In other words , we must ensure proper safeguards for jobs and for the general interest .
Mr President , the oral question on postal services and the subsequent wind-up motions give this Parliament an opportunity to reaffirm its often stated position on the future of postal services in the European Union .
It is also a great coincidence that this subject is being discussed on the same agenda that Parliament is considering the motion of censure on the Commission .
One of the reasons for the deterioration in Parliament / Commission relations without doubt has been the arrogant attitude sometimes displayed by certain Commissioners .
We experienced that ourselves in 1997 , and I think we are about to experience it again in 1999 , when Parliament overwhelmingly supported the report I put forward but it was dismissed at that time by Commissioner Bangemann with the words that he would return to pursue his highly liberalised plans - plans that have been rejected by Parliament .
Let me remind Commissioner Bangemann of Parliament 's position .
Perhaps in this new spirit of reverence and respect for Parliament which seems to be sweeping the Commission this week , he will take note and ensure that Parliament 's position is fully included when he finally gets round to presenting us - late - with the new postal directive that is being worked on at the moment .
We want to see a reserved area large enough to sustain a viable universal service .
That includes keeping direct mail and cross-border mail in the reserved area .
That reserved area is the responsibility of the national postal administrations .
We want to see a reserved area based on a realistic weight limit , not the 20 grammes , or even the 50 grammes which is rumoured to be the view of the Commission .
We want to see a detailed definition of what a universal service is and we want to know what the social effects of liberalisation will be on employment on jobs and on the quality of service that is delivered to the people of the European Union .
Reminding the Commissioner of the thousands of jobs involved and also reminding him that Parliament has severe doubts , as Mrs Moreau mentioned , about the authenticity of previous so-called studies in this and other areas .
We frankly believe they are rigged .
Florus , you will get your chance in a minute , so stop whining and belly-aching at the back .
We are still awaiting this Commission proposal , in line with Directive 97 / 67 / EC , which means that the articles relating to liberalisation of the previous directive may no longer apply .
When , oh when , will the Commission recognise that you cannot compare fairly telecoms and post because , as we have often said , telecoms is about machines , and post is about people .
But we still have this great difficulty in getting that between the ears of the Commissioner .
Parliament knows I am a reasonable man .
But I say tonight to the Commissioner and the Commission in general that whether that Commission has one day or one year left to run , if you come to Parliament with a postal directive which attacks the concept of a publicly accountable universal service of high quality for all , if you come to Parliament having dismissed - as you have done in the past - or ignored - as you have also done in the past - Parliament 's previously stated position , a position supported by the Council , and if you persist in enforcing a dogmatic , totally liberalised approach to the detriment of the postal services , then you are in for a monumental battle : a mother and father of all battles .
Be warned , Commissioner , Parliament 's position has not changed .
Parliament is still of the same view with the exception of the lunatic fringe of the Dutch liberals .
What you need to do is to listen to what Parliament is saying to you , listen to what the people in the European Union want and stop this folly of trying to liberalise the postal services purely on a dogmatic basis .
Thank you , Mr Simpson .
I have received seven motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) to wind up this debate .
I give the floor to Mr Ferber , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , may I begin by saying a few words to the last speaker .
I would point out to Mr Simpson that he was speaking there on behalf of the Socialist Group , not of Parliament .
Here we are again , sitting late into the night and having to acknowledge once more that the Commission has problems getting the timing right when it comes to directives .
This is not the first sitting at which the Commission has had to be asked how much headway has been made .
A fresh proposal for a directive was supposed to have been submitted by the end of 1998 .
That deadline has been allowed to pass .
As I have stated on several occasions in the past , Commissioner , you cannot expect the legislative process to run smoothly unless you meet the timetables .
You have forfeited the chance to produce long-overdue proposals on enhancing the quality of the EU 's postal services . With proper competition , costs could be brought down and the system made capable of matching alternatives such as fax or e-mail .
If you did not act for fear of the left-wing majority in the Council , then I have little sympathy .
If you failed to deliver because you are not happy with the way the Member States are transposing the directive , then that means that the Commission has not fulfilled its duty as guardian of the treaties .
And whilst on this topic , I note with interest the provenance of the three questioners ; their countries seem to have a particular problem with transposing this directive , although it has been officially adopted .

I would therefore appeal to you , Mr Bangemann , to come back to Parliament as soon as possible with a committed proposal for a further directive . The old one called for an intelligent approach to the development of our postal services , and I trust that this will be forthcoming in the near future .
Mr President , as we have heard in the debate this evening , everyone knows our position .
Some people may call us the lunatic fringe , but we are standing up for consumers , because they are entitled to a better service .
The postal service must not be seen as a welfare service , nor must it be used by countries to provide services that belong elsewhere .
We all know that as soon as postal services are put in a monopoly position , they tend to be sidelined by faxes , e-mails and other modern media .
It also appears in practice , in countries like Sweden , for example , or the Netherlands - and Sweden is not a small , densely populated country like the Netherlands , it is an enormous place covering huge distances - that a privatised service or a service where competition is possible can be just as good as the inefficient monopolies that also provide social services .
This is why we are calling on the Commission not only to implement the old , outdated directive as soon as possible , but also to put forward new proposals on liberalising the sector .
This is what the Commission undertook to do .
The failure of Reims II and the failure to achieve full compliance because all sorts of integrators are now at work means that we need to come up with proposals for a new , modern service .
I hope that the Commission is not going to take another ten years over this and that it does not produce another white elephant like the last time .
Any resemblance to persons here present is , of course , entirely accidental .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wonder if we might have a few comments from Mr Bangemann on his new role , since he said that it might be a good idea to start a union for Commissioners .
What an interesting thought !
I must say that I am rather surprised at the way the Commission has acted in this case .
In general , I am not opposed to privatisation and nor is my political group .
But why is the Commission in such a tearing hurry ?
On the contrary , Parliament has already asked the Commission to assess the economic and social consequences , as well as the state of the postal sector , on a country by country basis .
However , this has not been done .
We have also said that in evaluating the effect of liberalisation on postal services , account should be taken not only of the Commission 's own feasibility studies , but also of Parliament 's consultations , postal sector trade unions , user organisations and so on .
If that had been done , Mr Bangemann would not be able to say that our concern is unfounded .
One of my colleagues has already mentioned that some liberalisation of postal services has taken place in Sweden .
However , studies show that the quality of services has deteriorated in the more remote areas , that there has been ' cherry picking ' , and that postal services in villages are not as good as they used to be .
Naturally , the postal sector has to be large enough to maintain the quality of what is , after all , a public service .
In my view , it would be totally inappropriate to put forward new legislative proposals without having some idea of what their overall consequences would be and without carrying out a general overhaul of the sector at the same time .
So there is no hurry , and it would be better to take our time .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr Bangemann himself said , this is by no means the first time that we have sat in this House at midnight discussing the question of European postal services .
And today 's debate will doubtless not be the last - although a better slot next time round would be nice .
We as a parliament clearly cannot overemphasise our position on liberalising postal services .
No one in the European Parliament would dispute the need for a functioning single market in the postal sector ; we shall therefore need to expand on the existing market liberalisation directive within a reasonable time frame .
The differences of view among ourselves and with the Commission begin over when to take action and how much liberalising should be carried out .
At the time of the majority decision on the current directive , that was certainly the case .
So let us take a close look at the timetable set for the new version of the directive .
It was adopted in 1997 and was due for transposition in the Member States by the end of 1998 , although quite a number of countries have yet to take the necessary steps .
The directive also called upon the Commission to submit fresh proposals for further liberalisation by the end of 1998 .
It would , however , be rather strange to start revising the directive before the consequences of the original have been properly assessed .
I appreciate that Parliament endorsed this schedule at the end of 1997 , but what is the point of amending a directive that has not yet even been put into effect in all the Member States ?
The Commission first needs to submit a report detailing the state of play on transposition and - most importantly - comparing the measures put in place in individual countries .
It will certainly emerge that there are some considerable discrepancies . Once the facts are established , action can be taken .
If the directive is to be amended , two sets of guarantees will be required . We must be able to rely on an efficient universal service , with a solid financial base .
And the postal sector must continue to offer jobs with proper social security coverage .
You cannot reasonably make comparisons with the telecommunications sector , Mr Bangemann .
As Mr Simpson said , technology pretty much holds sway there , whereas the workforce - the human factor - is far more significant in the postal services .
Only a universal service is capable of ensuring that each and every European citizen , however remote his or her place of residence , has access to postal facilities .
Only then can we speak of ' communication ' .
Our postal services fulfil a social remit ; it is not just a matter of providing a commercial service . This remit is to offer the people of Europe an affordable and readily usable means of communicating .
It is therefore not enough to equip the Greek islands and more isolated villages in the Bavarian forests with computer terminals .
These regions need real letter boxes , which will be emptied daily .
A universal service of this kind needs a solid financial foundation - which it will be denied if the reserved area is broken up , opening the way for commercial suppliers to pick the cherries out of the cake .
Instead , what is required is a system whereby postal undertakings offer a range of services , including non-profitable ones . The universal service and reserved area dimension can then benefit from cross-funding .
Nor should we forget the 1.5 million people employed in the European postal sector , for whom we bear a social responsibility .
It is common knowledge that the process of postal liberalisation to date has been painful for the workforce , accompanied as it was by redundancies and switches to often socially insecure conditions of employment .
I doubt that any political group would argue with me when I say that this parliament will not stand idly by while the postal service suppliers turn their workplaces little by little into production lines .
We will not countenance quick profits for the companies at the expense of employees and quality .
We demand guarantees that a comprehensive and high-quality universal postal service , offering proper job security , will survive .
Mr President , the old monopolies are no longer up to providing the efficient service which we have all come to regard as a right .
This has led to the deregulation and liberalisation of one sector after another .
Unfortunately , the postal services are a major exception to the rule .
A number of EU countries have already moved so far in the direction of free competition that they have extended it to the postal sector , and they can point to satisfactory results .
In Sweden , the process has gradually assumed a political significance of its own .
It is essential that encouragement should be given to its continuation .
Having filled you in briefly on the background , I should now like to put a question to Mr Bangemann which should wind up this debate : what measures is the Commission thinking of taking in order to further the process of liberalisation in the postal sector ?
Thank you , Mr Stenmarck .
With that speech by Mr Stenmarck , we have reached the end of the list of speakers .
Mr Bangemann has asked to make a brief statement , and he now has the floor .
Mr President , let me attempt to answer these questions .
What Mr Stenmarck asked illustrates the confusion besetting this debate .
The Commission has not yet decided what measures it will take .
Not , Mr Ferber , because I am frightened of the Left - or indeed of anyone else .
I am not even in fear of Mr Stoiber , unlike some CSU members seeking re-election to this House .
I do not aspire to have my name on the CSU list , and this spares me the need to draw attention to myself with fiery rhetoric .
Nobody frightens me - not even you , Mr Ferber .
Mr Simpson seems to hold a very simplistic view of the relations linking Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
He has got things the wrong way round if he thinks that the Commission should always make proposals which match Parliament 's vision .
The procedure is that the Commission proposes , then Parliament and the Council deliver their positions .
The Commission of course takes on board the results of this democratic process .
Our own right to propose would be totally undermined , however , if I or any of my Commission colleagues were systematically to advocate what Parliament wanted - particularly since you will have noticed that the parliamentary position is not clear at this stage .
And how could it be ?
The Commission has yet to make a proposal .
Once it has done so , we can see what Parliament has to say .
Let me repeat , however , for the sake of clarity : my personal intention - and I can speak only on my behalf at this juncture - is to defend the universal service . So you need have no worries , provided my colleagues in the Commission follow my lead .
What I cannot do is come forward with a proposal which would rule out extending the liberalisation process to the postal sector ; nor can I advocate delay , since our postal services would simply end up being overtaken by developments elsewhere .
This is a point I have endeavoured to drive home in previous debates ; once you have grasped it , you will understand that I am not ' out to get ' those employed in the postal sector .
We can already see competition developing between those postal service providers who operate in a liberalised environment - Deutsche Post AG , for example - and the others who do not .
The former enjoy a natural advantage born of their market fitness .
They will be better placed legally as well , free as they are to buy up or merge with other companies ; that door is closed to the monopolies .
Anyone who fails to comprehend that will truly be letting down postal employees - and Mr Wijsenbeek 's consumers - alike .
This is not about ideology .
Very well , I am a Liberal and have been all my life .
Occasionally one wonders if one 's colleagues on the Liberal benches have the same degree of common sense ; be that as it may , I have certainly never abandoned my Liberal convictions .
It is not ideology which spurs me on - I see nothing Liberal in ideological positions ; my aim is to do the job entrusted to me .
If you are not happy with the way I perform , Mr Simpson , you have all the opportunity in the world to kick me out , along with my colleagues .
It is fine by us ; that is life on the democratic stage .
You can do it tomorrow if you like ; the opportunity is there if you so decide .
I shall not be offended ; Parliament will simply be doing its job .
And if you refrain because you believe that the Commission has not done so badly , after all - then many thanks in advance .
Thank you , Mr Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
The sitting was closed at 11.50 p.m.
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I would like to point out with regard to yesterday 's Minutes that for the umpteenth time the UPE Group tabled an oral question with debate , to be moved by Mr Donnay , with an associated resolution on postal services being tabled by Mr Pasty .
Yesterday evening at 11.45 p.m. the UPE Group did not even take the trouble to be here - not a single one of them turned up .
I would urge that these sorts of unnecessary requests should not be allowed in future , because no new information or views were put forward and the Commission had absolutely nothing to tell us that it had not already told us before .
We take note of that .
The Minutes were approved
Article K.6 EU ; Schengen cooperation
The next item is the joint debate on :
the oral question ( B4-0716 / 98 ) by Mr Nassauer on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , to the Council , on the annual debate on Article K.6 of the Treaty on European Union , December 1998 ; -the oral question ( B4-0717 / 98 ) by Mr Nassauer on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , to the Commission , on the annual debate on Article K.6 of the Treaty on European Union , December 1998 ; -the proposal for a recommendation ( A4-0006 / 99 ) by Mrs Van Lancker , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the programme of activities to be conducted under the Schengen cooperation arrangements up to June 1999 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is probably the last time that we will be holding this debate under Article K.6.
Once the Treaty of Amsterdam comes into force , our debate will not only be based on a new article , it will also be far more limited in scope , as it will only be concerned with police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
Madam President-in-Office , Mr President-in-Office , before I move on to the subject at hand , I would first like to make some procedural comments .
Up to now , we have normally held this debate at the end of a Council presidency , in December .
This had the clear advantage that at least one of the Presidents-in-Office responsible could respond to Parliament .
We really must insist on arrangements being made to return to that pattern in future .
I concede that this is less an issue for the Council presidency than for Parliament itself , but this does need to be coordinated .
However , my second point is most definitely one for the Council .
Traditionally , we get this debate underway with an oral question and a motion for a resolution .
For years we have been calling on the Council to provide us with a written report as a basis for our debate .
This would also have great advantages for the Council , as it could highlight what it sees as the key points and what it regards as successful achievements .
Giving us a written report before this debate could not fail to improve cooperation with Parliament .
This resolution includes various requests about cooperation between Parliament and the Council that we have made before .
However , during the Maastricht Treaty phase they never resulted in a proper procedure .
Interestingly enough , the rather unfortunate wording concerning the most important aspects of the activities on which the Council is supposed to consult Parliament has been eliminated from the Treaty of Amsterdam , which I am pleased to say makes it clear exactly when Parliament is to be consulted and when it is just to be informed .
But a series of consultations has been overlooked even under the present wording - I shall come back to this point in a moment .
The new arrangement we have requested provides for us to be kept informed about important developments , as stipulated in Article 39 ( 2 ) .
This relates in particular , Madam President-in-Office , Mr President-in-Office , to Council meetings , including informal ones .
Parliament should not have to piece together information about events in the Council from press reports .
Surely it cannot be a problem to inform Parliament beforehand what is to be discussed at Council meetings , and , afterwards , what was discussed .
I would now like to refer to a few practical points .
Certain key legislative matters - and I am sorry to have to harp on about this - are communitarised in the Treaty of Amsterdam . They may require a unanimous vote for at least five years , but nevertheless they have been communitarised .
In other words , they have been removed from the legislative competence of national parliaments .
At the same time , however , they are still outside this Parliament 's competence , since we are only entitled to be consulted until the codecision procedure has been introduced .
That means - and I can see two brilliant lawyers in front of me - that for the purposes of the development of European legislation areas that are clearly subject to the legal process , such as asylum and immigration , can no longer be directly influenced by an elected parliament , and that is surely not acceptable .
The only possibility I can see is for the Council to consult Parliament particularly carefully during the interim phase , five years plus x , and to take account of the views Parliament expresses during the consultation .
I just wanted to say a few words about that .
To conclude , I would like to mention another aspect , just by way of example .
I was delighted that the President-in-Office last Monday or Tuesday called for the scope of Europol 's operations to be extended .
I was delighted to hear that because his erstwhile fellow member of the Green Group in the European Parliament , Ms Roth , would have run out of the Chamber screaming if she had heard words like that .
The point I want to make is that the further development of Europol is coming up against the limits imposed by the structure of intergovernmental cooperation .
In view of the communitarisation involved , progress in this field needs to be subject to parliamentary scrutiny and judicial control .
So anyone wanting to achieve progress in this field must submit themselves to the rigours of communitarised progress , and that is what Parliament is urging you to do .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that today 's debate on Schengen has come at just the right moment at the start of the German Presidency of the Union , which also coincides with Germany 's Schengen presidency .
This is of crucial importance , because it is the time when , under the Schengen Protocol , the Schengen acquis must be transferred to the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Parliament has also just received the second annual report by the Executive Committee and the Joint Supervisory Authority .
I should therefore like to thank the German Presidency for this first opportunity to discuss this issue with them , and I would like to thank my colleagues for their helpful cooperation in dealing with this report as a matter of urgency .
Parliament has always had mixed feelings about Schengen .
On the one hand , we are naturally delighted that a number of Member States have taken the lead in establishing the free movement of persons and an area of freedom , security and justice in practice , but on the other hand we have always regretted the fact that this has happened outside the EU structures .
Legally speaking , too , Schengen is not exactly a thing of beauty .
The acquis is a melting-pot of guidelines , measures and decisions through which few people can find their way , let alone their rights .
Now that Schengen is to be integrated into the EU Treaty , we can take definitive steps towards greater clarity and democracy .
The inclusion of part of the acquis in the first pillar will pave the way for the communitarisation of this policy and will enable us to take measures to tidy up ' la nébuleuse Schengen ' , as my predecessor used to call it .
However , all these good intentions have been jeopardised by the discussions that have been dragging on for 18 months now on how the Schengen acquis should be integrated into the Treaty .
First and foremost , it has not yet been possible to define what the Schengen acquis is , nor to eliminate the redundant clauses from it .
Thirdly , there is still a major debate going on about whether to include Schengen in the first pillar or the third .
I have to say that the obstinate refusal of certain Member States to transfer part of the Schengen acquis to the first pillar is threatening to undermine the modest progress that we have made with the Amsterdam Treaty .
At the European summit in Vienna last month , the Heads of State urged that a decision should be taken quickly .
This was an important political signal , Mr President-in-Office , and I should like to hear from the German Presidency and also from the Commissioner as the guardian of the Treaties what political measures they intend to take to get out of this impasse .
I would also like to know how they intend to involve the European Parliament in this transposition process .
The integration of the Schengen acquis into the Treaty , and in particular how it is divided between the first and third pillars , will have important implications for Parliament 's future involvement and the future development of all European legislation on security and freedom .
Even if the Schengen Protocol does not specifically provide for Parliament to be consulted , I still think that Parliament 's rights must be respected , because it would be of enormous damage to our interests if we were not .
Parliament would have to think very seriously about going to the Court of Justice if our democratic rights were disregarded .
We would certainly urge that the aims of the Treaty should be borne in mind when integrating Schengen , and that the balance must be restored between efficient policing and respect for fundamental rights and the rule of law .
In my first report on Schengen we called for greater transparency , greater parliamentary and judicial controls and respect for human rights .
I think that these now need to be put into practice , and that in defining the Schengen acquis the opportunity must be taken to publicise it , to involve the European Parliament and the national parliaments more , and to provide the public with better information about their rights .
I would also point out that we feel that the future of the Schengen information system is of crucial importance .
Our recommendation even calls for the SIS to be developed as a trans-European network , managed by an agency under the operational authority of both the Commission and the Council , with data from the various sections strictly separated for end-users , and supervised by the body provided for in the Treaty .
I would like to know what the President-in-Office thinks about this point in particular .
The Presidency has naturally fixed other priorities , most of which we support , such as strengthening international cooperation in cases of criminal prosecution , which is very necessary .
The German Presidency is also calling for further harmonisation of visa policies , which would also be a welcome development , because the current situation is an out-and-out disaster .
As regards the accession of new Member States , Mr President-in-Office , I would simply say that the mistakes of the past are threatening to be repeated .
The evaluation of the applicant countries must involve more than just demanding watertight border controls .
We also expect you to assess the operation of their legal systems , their human rights record and their respect for the principles of the rules of law .
Finally , I should like to take a quick look at a number of points from the Schengen annual report .
Firstly , France is still maintaining border controls at its frontiers with Belgium and Luxembourg , despite all the efforts that have been made .
Can the President-in-Office tell me when this unfortunate situation will be resolved ?
Secondly , there is the evaluation of the Schengen information system .
I have to say that as far as we are concerned , evaluating the amount of data stored is not a measure of the system 's success , and we would strongly urge that a qualitative assessment should be made of the efficiency of the Schengen system .
Thirdly , there is the report by the Joint Supervisory Authority which monitors compliance with data protection requirements .
I have to say that reading this report raises serious questions about a number of lapses .
I could give you some hair-raising examples here , but unfortunately there is not time .
I would simply say that the Supervisory Authority has uncovered some very serious problems relating to data finalisation , the removal of data and refusal of access to the Schengen area .
We expect the Council presidency to carry out the Authority 's recommendations here .
After the four years in which Schengen has been in operation , this first debate has come not a moment too soon .
There are many adjustments to be made and there is still a good deal of work to be done before a European area of security and freedom can be achieved .
The European Parliament expects to be involved in this work from now on .
Thank you , Mrs Van Lancker .
The very difficult subject we are dealing with today means that the presidency is represented by two ministers , namely the Federal Justice Minister and the Federal Minister of the Interior .
I should like to thank them both for being here and first give the floor to the Federal Minister of the Interior , Mr Schily .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Van Lancker and Mr Nassauer .
Mr Nassauer , you were quite right in saying that it would be normal to give the report at the end of the Council presidency , but you know why it was postponed . So the blame in this matter cannot be laid at the Council 's door .
Nevertheless , the fact that we are the ones making the report does have certain advantages , although I was not involved in both stages during the previous presidency .
But it does mean that we have the benefit of a certain distance which perhaps gives us a better view of the outcome of these presidencies .
Drawing on information provided by the previous two presidencies , I shall try to be as objective as possible .
There are two possible approaches to assessing progress . The first is a quantitative approach , summating all the various achievements .
It is certainly true to say that a great deal has been accomplished : a dozen joint measures have been adopted under two agreements and political agreement has been reached on two further agreements .
But maybe it would be more helpful to assess progress in qualitative terms , paying particular attention to the Council 's activities concerning the European Parliament 's participation . I would like to say straight away that I am happy to take up your suggestion of producing a written report , and we will try to implement that .
It is a perfectly reasonable suggestion to have a written report before us so that we do not have to rely on an oral report .
Like the Luxembourg Presidency before them , the two presidencies over the last year have involved the European Parliament in anticipation of the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam , and we shall endeavour to do the same .
My colleague Mrs Däubler-Gmelin will give you further details of this .
We shall of course take advantage of this opportunity today not just to assess progress but also to give you a foretaste of our presidency .
Today the main focus of this is of course on justice and home affairs , with particular reference to the action plan for the establishment of an area of freedom , security and justice .
Mrs Däubler-Gmelin will also have detailed comments on that point .
I would now like to address a number of different points , taking one subject at a time .
The first is asylum and immigration .
More than any other , this is perhaps an area where we need to match our work to the pace of developments and to react to international events .
You know that Kosovo is one of the trouble spots we shall possibly be considering at the next informal meeting of EU justice and home affairs ministers because of its current relevance .
It will also be necessary to develop forward-looking strategies and to establish generally applicable rules .
1998 was notable for two influxes of migrants .
First , the influx of Kurdish refugees from Iraq and the neighbouring region , and second , the problems caused by the conflict in Kosovo , which has already been mentioned and which has resulted in an influx of asylum-seekers throughout Europe .
Some countries have been especially affected by this .
In January 1998 , the Council reacted to the influx of migrants from Iraq and the neighbouring region by adopting a comprehensive new action plan .
This influx of migrants also made it apparent that the Dublin Convention that had recently come into force was only capable of solving some of the problems it was intended to address , because of the role of criminal organisations in smuggling in migrants on an ever more massive scale .
And the situation is deteriorating .
The Kosovo crisis led to a similar but less widespread phenomenon .
In order to counter these developments the Council , acting on a proposal from the Netherlands , decided in December 1998 to set up a high-level group to formulate proposals for joint measures for a number of countries which seem likely to be the source of a massive influx of illegal immigrants .
This group is to analyse the push factors and then develop a strategy for dealing with them .
Last year there was a preliminary discussion of a Commission proposal for an agreement governing the admission of third-country nationals to the territory of Member States .
This is a very important proposal that would come under the new EC powers included in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The exchanges of views held so far suggest that Member States see a need for considerable further discussion before agreement can be reached .
I have already mentioned the Dublin Convention that came into force in October 1997 .
Although it is certainly to soon to pass judgment on how the Convention is working in practice , there has already been a feeling for some time that a legal instrument is needed to support the implementation of the Convention by providing for fingerprints to be taken from asylum-seekers so that these prints can be compared by a central office .
This brings me to the draft Eurodac Convention , and I am pleased to report that the Council did indeed reach political agreement on this in December .
With the massive influx of Kurds revealing problems in implementing the Dublin Convention , the Council decided in March to extend the Eurodac project to fingerprinting illegal immigrants .
The protocol that will create the necessary legal basis is still being negotiated .
The progress made at the December Council meeting gives grounds for hope that the work will soon be concluded , which I regard as a matter of urgency .
On the subject of asylum , one side of the discussions was the implementation of the Dublin Convention itself .
In this context , the committee set up under Article 18 of this Convention adopted a work programme and a declaration with the intention of improving some of the practical aspects of the implementation of the Convention .
The other side was the discussion of measures for temporary refuge and sharing of the burden between Member States in accepting refugees , particularly those fleeing from civil wars . These proposals were put forward by the Commission in July and considered by the European Parliament in December , and the German Presidency intends to move them forward with all speed .
I should like to say that the German Presidency firmly considers that temporary refuge and burden sharing are inextricably linked .
As far as we are concerned , this is a sine qua non .
Turning to travel , identity and residence documents , in June 1998 the Council adopted a recommendation on the provision of forgery detection equipment at ports of entry to the European Union .
In order to facilitate the checks concerned , in December the Council accordingly adopted a joint measure setting up the FADO electronic image archiving system , providing for a rapid exchange of information on both genuine and forged documents .
The Council has pursued contacts with the applicant countries concerning visas , and two visa group meetings took place with the applicant countries , in May and November 1998 .
Following the second of these two meetings , expert groups were set up to assess the security of the applicant countries ' documents and to bring their computer systems into line with the Schengen cooperation requirements in relation to checking visa applications and the administration and organisation of visa offices .
A partnership has also been set up to evaluate the training and equipment needs of the applicant countries .
In 1998 the Council adopted three instruments on the uniform format of residence permits .
The first of these was a Council decision on sharing the cost of producing specimens of the common-format residence permits .
The second was a communication on the publication of the format for these permits .
The third was a Council decision on common rules for filling in the uniform format for residence permits .
I would now like to turn to police cooperation , and especially Europol and the war on drugs - Europol has , of course , already been mentioned .
On 1 October 1998 the Europol Convention came into force , and although this was a very welcome intermediate step , Europol has still not commenced its activities , as it has not yet been possible to conclude work on certain implementing regulations required before it can start work .
The following texts have been approved or adopted so far : determining the rights and obligations of liaison officers in relation to Europol , the rules applicable to analysis files , staff regulations , confidentiality regulations and the Headquarters Agreement .
The financial regulation is to be adopted shortly .
I am pleased that it has been possible to reach a compromise on the senior appointments at Europol . Once again , the financial regulation is to be adopted shortly .
The following legal instruments have either not yet come into force or still need to be finalised : the Europol immunity protocol , Europol 's institutions and staff members - in this case you may be aware that the ratification process has not yet been completed by four Member States - and the bilateral immunity and privilege agreements for liaison officers posted to Europol and their families .
The Member States have reached agreement with the Kingdom of the Netherlands on a text , and the relevant verbal notes are soon to be exchanged .
The Council has also adopted texts governing Europol 's external relations with third countries and third bodies and the receipt of information by Europol from third countries and third parties .
The joint supervisory body has reached agreement on its rules of procedure , which are now before the Council for approval .
The most important question still to be settled is on procedural aspects of the complaints procedure .
This relates to both the non-disclosure of data with security implications and observance of the necessary procedural guarantees .
A succession of discussions has taken place on this , and I hope that we will be able to resolve these issues during the German Presidency .
I would now like to talk about Europol 's institutions .
Following the entry into force of the Convention , the management board and the joint supervisory body started work in November 1998 .
The joint audit committee has been established and has issued a declaration concerning the financial regulation .
At the meeting of the Council held on 3 and 4 December , agreement was reached on the future composition of the management board .
The financial regulation will be revised to take account of this , if necessary .
I would now like to talk about Europol 's computer system . At its meeting in September 1998 , the Council took note of a progress report on the setting up of the Europol computer system , TECS .
The report pointed out that because of the delay in setting up TECS , which is at present only approaching the procurement phase , an interim system would be provided for analysis and index purposes when Europol started work .
Regarding the scope of Europol 's mandate , at its meeting on 3 and 4 December the Council adopted a decision instructing Europol to deal with crimes committed or likely to be committed in the course of terrorist activities against life , limb , personal freedom or property . The Council also agreed that Europol should be instructed to prepare to extend its mandate to dealing with the forgery of money and means of payment , particularly in view of the introduction of the euro - something which I consider to be very important .
Lastly , the definition of traffic in human beings as a form of crime in the Annex referred to in Article 2 of the Europol Convention is to be supplemented .
I will now turn to the subject of drugs . As under the previous presidencies , the war on drugs was also a priority for the British and Austrian Presidencies .
The most important activities in this field were the preparation of a drug strategy for the period after 1999 , the UN General Assembly special session on drugs , and the development of regional initiatives in Latin America and central Asia , both centres of the drug trade .
The principle underlying the European Union 's approach has been to combat the scourge of drugs in a comprehensive , integrated and balanced way .
Several initiatives , especially those of the UN General Assembly and the measures relating to Latin America , focused on reducing demand .
The work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction played an important part here .
The programme of Community action on the prevention of drug dependence was continued , and a European Drug Prevention Week was held at European , national and regional level in November .
As you know , we also attach great importance to prevention at national level .
It has emerged from the Member States ' progress reports on the continued implementation of the joint measure on the approximation of laws and procedures that many Member States have , at national and European level and also within the Schengen arrangements , further strengthened measures aimed at achieving close cooperation between police , customs services and judicial authorities .
Implementation of the joint measure on new synthetic drugs was carried forward , and a detailed report on these activities was presented to the European Council in Vienna .
That brings me to relations with third countries and enlargement issues , which Mrs Van Lancker has also expressed a particular interest in .
On enlargement , I would like to refer to two particularly important measures : on 28 May 1998 the Council adopted the Pre-Accession Pact on Organised Crime between the Member States of the European Union and the applicant CEECs and Cyprus . The German word for pre-accession pact is one of those interesting new words that the bureaucrats are always inventing , and I nearly mispronounced it so that it came out as pre-cession !
In the case of organised crime we are faced with criminal activities which are unfortunately spreading not only within the applicant countries but also from them into the Member States of the European Union . It therefore makes sense to involve representatives from the applicant countries at this stage in the general effort to combat these widespread criminal activities - illicit drugs , traffic in human beings , prostitution and money laundering .
We really must not underestimate the dangers of these forms of crime .
A group of experts on the Pre-Accession Pact , which consists of representatives of the 15 Member States and the 11 applicant countries , meets regularly for mutual exchanges of police experience and to draw up a joint strategy , in conjunction with Europol , to identify the main dangers and develop effective countermeasures .
There is also the joint measure of 29 June 1998 establishing a mechanism for collective evaluation of the transposition , application and effective implementation by the applicant countries of the acquis communautaire in the field of justice and home affairs .
Recognising that it is not enough to pass laws and ratify agreements , but that the new legislation concerned also has to be applied by appropriately equipped and trained forces in sufficient numbers , the Council has set up a special group .
This is of course a well-known problem : it is not just about having the legislation itself , it is also about how it is enforced .
The remit of the joint evaluation working party is to prepare and subsequently update , by analysing all available information , a collective evaluation of the situation in the applicant countries regarding the transposition , application and effective implementation of the acquis communautaire in the field of justice and home affairs , working in close cooperation with the K.4 Committee .
The Justice and Home Affairs Council receives regular reports on this .
This ensures that in particularly sensitive areas such as checks at external borders or the fight against organised crime , experts can monitor whether the standards flowing from the European Union or Schengen acquis are being achieved , and where there may still be room for improvement .
Relations with third countries are particularly important in the field of justice and home affairs .
During the year the existing cooperation under the TREVI system was systematically extended and now includes the USA and Canada , the Mediterranean countries participating under Euromed , countries such as Norway , Iceland , Switzerland , Turkey , Morocco , Russia and Ukraine , while in special cases such as the fight against drugs it also extends to the countries of Latin America and central Asia .
I now come to the second part of my report , on Schengen cooperation , and I would like to start with some fundamental comments .
Schengen cooperation consists of a balanced system of measures which guarantees freedom of movement in the Schengen area and at the same time reduces the security risks inherent in ending controls at internal borders .
Over the period of almost four years during which this system has been applied in practice , it has largely proved its worth .
We must therefore continue to pursue its underlying concept of freedom of movement combined with security .
As Mrs Van Lancker has already commented , the development of Schengen cooperation has reached an important turning point .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam means that Schengen will be integrated into the European Union .
The required legal and institutional preparatory work is already under way .
We must now push ahead with this work at full speed , so as to complete it , if at all possible , by the time the Treaty of Amsterdam comes into force .
Germany has always firmly supported this objective and will ensure that the necessary effort continues under its EU presidency in the first half of 1999 .
The fact that we have already agreed that Germany will continue to hold the Schengen presidency in the first half of the coming year will assist the integration process .
Now let me say a few words about defining the Schengen acquis .
For Schengen to be successfully incorporated into the EU , we will have a lot of homework to do on the EU side .
First and foremost , this means defining exactly what the Schengen acquis consists of .
Mrs Van Lancker talked about nebulous structures , and we certainly want to help to disperse this fog .
For reasons of legal certainty and clarity , the states already applying the acquis , the states that will have to adopt it on accession to the EU , and above all our citizens themselves need to know precisely which Schengen provisions will continue to apply and which will not .
One of the tasks still to be accomplished is dividing the Schengen acquis between the legal bases of the Treaty establishing the European Community and the Treaty on European Union .
Current thinking and future strategy can be summed up as follows : because of fundamental differences between Member States at expert level , it has not yet been possible to find conclusive answers in either area , I have to admit .
It may well be necessary to sort this out at political level .
If it really proves impossible to reach agreement on this , we would have to resort to the Schengen Protocol safeguard clause , which fictionally deems that Schengen is entirely based on the third pillar .
Mrs Van Lancker , I know that you do not approve of that , and for the time being we will have to make every effort to reach agreement , but that would be the consequence .
Negotiations with Norway and Iceland , which I am pleased to say have already made great progress , are to be finalised by means of an association agreement .
Germany has already sought to achieve the most efficient possible means of linking these states with the Schengen cooperation , and that remains our approach .
The planned cooperation structure is a good way to take account of these Nordic states ' legitimate interest in participating in the process .
My next subject is EU enlargement .
Schengen faces another significant challenge because of the Central and Eastern European countries ' accession to the Union .
The Schengen states will have to be prepared for the fact that in future all states joining the EU will automatically become members of the Schengen cooperation under the EU umbrella .
The transition protocol commits them to adopting the acquis in its entirety .
I must stress that it will not be possible to allow any departures from this principle during the accession negotiations .
Schengen 's carefully balanced association of freedom of movement and security will only carry on working if it requires the same of all Member States .
We also need to ensure that it will only be possible for a state to take part in this association in future if it can demonstrate that it fully complies with the necessary requirements .
To this end , the instrument concerning the entry into force of the Schengen regulations for any given state must at all costs be complied with .
We also still have a special problem with one country in the south .
We need to actively support new EU members preparing to adopt the Schengen standards .
To conclude , I would like to say just a few words about the focal points of the German Schengen presidency in the first half of 1999 .
This presidency has set itself the objective of further reinforcing cooperation in the Schengen states by means of a number of initiatives .
In doing this , we are continuing where the German Schengen work programme for the second half of 1998 left off .
The focal points are to be the following : improving police mutual assistance in criminal matters by adopting a catalogue of criminal investigations compulsory for all Schengen states , which the police can apply for and deal with without involving the judicial authorities , as a means of speeding things up , but without any loss of legal sovereignty ; mutual posting of liaison officers involved in border police work to Schengen external borders to give advice and support ; establishing the interoperability of various police digital communication systems in internal border areas ; reviewing Germany 's implementation of the Schengen Implementation Agreement , which means that we are subjecting ourselves to the first review , which I think is a good thing in itself ; and improvement in the exchange of visa information and the introduction of an exit document .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank you for this opportunity to discuss this interesting subject with you here today , a subject of great importance to the citizens of the Member States of the European Union .
I welcome the fact that we are not just discussing these issues today alone .
Continuing the theme already embarked upon by Mr Schily , we are at an interesting point in time .
As you , Mr Nassauer , pointed out , we are today in the unusual situation of not only having to report on the events and progress of the last year , that is on the achievements of the British and Austrian Presidencies . We also have to give you a short overview of the German Presidency 's plans for the next six months .
It is good that today is not the only chance to do this , and I am delighted that we shall have an opportunity to continue this discussion about our plans and the problems informing our decisions over the coming week in the relevant committees of this House .
For that reason , I hope you will forgive me if I limit my presentation here to a few significant points .
Mr Nassauer , I would like to start with a few general comments about relations between the Council and the European Parliament .
I am very much in sympathy with your suggestions .
We must certainly heed your comments about democratic control in areas which we have always traditionally felt - and I am sure rightly so - are subject to the law-making process .
I have read the passages in the motion for a resolution to be debated today with great interest .
You can rest assured that we will do what we can , within the bounds of the Treaty , to further enhance relations between the Council and Parliament .
Looking back over the events of the past year , in the areas on which I have to report today , of course , it is fair to say that on the whole relations between the Council and the European Parliament have been fruitful and positive .
Both the British and the Austrian Presidencies had an opportunity to present their work programme for the next six months to you and to discuss it with you .
Depending on the area of competence , these work programmes were explained in detail and discussed with the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs or in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
There was also an exchange of views between the presidency and Members of Parliament on aspects of mutual interest in the fields of justice and home affairs .
I think we can safely say , Mr Nassauer , that there was accordingly a chance to discuss issues before they were considered at formal or informal meetings of the Council .
We thus ensured that the views of the European Parliament had some impact at those meetings .
It was also a useful exercise for the Presidents-in-Office to give a detailed report to Parliament 's committees at the end of each half year on the work done by the Council during the period under review .
We will continue that practice .
Furthermore , the presidency also continued the practice established by the Luxembourg Presidency in the second half of 1997 of consulting the European Parliament in accordance with the Treaty of Amsterdam .
We should carry on doing that . It has been another way - a successful one to my mind - in which we have tried to take account of the views of the European Parliament .
And in each case the presidency has conveyed Parliament 's views to the relevant Council body .
I would like to add that in December 1998 the Council consulted the European Parliament on a project which has a very special role to play , namely an action plan for the establishment of an area of freedom , security and justice , which your resolution also touches upon , albeit from a particular point of view .
This action plan is intended to point the way ahead and broadly determine how we proceed in future , in the first five years - you yourself , Mr Nassauer , said five years plus x - after the Treaty of Amsterdam has come into force .
Let me say this again : you can rest assured that the German Presidency attaches great importance to improving relations between the Council and the European Parliament still further .
We think it was very positive that throughout the year the European Parliament demonstrated considerable interest in work in this field .
The Council received more than 100 questions , which I think is proof enough .
Lastly , I would like to talk about the conclusions of the Council of 19 March last year .
These conclusions related to openness and transparency in the Council 's activities in the field of Title VI of the Treaty on the European Union , providing a wider range of information on the activity of the Council and reinforcing its external impact .
Some of this relates to matters we have already discussed and some of it to your own proposals : making the calendar of meetings available to the public , publishing Council decisions on the Internet , and having public debates in the Council .
I shall now turn to my second point .
What progress was made on judicial cooperation last year under the British and Austrian Presidencies ?
The first point I should mention is judicial cooperation on civil matters .
I say that simply because we know very well that this is of special interest to Europe 's citizens .
A key event in the field of judicial cooperation on civil matters was the adoption by the Council of the Brussels II Convention on jurisdiction , recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters , and the signing of this convention by the Member States .
As you know , this convention is of great interest to Europe 's citizens .
It stipulates in which Member State a divorce , legal separation or marriage annulment can be applied for , and also determines which Member State is responsible for making a judgment on parental authority for children of binational marriages when a divorce , separation or marriage annulment has been applied for .
I do not have to tell you that for binational marriages in particular , divorces involve many problems .
By virtue of this convention , we can endeavour to create a reasonable framework for legal and judicial processes and practice .
But it is of course almost impossible to legislate for the human aspect of the problems associated with this , and I think we will have to explore other options in this case .
I believe that the Members of this House also have a part to play in helping with this aspect of regulation and practice .
But let me return to the convention itself .
As soon as the courts of a Member State have made a judgment , it can then be recognised and enforced in other Member States by means of a quick , simple and inexpensive procedure .
It is also important to note that in connection with this convention the Council adopted a legal instrument simultaneously signed by the Member States concerning the interpretation of the convention by the European Court of Justice .
This legal instrument is not only important as a means of taking matters further forward , but also in that it highlights the importance of the European Court of Justice .
I believe that emphasising the significance of the European Court of Justice in this way is important as a means of furthering the concept of judicial control and thus also of constitutionality in the European Union , in exactly the same way as in all the Member States .
Important work on judicial cooperation in the field of civil law was launched in relation to revising the Brussels I and Lugano Conventions .
This too was a very positive development .
The Brussels Convention of 27 September 1968 lays down uniform rules for the Member States on international jurisdiction , lis pendens conditions , recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters .
The Lugano Convention of 16 September 1988 is similarly structured but , as you know , there are differences of detail .
The signatories to the Lugano Convention are , in addition to the EU Member States , the EFTA states of Switzerland , Norway and Iceland .
The German Presidency plans to revise these conventions over the next six months .
The objective of the discussions is to bring these two conventions more closely into line with each other , to make improvements on the basis of experience of legal practice and in particular to further simplify the mutual recognition and enforcement of judgments .
We particularly want to keep an eye on the simplification side .
So the aim of these negotiations is to achieve an important step towards establishing the area of freedom , security and justice which the Member States want to create together .
We hope to complete this during the German Presidency .
In July 1998 , a Council working party met to consider the requirements for creating a legal instrument on the law applicable to non-contractual obligations .
This is known as the Rome II project , and it builds on Rome I , the agreement between the EU Member States of 19 June 1980 on the law applicable to contractual obligations .
The working party achieved a positive interim result and is now to produce a draft on the basis of a working document prepared by the Austrian Presidency .
I shall now turn to judicial cooperation in the field of criminal law , which Mrs Van Lancker also touched upon .
First , I would like to mention the importance in practical terms of the Convention on driving disqualification , another subject with a very immediate impact on people in the Member States of the European Union . I have to tell you that in Germany too people are constantly asking questions and expressing their fears about this convention , although it is also widely praised .
The convention adopted by the Council on 16 June 1998 provides that judgments no longer subject to the right of appeal may in certain circumstances be enforced in a Member State other than the state of residence .
This therefore makes a valuable contribution to road safety and simultaneously , by tackling such a practical subject , helps to create a common legal area of which our citizens are directly aware .
There is another field in which I unfortunately cannot report the same degree of progress .
I am talking about improving mutual assistance in criminal matters .
Despite the extraordinarily commendable and persistent efforts of the Austrian Presidency in particular - which I would like to emphasise - there has been far less progress in this field , the reason being the different systems that exist in the Member States .
Another reason is the various expectations people have of the European Union in this field , and I think that in this case all the European institutions , and above all the European Parliament , have a duty not only to generate greater appreciation of the issue , but also to take supportive action so as to facilitate effective international negotiations .
To do this it is necessary to improve the existing instruments of international mutual assistance in criminal matters and to adapt them to the requirements of modern international law enforcement .
This particularly applies , as we all know , to modern international communications technology , such as satellite communications .
The German Presidency plans to work towards adoption of the Agreement on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters as quickly as possible , preferably within the six months of our presidency .
There is a considerable body of earlier work for us to build on .
In particular , there is already a consensus about simplified procedures for passing on requests for mutual assistance , and also on rules governing modern methods of passing requests across borders - the key words here being controlled deliveries and undercover agents - as well as questioning via video-conferencing .
However , I am sure that I do not need to tell you again that there are still many problems to be solved .
We may perhaps have a chance to tell the relevant committees more about this next week .
In the field of combating fraud and corruption , by adopting the joint measure on corruption in the private sector in December 1998 we have managed to create a new basis for combating corruption in business in the common market under criminal law .
I have no doubt that this too is a very important step forward that should be brought to the public 's attention in an appropriate way .
Let me now turn to the fight against organised crime . Just before the Treaty of Amsterdam was signed the European Council instructed a high-level group on organised crime to work out an action plan to develop a comprehensive approach to this task .
This has enabled the various parties involved - the police , judicial and customs authorities - to work together in a multidisciplinary team , initially for a limited period , to combat the scourge of organised crime . This is in marked contrast to the artificial barriers which previously separated them .
I would once again like to stress that the Council very much appreciates the important contribution made by the European Parliament to the Multidisciplinary Group on Organised Crime . I particularly have in mind Ms Cederschiöld 's report on the action plan .
This report was - and still is - one of the cornerstones of the Group 's work . For example , the resolution adopted by the Council on 21 December 1998 on the prevention of organised crime goes back to an initiative inspired by the debate in the European Parliament .
Substantial progress has been made in implementing the action plan , and this was set out in detail in the report to the Vienna European Council .
I would like to draw special attention to the launch of the European Judicial Network and the adoption of a joint measure on money laundering , the identification , tracing , freezing , seizing and confiscation of the instruments used in and the proceeds from crime , and the adoption of a joint measure under which the legislation of all the Member States will make it a criminal offence for any person on their territory to participate in a criminal organisation , regardless of where it is located or pursues its criminal activities .
As you know , the deadline for implementing the recommendations in the action plan is the end of 1999 .
The Council will then have to reach a decision on the follow-up to this work and on how it links up with the new action plan on the establishment of an area of freedom , security and justice .
I am sure I do not need to tell you that this decision will be a rather important one .
I would now like to say a few words about the action plan on the establishment of an area of freedom , security and justice .
The process of drawing up this new action plan was the focal point of the Council 's work in the second half of 1998 , making it the centre-piece of the Austrian Presidency .
As you know , the Cardiff European Council called upon the Council and the Commission to present proposals to the Vienna European Council on the best means of implementing the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam concerning an area of freedom , security and justice .
A document was presented to the Vienna Summit in which an attempt was made to pinpoint the changes and progressive innovations contained in the Treaty of Amsterdam , or in other words its added value , and to draw up a work programme for the next two to five years .
The Vienna European Council approved the action plan and stated that it would give the field of justice and home affairs a new dimension after the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , thus creating a concrete framework for developing activity in this field .
I think it is right to draw attention to this .
At the same time , the European Council decided that progress to date should be assessed at the Special Justice and Home Affairs European Council to be held in Tampere in October 1999 and that that meeting should set further guidelines for EU action in the field of justice and home affairs .
This is an important task and the opinion sought from Parliament by the Austrian Presidency in mid-December will be accorded its full weight .
I can certainly assure you that the German Presidency , which will be making the initial preparations for Tampere , will ensure that the European Parliament 's opinion is fully taken on board .
I am convinced that the Tampere Special Council will give us an opportunity to make significant further progress with discussions in this field and I hope that the German Presidency can count on the continuing support of the European Parliament in achieving this objective .
I would like to mention once again that we are at the interface of two interesting phases .
The European Parliament elections are about to take place , and it will be important to enter into a dialogue with our citizens about the progress we have made and the potential of a European legal area and common security area .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam makes this a time of radical change , and this will have a special impact in our area .
We should all be aware that a key factor in driving Europe as a whole forward is the enormous interest shown by Europe 's citizens in the common legal area - which will mean additional and common rights for all - and also in the common European security area .
So the challenge we face is to act jointly and to use our knowledge and ability to the full to find ways of bringing Europe as a whole closer to a social and democratic constitutional identity .
I think that is your objective , and it is also the objective of the German Presidency .
Applause
Mr President , Ministers , ladies and gentlemen , EU cooperation in the fields of justice and home affairs is now entering its sixth year .
This area has gradually taken on greater significance , as Mr Nassauer also notes in his report .
At the same time , the need for a new approach has become increasingly evident .
Through the Amsterdam Treaty we have set ourselves a more ambitious task : to establish progressively an area of freedom , security and justice .
One of my major goals last year was to give substance and intelligibility to this vision in the communication which I forwarded to the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament .
Previous experience shows just how important this is .
Four years have now elapsed since , as Commissioner , I began work on cooperation in justice and home affairs , and a clear pattern has now emerged .
Underlying the initiatives , there are common challenges and a genuine desire for a European solution that works .
In most cases , there is strong popular support for the ideas behind the proposals , but when it comes to implementing them there is real resistance .
This point is well illustrated in Mr Nassauer 's report where he lists the numerous issues which the Council of Ministers has not managed to resolve during the past year , partly due to the length of time that proposals have had to wait for a decision , and partly because , for various reasons , the decisions have not been implemented .
Of all the conventions dealt with during the past five years , only one - the Europol Convention - has entered into force .
It is not just in the Council that progress has been slow . Parliament has also sometimes found it difficult to reach agreement on a common strategy .
There is therefore also a need for a far-reaching debate here in Parliament .
What is required is a new impetus to speed up the cooperation process .
I hope that during the spring we can have a broad public debate on the direction that EU cooperation on justice and home affairs will take in the future .
There are a number of basic issues to be analysed here .
We must look for answers in the everyday reality in which the citizens of Europe live .
I therefore wholeheartedly support Parliament 's idea that we should try to arrange an interparliamentary conference next spring .
Such a meeting would be the perfect forum in which to launch a broad public debate on the Union 's priorities in the future .
Mr Nassauer notes in his report that not one single legislative instrument was approved in this field during 1998 .
I too had hoped that we would make more progress .
This applies in particular to the proposal concerning temporary shelter where there has been a mass influx of refugees .
Two years have elapsed since the issue was first raised in the Council of Ministers , and I have put forward concrete draft proposals on two separate occasions .
I have also prepared a model for joint action in burden sharing .
With so much preparatory work , more should really have been accomplished , and I would like to say that I am open to any kind of suggestions .
At the same time , I naturally expect help from the Member States in finding a constructive alternative solution .
Last year we had a major success with the Europol Convention .
It gives us more scope for action in the fight against organised crime .
This year we have to finalise our work on the plan of action for fighting organised crime .
The Commission will also be playing an active role in this task .
We are also in the process of updating the Union 's action plan on drugs .
As you know , the current plan runs for another year , and the Commission will be putting forward another five-year plan in the spring .
This work took on new momentum following the special session on drugs organised last year by the United Nations in New York .
While I was there , in the company of Members of the European Parliament , I noted that the work of the UN in this area would continue to be characterised by continuity and resolve .
I also welcome the resolution giving clear support to the UN Drugs Convention , which Parliament approved in October .
This ensures that for a long time to come , the policy on drugs will continue to build on past knowledge and experience .
Another important priority last year was enlargement .
A number of applicant countries are involved in the process .
Intensive negotiations are in progress with all of them , particularly in the field of justice and home affairs .
It is incumbent upon the Commission to give them as much help as possible , particularly through technical assistance .
The PHARE programme is an important tool in this respect , as is the education and exchange programme .
On behalf of my colleague Mr Monti , I should like to say a few words about Schengen .
To a large extent , the Commission agrees with the analysis prepared by the rapporteur , Mrs Van Lancker , and her recommendations concerning the integration of the Schengen acquis .
First of all , it is essential that Schengen should be integrated into the Union and not the other way round ; secondly , integration should really serve to bring about the increased openness and legal control that is envisaged ; and thirdly , the integration of Schengen should not hinder any future progress as laid down in the Amsterdam Treaty .
The Schengen Protocol clearly stipulates a line of communication between the first and third pillars .
If we cannot reach agreement , then the whole Schengen system would be deemed to be based on the third pillar instead of being integrated within the Union framework .
I think this would go against the spirit of the new Treaty and is therefore totally unacceptable .
The Commission will do everything in its power to finalise the work on this line of communication before the new Treaty enters into force .
Naturally , Parliament should be as fully involved as possible in the preliminary work .
In the coming weeks , the Commission is definitely not going to change its stance on this in any future contacts with the German Presidency .
We intend to work with the presidency to find the most effective way possible of organising our work with Parliament .
I am sure the House will be pleased to know that the negotiations with Norway and Iceland have now been concluded .
In the Amsterdam Treaty , justice and home affairs are upgraded .
The new Treaty opens the door to a number of fresh areas for action by the Commission .
I see new challenges ahead , above all in the area of justice .
The demands of our citizens for equal access to justice know no boundaries .
An integrated Europe where people move around freely both implies , as well as strengthens , a common sense of justice .
This is something we should welcome and encourage .
Terrorism , bribery , corruption , fraud and the sexual exploitation of women and children are just a few examples of crimes which arouse disgust throughout the Union .
The Treaty provides access to new and interesting initiatives , for example in relation to the right to punish .
Another area we began to investigate in 1998 was the Union 's role with regard to victims of crime .
What can we do to protect people who are exposed to violence and other forms of criminal behaviour when they are in another Member State ?
I intend , during the course of the year , to issue a communication describing what progress can also be made in this area through European cooperation .
As regards the enslavement of women and the sexual exploitation of children , over a period of several years we have only succeeded in raising the issue to its present level .
We have come up with a framework for a common strategy and put forward concrete proposals and measures .
Through the STOP programme , we have also succeeded in earmarking financial support for these activities .
Consequently , in the communication on the smuggling of women which I issued last month , I identify other areas where further measures are needed , such as temporary residence permits for women who would like to stay to give evidence against smugglers and pimps .
Last year , we also put forward a proposal for a programme of work known as Daphne , to be carried out over a number of years , with the aim of combating the abuse of women , teenagers and children .
I am especially pleased with this programme .
As you know , it is directed at the voluntary organisations with the aim of encouraging them to use their expertise in this area .
An important aspect of our work is increasing people 's awareness of how Europe functions in practical terms in the fields of justice and home affairs .
In this way we can build respect for , and understanding of , the differences that exist , and develop an interest in finding solutions to the problems that arise .
To my mind , it is the best form of confidence building .
During 1998 , we therefore devoted a great deal of time to the ongoing programmes of work we have begun .
Through them we have been able , over the past two years , to support hundreds of awareness-raising and confidence-building projects within the Union and around Europe .
I shall shortly be proposing that this work programme should be extended to cover the new democracies in Central and Eastern Europe .
They already participate in numerous projects , but now they should also be initiating their own .
Cooperation in justice and home affairs obviously has a place on today 's EU agenda .
The decision to hold a special top-level meeting in Tammerfors later in the year is proof of this .
At the same time , support for cooperation should be deeply rooted .
An essential condition for establishing an area of freedom , security and justice is that our work should have strong popular support .
We must therefore commit ourselves to initiating a lively and sustained dialogue between the EU and its citizens .
I have a particular answer for Mr Nassauer .
Twenty-one proposals for conventions , joint actions and other instruments have been discussed in the Justice and Home Affairs Council during 1998 .
Ten of these proposals were based on Commission initiatives .
The Member States presented 11 proposals .
The Commission has systematically sent copies of all its initiatives to Parliament at the same moment they were sent to the Council .
It has also always urged the presidency to consult Parliament in accordance with Article K.6 EU .
This includes both Commission initiatives and proposals submitted by the Member States .
Five Commission initiatives have not yet been finalised .
They are : joint action on temporary protection , joint action on burden sharing , the convention on admission , the joint action on support of reception , repatriation of displaced persons and asylum seekers and , finally , the initiative to revise the Brussels Convention .
The joint action on non-cash means of payment was presented late in the year so its finalisation could not reasonably be accepted before the end of 1998 .
In many cases the reason for non-progress is the profound divergence of opinion between the Member States .
A good example is the actions on temporary protection and on burden sharing .
In the latter case the Commission , together with the German presidency , will attempt to find compromise solutions to the issues at stake .
On the basis of the content that is agreed , the Commission will then present post-Amsterdam proposals in the form of a Community instrument .
As a supplement to my answer , we have also produced a detailed table of initiatives taken within the field of justice and home affairs during 1998 .
I have handed over this table to the chairman of the committee , Mrs d 'Ancona , and I also gave it to Mr Nassauer before he left the hemicycle .
Others who might be interested can also look at this table .
It makes it easier to see who has done what .
Mr President , on a point of order .
You mentioned that we are under great time pressure .
This is partly occasioned by the fact that the statements by the two German Ministers took up some 50 minutes .
I am not complaining because what they said contained some fascinating , important and valuable information .
I wonder if it might be possible , exceptionally in this case , to have their statements translated into the official languages promptly .
I know this happens in the normal course of events but it can take up to a year .
It is such important information that it would be very valuable .
Thank you , Mr Elliott .
I think that can be done through the committee or by other means .
I can also see that the ministers are nodding , so that should be possible .
Mr President , I really have very little speaking time , and I have to say that in comparison with the time given to the Council and the Commission , Parliament 's time is extremely limited .
I shall therefore confine myself to a few comments on what Mrs Däubler said about relations between the Council and Parliament .
First of all , it is a major step forward that the Amsterdam Treaty now requires us to be consulted about relevant issues .
It does not always happen , unfortunately , but nevertheless a good many proposals are put to us .
However , we are often given very little time to deliver our opinion , and the Council always seems to be in a hurry as well , so that it often scarcely has time to look at Parliament 's opinion in detail .
My first question , therefore , is this : would it not be a good idea to organise a meeting shortly before the Council so that our rapporteur can inform the ministers ?
This would be a good way of ensuring that the best use is made of our work .
For example , we will finish work on the action plan in mid-April , so it would make sense if we were given time then to explain our position .
Secondly , following on from this , we never actually hear what happens to our opinions .
I have just been told here that our recommendation on the action plan on organised crime was very useful , but it has taken until now for us to hear this .
It would therefore be useful , in addition to sending a representative to the Council meetings , if the Council could send us a written report on which parts of our opinions it is prepared to accept and which not .

Thirdly - I cannot go any faster or put my points any more briefly - as far as our committee is concerned the K.6 debate is extremely important .
We have asked on five occasions for an annual progress report on the third pillar , so we were absolutely delighted to read that the Council had decided on 19 March last year to send Parliament progress reports not just once but twice a year .
But nothing has happened - we have not actually seen one of these reports yet .
So I hope that the Council intends to keep its promise and that we will receive these reports in future under the new presidency , which I naturally wish every success .
Once again , I hope that we will receive replies to these three questions .
Mr President , I should like first of all to apologise to the President-in-Office of the Council for the fact that so few members of my group are here - an important vote is currently being taken in the group on an issue that is one of the next on the agenda .
However , I shall try to make my group 's position on the Van Lancker report clear .
I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Van Lancker , on the way in which she got us all to work together on this report , which had to be prepared under very difficult circumstances given the extremely short time it was before the committee .
We have been given a very comprehensive picture by the presidency this morning , for which I would thank the ministers concerned .
The presidency has clearly described the work which has to be done to integrate the Schengen Agreement into the EU Treaty .
There is an important point in the document from the German Presidency to which I would to draw your attention , where it talks about the Schengen system being founded on two pillars : the free movement of persons and security .
It says that the abolition of individual controls at the internal borders of the Schengen states is based on the assumption that the planned compensatory measures are genuinely effective .
I think that this is an important principle and one which my group wholeheartedly supports , because a number of Member States have attempted to use Schengen to introduce freedom of movement .
We must also not forget security considerations .
I think that internal security is an extremely important issue for the public , and that people want to have both freedom and security at the same time .
What we need to do now is to ensure that the fairly complicated transition from inter-state cooperation to cross-border policy measures should happen as smoothly and flexibly as possible .
With the entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty , and this was another point made at the European Council in Vienna , Schengen must be incorporated into the European Union as quickly as possible .
The minister referred to the problems that are still being encountered , although these have not really been identified - the choice of legal bases for the Schengen acquis , perhaps ?
I know that this is a fairly complicated subject .
Perhaps we could be given more detailed information , maybe in writing , on this and on the operation of the Schengen information system .
The PPE Group feels that the system must not become a ' big brother ' , but on the other hand it must not be a little system either .
In other words , data must be recorded accurately and carefully in the system and only the competent authorities must have access to it .
We must prevent any infringement of privacy , and we must prevent those responsible for international organised crime from having access to information that encourages the white slave trade or the trade in foreigners .
These are two of the biggest phenomena that we are facing and for which the international community , whether under the Treaty or the Schengen Agreement , has really not found an answer . I think , Minister , that we must give our fullest support to further efforts in this direction .
I have no more time to deal with any other points .
Mr President , I am sure you are aware that our thoughts are elsewhere at the moment , which is a great shame given the importance that should be attached to this debate .
I will therefore only say a few words in support of the approach proposed by Mrs Van Lancker .
The Liberal Group as a whole is in favour of her proposals and , once again , we join her in deploring the difficulties that the Member States are having in coming to an agreement on the definition of the Schengen acquis .
It would be unfortunate if these difficulties could not be overcome in such a sensitive field as the movement of persons .
It goes without saying that the European Parliament must be informed of the substance of Schengen and consulted on the draft decision that will allow the acquis to be integrated into the Treaty .
I welcome the presence here today of the German ministers who are assuming the Council presidency , and I would like to say to them that they will always be able to count on the Liberal Group whenever the rights of the defendant are at stake .
It is a matter that we feel is fundamental , and I welcome the initiatives that you announced in this field .
Although we should be pleased about the extension of the Schengen area , the common European approach means that the United Kingdom and Ireland need to join their partners as soon as possible so that the same rules can be applied to the movement of persons as to the movement of goods .
The timid approach that is the root of many obstacles in the field of free movement of persons must give way to a wider vision that focuses on the requirements of the vast area of freedom , security and justice to which a great majority of us aspire .
I will conclude by saying that through her sound proposals , Mrs Van Lancker is making a significant contribution towards achieving this great plan , and we will be sure to demonstrate the support that I have just outlined when it comes to the vote .
Mr President , the dual German Presidency for the next six months of both the European Union and the Schengen area gives weight to the recommendation to the Council from the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , presented by our colleague Mrs Van Lancker .
While the objective of Schengen cooperation is to ensure the free movement of persons and to remove internal border controls , that objective only has meaning if the necessary accompanying measures are put in place at the same time .
In Mrs Van Lancker 's report , one senses an element of reproach , considering as it does that the main emphasis has been placed on strengthening external border controls , on admission policy and on police and judicial cooperation .
While these measures are not the primary objective of the Schengen agreements , they are an essential consequence of it , in order to guarantee the greatest possible security for the citizens of the Union and to ensure that they support the system .
With regard to the integration of Schengen into the Treaty and the division of the acquis between the first and third pillars , my group cannot share her view on the institutional catastrophe that would result from the application of the safeguard clause , which would mean a complete transfer to the third pillar . This would be even less the case if the Council , as requested by the recommendation , informed Parliament by involving it both in defining the strategies and also in the legislative measures to be taken under the third pillar , and if it respected the transparency rules , certainly with regard to the European Parliament but also with regard to the national parliaments and the citizens .
My group welcomes the proposal to make a start now on converting the Schengen Information System into a European Information System by strengthening links with the Europol data processing systems .
This would allow the involvement , at least in this area , of the United Kingdom and Ireland , who are signatories of the Europol convention and , for obvious geographical reasons , are outside the Schengen area .
On behalf of my group , I of course welcome the German Presidency 's objective of improving international cooperation in criminal affairs as well as the decision of the Member States to harmonise their visa policies and to introduce without delay a computerised format for residence permits for third-country nationals .
With regard to assessing the operation of Schengen , we also welcome the progress that has been made , in particular in the accession of Italy and Austria , and we agree that it is important to encourage the involvement of the United Kingdom and Ireland in the areas covered by Title IV of the Treaty .
I cannot , of course , agree with the regrets expressed concerning France 's use of the exemption mechanism provided for in Article 2 ( 2 ) of the Convention in respect of its land borders with Belgium and Luxembourg .
I prefer , and I have tabled an amendment to this effect , to place emphasis on continuing the efforts being made by those countries to combat drug trafficking .
The rapporteur also highlights an incident which occurred at the Belgian Sirene office , where personal data was stolen .
She questions the reliability of the database protection system , and I wonder whether the problem lies with Belgium rather than with the Sirene network .
Overall , apart from these various points , we will vote for these two reports .
Mr President , in this annual debate on the progress made on cooperation in the areas of justice and home affairs and , more specifically , the Schengen area , I would like to highlight certain aspects that prove that a great deal still remains to be done before we can talk about a true area of democratic justice that is subject to the supervision of Parliament and the jurisdictional bodies .
As the speaker before me , Mrs d 'Ancona , pointed out , it is vital for the Council to comply once and for all with the provisions of the Treaty and to inform Parliament regularly of the preparations for and results of its discussions and official meetings .
Without such information , it is impossible to have any sort of adequate democratic supervision .
It is significant that at this stage we have not adopted any legislation relating to our policy on asylum , refugees and immigration . This demonstrates the lack of political will among the governments and European institutions to give decisive , serious and , above all , consistent consideration to these matters .
In this Schengen area that is being created , there should be a clause making it possible to implement common policies on the socio-cultural integration of immigrants , avoiding any discrimination against people or groups due to race , colour or religion or due to national , social or ethnic orientation .
The Schengen responsibilities must be incorporated into the Union 's policies , as provided for in the Treaty of Amsterdam , but they must also be subject to the supervision of its institutions in order to ensure that they do not turn into an instrument for resisting immigration .
Integration is essential , yet we must also unequivocally guarantee respect for the fundamental rights of the citizens of the European Union and third country nationals .
The same can be said for the transparency and democratic supervision of the decision-making procedure .
Finally , Mr President , I would like to mention a specific problem , but one that is no less important in the creation of this Schengen area of freedom and justice : the protection of personal data , which must be guaranteed without exception in any democratic society .
The incident in the Belgian SIRENE office , where personal data were removed , is proof of the lack of sufficient protection for databases and the need to take clear measures to guarantee effective protection in this respect .
Mr President , my group cannot support Mr Nassauer 's motion for a resolution .
We cannot accept the wording on Europol and on asylum and migration policy .
We are not opposed to Europol , quite the contrary , we are in favour of Europol and citizens ' rights .
What is at stake is the legality of the work done by officials in the EU who are supposed to be dealing with citizens ' security .
It seems that there is agreement on police cooperation , and on setting up Europol , but they are being denied the legal bases required for their work , in other words democratic legal bases guaranteed in the Member States .
We find that unacceptable .
The police need generally applicable laws in order to operate properly .
But that was not the subject of the decision - it was about the immunity of Europol officials .
Who are we protecting against whom ?
We are protecting our officials against our own democratic laws and courts , but we are not protecting anyone else .
I am sorry that Mr Nassauer is not with us now .
He welcomed the Austrian Presidency 's failed initiative against illegal immigration .
The fact that he also welcomes the campaign in my home Land of Hessen against dual nationality is his problem .
I would like to ask him if we agree on the definition of illegal immigration .
What does illegal mean in the EU ?
Does it include people recognised as refugees in one Member State but rejected in another because it has different asylum laws ?
There is indeed illegal immigration , from eastern Europe for example .
We are not defending the idea of open borders , and we are prepared to accept reasonable regulations and harmonisation .
However , this must not mean that human rights suffer as a consequence .
I am grateful for the current Council presidency 's suggestion that we need a new summit , as explained by Mr Fischer , the German Minister for Foreign Affairs , and I hope that the German Presidency will succeed in making certain changes in this area .
Mr President , I would first like to thank Mr Schily , Mrs Däubler-Gmelin and the Commissioner for what they have said , as I really think that in them we may have a joining of forces which will enable us to progress more quickly than we have up until now , and this is probably a good sign for the future .
The goal of the operation is still to set up this area of freedom , security and justice , and this is worth repeating , insofar as nowadays more importance is attached to increasing the number of bolts , fortifications , barbed wire and protective walls than to explaining to citizens the measures to be taken and the point of a Europe without borders , this Europe that is behaving more like a club for rich people who intend to continue to increase their wealth .
I do not know if you have been curious enough to take the train between Brussels and Strasbourg .
Well , between Brussels and Strasbourg , perhaps not exactly at the border crossing but a few kilometres either side , passengers are subjected to controls in which they are asked their nationality , their profession and the reason for their journey , and all with a degree of courtesy that is inversely proportional to the presumed importance of the traveller .
We have tabled two amendments in order to condemn and put an end to the French Government 's attitude , as it continues to demand the application of exemption clauses .
The controls that are currently carried out at European internal borders should be able to end .
I would like to draw your attention to this point .
Secondly , with regard to the report presented by Mr Nassauer , this text will of course receive at least our qualified support .
We naturally welcome the progress made in 1998 , although we know that despite everything this progress was made at a snail 's pace rather than the fast pace we would have liked .
Commissioner Gradin drew attention to the fact that we were perhaps simply not very fast .
Nevertheless , I think that we must radically increase our speed .
In any case , Mr Nassauer must be supported in his demand that Parliament should be listened to and heard , and that its decisions and positions should be taken into account by the Council .
There are , of course , initiatives to be taken , but first of all it is enough to apply the clauses of the Treaty and to implement them effectively .
That would already be a significant step .
There are still two small points on which I would have reservations or disagreements , or which I would at least like to have clarified before the report is adopted , as they concern me slightly : one is the central fingerprints file and the other is the status and the monitoring of Interpol staff .
Mr President , in its day , the Schengen Agreement caused a stir in France because , having been negotiated in the utmost discretion , it was disclosed to our citizens somewhat inadvertently , proving once again that Europe and transparency do not go well together .
One of the fundamental elements of the Agreement is of course the gradual removal of border controls among the signatory states , and experience has shown that implementing the Schengen Agreement is a delicate and difficult matter .
Indeed , this is why France was obliged to apply exemption mechanisms .
If the implementation of Schengen was difficult , then integrating it into the legal corpus of the European Union appears to be just as difficult .
The Member States are unable to agree on the definition of what , in Eurospeak , we call the Schengen acquis , nor can they agree on the division between the first and third pillars .
The easy solution would otherwise be to place everything under the third pillar .
In addition , as Mr Nassauer pointed out , in the transitory period , national parliamentary control will disappear , but without our Parliament 's control coming into effect , and on that point we join Mr Nassauer in his request for information .
However , information does not mean control .
In practice , all these problems point to a reality : Schengen disregarded the facts and they are now catching up on Schengen and on the European Union .
Mr President , as this debate on Article K.6 of the Maastricht Treaty is most likely the last one before the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , it is no longer the time to bemoan , once again , the slow pace , the inefficiency and the lack of transparency and democracy of the operation of the third pillar .
We have done plenty of this in previous years and the criticisms that we made then are still valid now .
The President of Parliament made an excellent summary of the situation on 16 October at a conference in Avignon , when he said that an evaluation of the initiatives and proposals of the last few years bears too great a resemblance to Dante 's hell , in that it is paved with good intentions .
He also said that a huge number of conventions that were signed have not been ratified and it is reasonable to doubt that they will ever come into force . The President was illustrating , in a concise but extremely exact manner , a major concern expressed by our committee in Article 23 of the Nassauer resolution .
This article gives a list of the main acts that have not yet been ratified .
What will become of these agreements and protocols ?
How can we escape the legal insecurity that we are currently facing ?
The members of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs invite the Commission to present , in good time , the proposals that are essential for transforming these acts into Community measures as from the entry into force of the new Treaty .
I also share the concerns expressed by Mr Pradier and by the Green Group .
I do not have enough time to dwell on those concerns and I would particularly like to refer back to a point that has already been made by several of my colleagues , notably by Mr Nassauer and Mrs d 'Ancona , and which concerns us greatly .
It is the issue of democratic control , which for citizens is an essential counterweight to the sharing of sovereignty that they are being asked to accept .
I believe , and the opinion polls show , that they are prepared to accept the transfer of sovereignty that results from bringing part of the third pillar within the Community 's powers .
They understand that together we are more capable of fighting large-scale crime , organised international fraud , and trafficking of every kind .
They do not want internal borders to continue to be an obstacle to justice , nor do they want mixed couples who divorce , and the children of these couples , to continue be faced with contradictory rulings .
In short , they feel that there is an evident need for the European judicial area that is taking its first steps , and they understand that a shared European sovereignty is better than a declining national sovereignty that no longer has a grip on events . However , this is on condition that effective parliamentary control , which is the only means of democratically operating that shared sovereignty , can be exerted , which is why the Council must take into consideration Parliament 's opinions and change its behaviour towards Parliament .
Why is it , Mr President-in-Office , that the demands that we have made one by one over the years , through resolutions like today 's , go unheeded ?
Mr Nassauer 's resolution recalls the terms of the resolution of 12 December 1996 , for which I was rapporteur , which detailed the demands that we made then to the Council for more genuine and more complete information , for systematic consultation , and for our points of view to actually be taken into account .
Today we could repeat these terms word for word , as nothing has changed .
It is not acceptable , for example , that we were not consulted on the Austrian Presidency 's strategy paper that is going to determine European policy on asylum and immigration for many years .
Nor is it acceptable that the Council , having taken the official decision , on 19 March 1998 , and following our repeated demands , to publish an interim report at the end of each presidency , that is every six months , has not done so .
You have expressed your agreement , Mr President-in-Office .
You see , the problem is that the Council always agrees , in words , but the necessary actions do not follow .
If a report was presented beforehand , there could be a real debate in the House .
Mr President , although I cannot be here this afternoon , for which I hope you will forgive me , we will be able to continue this discussion in the relevant committees over the next week .
I would therefore like to pick up just two points which I consider especially important in this context and which need to be followed up .
The first is exchanges of information and relations between the Council , the Council presidency and the European Parliament .
It is evident from the comments made by honourable Members that there are genuine problems .
I would like to assure you that we will endeavour to work with you to solve these problems in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with the European treaties .
The second point I would like to pick up is the transition from the Maastricht Treaty to the Treaty of Amsterdam .
I believe that we can expect an important debate on new ideas here - including the work done by the Commission - so that we can push ahead with our plans in the fields of internal security and the common European legal area , quickly and profitably .
Thank you , Madam President-in-Office .
We shall now adjourn the debate ; it will be resumed at 3 p.m.
The sitting was suspended at 10.55 a.m. until voting time at 11 a.m.

VOTES
The Conference of Presidents adopted an agreement yesterday on the order of votes .
We will begin with the motions for resolutions , and then request the Commission to give its position . This will be followed by a short suspension to allow the groups time for consultation and we shall then proceed to the vote on the motions of censure .
I have received a request from the Green Group to vote first on the motions of censure and afterwards on the motions for resolutions on the refusal to grant discharge for 1996 .
Therefore , we must first decide whether or not to accept the position of the Conference of Presidents or to amend it .
Mr Telkämper wishes to speak to move the request by the Green Group .
Mr President , we have made this request under Rule 119 because we assume that the vote on the motion of censure is the more significant one .
There is now an institutional conflict between the Parliament and the Commission , and I believe that we will not be able to explain it to our electorate if we start arguing about various individual positions and split Parliament into subtly differentiated factions , instead of adopting an unequivocal position towards the fraud , corruption and nepotism inside the Commission .
I think this House agrees that that is what this motion of censure is all about , and in that sense it is the most significant .
That is what we have to vote on .
We have requested a roll-call vote in this case because if it eventually comes out that Parliament did not act firmly in this institutional conflict , it will have made a poor start , a false start if you like , to the election campaign .
That is why I am requesting this vote .
Mr President , I would like to oppose that proposal on two grounds .
Firstly , there is a precedent for this way of proceeding .
As we discovered , when your services looked at the precedents , this is how we dealt with the BSE motion of censure : the resolutions first and then the motion of censure .
Secondly , this is an eminently political debate .
We all know that the way in which the resolutions go may well affect the outcome of the motion of censure .
There is no escaping that reality .
I put the request from the Green Group to the vote .
Parliament rejected the request
Joint motion for a resolution on the consequences of the refusal to give discharge
Parliament rejected the joint motion for a resolution
I give the floor to Mr Santer , President of the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , your Parliament has just given its opinion by means of a resolution that sends a clear and firm message to the Commission .
It will shortly take a position , in all sovereignty , on the question of confidence .
This is an important moment in the life of our institutions .
I would first like to say a few words about the resolution .
As I said , the message to the Commission is a clear one , and I understood it fully .
I am taking on board the criticisms that have been expressed and I commit myself here and now to completing , according to a strict timetable , the ambitious programme that I have proposed , and to fulfilling the demands made by this Parliament .
I see this test as a means of giving a very strong impetus to the necessary reforms .
Today the European Parliament has strongly reaffirmed its authority and its monitoring role .
As democrats , we should all welcome this .
I would like to say a few words about this idea of a committee of experts .
I accept it , as it will enable us to completely review our methods , to improve our management , and to cast a critical eye over the fight against fraud .
Obviously , this committee could also examine certain individual cases , and I will state clearly that the recommendations from the committee of experts will be followed up with actions .
Moreover , it goes without saying that the Commission will continue to be accountable to Parliament 's monitoring bodies .
I said to you on Monday that each case of fraud pains me .
Each time it is Europe that loses out .
I admit that mistakes have been made .
We have been criticised , but our good will has never been questioned .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , I have now been involved in political life for thirty years .
I have always thought of that as a privilege , but also as an obligation to absolute integrity .
I respect taxpayers ' money and , with the help of Parliament , I am more determined than ever to continue the fight against fraud .
Now it is up to you , ladies and gentlemen , to decide , in good faith and in good conscience , whether you are going to grant us your confidence , the political confidence that we need to continue and to complete our political work in the interests of the citizens of Europe and to enable Europe to succeed .
That is purely and simply what I ask you to grant us today .
Applause
( The sitting was suspended at 11.25 a.m. and resumed at 11.40 a.m. )

Following our agenda , I shall now give the floor to the first signatories of the two motions of censure - Mrs Green and Mr Fabre-Aubrespy - and then to each of the group chairmen for one minute .
Mr President , I want to express my welcome and thanks to all those who voted with our resolution this morning .
In his comments Mr Santer said that this vote and this whole action has reaffirmed the authority of Parliament .
It is a major success for this Parliament ...
Protests
It is always a shame to see bad losers .
What the resolution has done is to give us the most extensive reforms ever of the internal workings of the European Commission .
Mixed reactions
Had we not tabled the motion of censure that would not have happened .
Mixed reactions
We heard Mr Santer 's commitment to carrying through the requests in the motion for a resolution .
Mr Santer understands that this group and those who voted for the resolution were voting for a stronger European Commission , a stronger Europe , and we will keep him to those commitments .
Mr President , having achieved what we consider to be a very considerable success in reforming the working practices of the European Commission , I would like to give you notice that I am now withdrawing the motion of censure on behalf of the Socialist Group .
Mixed reactions
The motion of censure of which Mrs Green is the first signatory having been withdrawn , I now give the floor to Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , first signatory of the second motion of censure .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the 70 signatories of the motion of censure who come , I would like to point out , from all the political groups in the House and represent almost all the peoples of the European Union , maintain , with conviction and determination , their motion of censure against the entire Commission .
Applause
They invite you to ask yourselves , in good faith and in good conscience , a very simple question : ' do I have confidence in the Commission or not ? ' Did it take the necessary measures following the various cases that came to light concerning the management of Community funds ?
Did it inform the Parliament correctly and adequately ?
If you answer ' no ' to this question , then you must vote for censure .
Ladies and gentlemen , never in the history of our Parliament will your vote be of such importance !
Do not take the risk of hearing your electorate ask you in a few days or a few weeks , when a new case is revealed to us , why you placed your confidence in the Commission once again .
By voting for censure ,
Applause
you will strengthen the credibility of our Parliament , you will give Europeans a renewed confidence in their institutions .
Loud applause
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President of the Commission , I do not think I am a bad loser .
What we have been calling for since December , thanks to the excellent work of the Committee on Budgetary Control led by Mrs Theato and with Mr Elles as rapporteur , has now been accepted in the Commission 's eight-point programme within a very strict deadline .
Why should we not be happy with this ?
On the contrary .
We have not been party to any political manoeuvring , and we have every reason to be happy because what was most important to us was the content .
There is a second point I would like to make .
It is now undeniably the case , Mr President of the Commission , that the era of bureaucracy and technocracy is over .
From now on , you are going to have to work with Parliament .
Applause
This is an undeniable and extremely important result , and I hope that it will be reflected in the forthcoming negotiations on the revision of the Treaty .
Mr President of the Commission , we passionately defended you here in the House in July 1994 , and I am still happy with my commitment and confidence in you personally .
I certainly do not regret it today , far from it .
I should therefore like to tell you that even if the members of my group vote with their consciences and even if there is a majority - but of course everybody will be voting with their consciences - I still hold you in the highest esteem as a man of integrity and as the President of the Commission .
Applause
Mr President , this week the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party raised consciousness inside and outside this House of the fact that the rules of engagement for the democratic control of the European Commission by this Parliament are self-evidently inadequate .
This must change !
Our instrument of naming names was perforce indelicate since no proper Treaty-based alternative yet exists to hold individual Commissioners publicly accountable before this Parliament for the political management and conduct of European affairs and subject them to sanctions where and when they fall short .
For months in this House the college of Commissioners has suffered from a self-induced collapse in its credibility .
In collusion with the Socialist Group , the Commission inexplicably last December drew this week 's crisis upon itself .
Applause
Politically we believe that this Commission is dead in the water .
Applause
When we demanded individual accountability , we were rebuffed by the shield of collegiality .
We have decided , Mr President of the Commission , to turn your shield of collegiality into our sword of parliamentary accountability .
For Europe , in good faith and in good conscience , the ELDR Group believes this Commission should go .
My Group will vote for censure .
Applause
Mr President , the Union for Europe Group is unanimous in deploring the serious management errors made by the current Commission and the previous one , as revealed in audits carried out by the Court of Auditors , internal enquiries and enquiries carried out on the ground by the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Our group condemns the lack of cooperation and transparency that the Commission has demonstrated for too long towards both Parliament and the Court of Auditors .
The Union for Europe Group has taken note of President Santer 's promise to put right the most glaring problems , but it deplores the fact that it took a vote of disapproval , the refusal of discharge , and the threat of an actual motion of censure , on which we are now going to vote , to bring about that result .
As a result , some members of the group , notably the French members , noting that previous commitments that were made at the time of the BSE motion of censure , and also following the decisions of the Committee of Inquiry into Fraud in Community transit , were not entirely fulfilled , have decided to vote for the motion of censure ...
Applause
in order to remind the Commission that the European Parliament 's monitoring powers must be respected because they are the only real means of protecting the citizens , the European taxpayers .
However , other members of the group , notably our Irish , Italian and Portuguese colleagues , have decided to grant the Commission mitigating circumstances and not to vote for censure , so as not to give rise to an institutional crisis at a time when Europe is faced with enormous challenges . This leniency cannot , however , be interpreted by the Commission as a blank cheque of confidence .
Applause
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I would like to say that we hope that the only winners in these votes and decisions by the European Parliament will be the citizens of Europe , European democracy and transparency , an element that is absolutely necessary , whether we are in the run-up to or in the wake of elections .
We hope that from now on , these decisions by the European Parliament will increase the credibility of this institution and its links with the real lives of the public . We also hope that they will mean greater political supervision of the Commission and that the Committee on Budgetary Control will be able to work under the necessary conditions .
I must add that , as regards this joint statement by my group , there were differences of opinions and conflicting ideas , as has happened in other groups .
The majority of the group believes that the Commission 's management deserves to be censured and it is therefore going to vote in favour of the motion of censure .
However , certain Members are going to vote against , while others - a substantial number , including myself , although not the majority - believe that our political life and our institution have been constantly exploited by the motions of censure . We are therefore not going to take part in the vote .
We wanted to make this point here so that it can be recorded in the Minutes of the sitting .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if Parliament now puts its trust in the Commission , then it also assumes political responsibility for the Commission 's past .
The Commission itself has refused to do this , and will only make proposals for the future .
I have two comments on the resolution we are adopting .
Not only have we thrown away some of the things we achieved in December by voting differently from then , but worst of all we are surrendering our own powers by allowing a committee of wise men to decide what has gone wrong .
Applause
This is an out-and-out scandal and not worthy of any parliament .
What we are doing is tantamount to censuring ourselves , and this is supposed to be strengthening Parliament 's authority , for goodness ' sake !
My group has always made it clear that our basic line was that the Commission should resign and that we cannot put our confidence in it , not just because of the financial scandals , but also because of its policies in so many fields : BSE , genetically modified foods on the market , and so on .
So we say that the Commission does not have our confidence and we should vote en bloc for the motion of censure .
Applause
Mr President , the resolution that has just been adopted is a good text .
It is firm , even severe , and demanding .
It also contains many demands and proposals .
We note the comments made by President Santer , who has recognised the errors that have been made and has promised reforms .
The political climate is certainly far from being stabilised .
Our disappointments and our criticisms remain .
It will take time to restore confidence .
Should we vote for censure ?
Our group has already done so in the past .
However , today , voting for censure would be an excessive gesture ; it would be inappropriate for the situation and also dangerous for the stability of the institutions .
We are also aware of the calendar .
We know that the current Commission will in any case reach the end of its mandate at the end of this year .
For all these reasons , the majority of our group - we do not have unanimity - the majority of our group will not vote for the motion of censure .
Applause
Mr President , there is a difference between blame and accountability .
You can have accountability without having blame .
The Europe of Nations Group does not have an opinion about who is to blame .
We leave that to disciplinary proceedings and the Court of Justice .
We are voting to censure the college because the whole Commission is accountable and must accept responsibility for the fact that so much has gone wrong and will continue to go wrong .
If the political leadership does not accept accountability , then there is no accountability .
The budget would then become a matter of helping oneself .
The main problem is that Mr Santer and his colleagues are not leading , but are allowing themselves to be led into a muddle of waste , fraud and corruption .
Mr Santer is a prisoner in his own fortress .
The Personnel Commissioner is a prisoner .
The Director of Personnel is a prisoner .
Only a motion of censure will release the prisoners and create a new culture of openness , closeness to the people and democracy , instead of secrecy , arrogance and bureaucracy .
Mr Santer reacted firmly when he should not have done , but he was not firm when he should have been .
He sacked an official for giving a document to an elected representative .
Instead , he ought to sack the people who do not give the elected representatives what they ask for .
That is why the Europe of Nations Group also wishes to sack Mr Santer 's Commission today .
Applause
Mr President , we have taken up a position against granting the discharge and we have raised the issue of the legality of certain operations in various questions .
We thus refuse to excuse mistakes in management or errors of omission and we want everyone in power to draw the appropriate conclusions in terms of political responsibility .
But the Alleanza Nazionale - which will vote unanimously - will not be joining in the chorus of those who , in the name of cleaning up management , are actually either attacking the institutions themselves or engaging in power struggles to gain control of the particular institution in question .
With the current turbulence on the Brazilian markets a ' no ' to the Commission could mean irreversible damage to the credibility of the euro and , consequently , serious damage to the completion of the Union and probable impoverishment of our fellow citizens later on .
As far as we are concerned the Commission and Parliament ought to become increasingly transparent and cooperative with each other in the interests of the people of Europe , because these are the two institutions appointed to establish not only the euro , but also that political union without which there will never be an economic project and the fight against unemployment will remain a dead letter .
Now we expect everyone to do their duty as responsible politicians .
We shall now proceed to the vote on the motion of censure on the European Commission ( B4-0053 / 99 ) .
Parliament rejected the motion of censure on the Commission
Mr President , it was unfortunate that during the procedure the President of Parliament did not allow me to speak , although I had requested the floor in plenty of time .
I want to state , in accordance with the Rules , that I was present but did not vote .
Therefore , I would like it recorded in the Minutes that I was in the House and that I did not vote because I disagree with the whole process that has led us to the motion of censure .
I am thus also expressing my rejection of the entire process .
Thank you , Mr President , and I would appreciate it if you could inform President Gil-Robles of how displeased I was that he did not allow me to speak at the right time .
Mr President , the theatrical performance that we have seen today may have been a perfectly normal and legitimate procedure in parliamentary terms , but from the point of view of our electors it was highly regrettable , as the Socialist Group has unanimously covered up for its discredited Commissioners , and that is the real scandal that we will have to come to terms with in the next few months .
A few votes one way or other on the motion of censure will not change that .
We shall continue to work towards transparency , propriety , democracy and stronger rights for Parliament , whether the Socialists like it or not .
Since December when the majority of Members of the European Parliament , including the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , refused to grant discharge to the Commission for the implementation of the 1996 budget , due to various management errors , fraud , and a general lack of transparency , we have observed in the House a whole series of diversions and excuses aimed at avoiding the logical consequence of that act : a vote on a motion of censure .
Firstly a resolution was tabled that was aimed specifically at certain Commissioners , with the purpose of defusing the risk of a general vote of no confidence in the Commission .
This first manoeuvre was thwarted .
At the same time , the Socialist Group tabled a false motion of censure , intended to neutralise its opponents , which it then withdrew at the last moment .
However , fortunately , this second manoeuvre was also thwarted , as the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations in the meantime tabled another motion of censure , this time a genuine one .
Finally , a draft resolution was tabled , aimed at putting an end to the debate by setting up a ' committee of experts ' .
That third manoeuvre appears to have succeeded , as the resolution has just been passed .
However , in reality , it discredits Parliament .
In fact it is not a parliamentary committee of inquiry that has just been adopted , it is simply a committee of experts which , the resolution specifies , will be placed ' under the auspices of the Parliament and the Commission ' .
In other words , this committee will depend at least partly on the very institution whose management it will be responsible for monitoring .
This blatant abandonment of Parliament 's powers displays clearly the complicity that has long existed between the European Parliament and the Commission in order to advance the federalist cause at all costs .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations considers that the Commission 's errors are sufficiently serious , evident and repeated to warrant a motion of censure .
With this approach , we wish to call into question the very system of federalist complicity that has led to all the current problems .
We welcome the fact that our motion has received the support of 232 Members of the European Parliament ( against 293 ) , which , taking account of the usual discrepancies between public opinion and Parliament , must demonstrate that an overwhelming majority of citizens support us .
Today 's votes in this House signal the end of an institutional crisis that was threatening the very existence and effectiveness of the Commission , following the refusal to grant discharge for the 1996 budget .
In adopting the motion for a resolution by the PSE , ARE and GUE / NGL Groups with 319 votes in favour , 157 against and 54 abstentions , Parliament has demonstrated its authority and capacity for control , as noted by the Commission President .
However , the Socialist Group 's motion for a resolution does not represent a blank cheque for the Commission .
On the contrary , it requires ambitious reform of the Commission 's administrative and financial practices and a rigorous investigation of all the accusations of irregularities made in the last few weeks in order to find out whether or not there is anything to be censured .
The reports containing the results of this investigation will be presented very shortly , by 15 March .
The Socialist Group has therefore wholeheartedly confirmed the strategy it outlined during the last part-session in December , in accordance with its proposed objectives of maintaining institutional stability at a crucial time for the future of Europe and of blocking the partisan manoeuvres of the PPE involving insinuations targeted at individual Commissioners . These actually represent an indirect attack on the socialist governments which are in the majority in the European Union .
The Portuguese socialists are convinced of the need to maintain confidence in this Commission so that the Agenda 2000 reforms could have a more favourable conclusion for the countries of southern Europe than the reforms planned by some of the Member States in northern Europe . We therefore decided to vote in favour of discharge in December 's part-session .
Similarly , now , having achieved the strategic objectives set out , we have decided to support the withdrawal of the motion of censure tabled by the Socialist Group .
However , the Portuguese socialists are highly critical of all the Members of all nationalities and of all the political groups that have preferred to go down the destructive road of instability , instead of following the constructive road of serious criticism , which could lead to the reforms that are undoubtedly required .
The rejection of the motion of censure tabled by the I-EDN Group , after the Socialist Group had withdrawn its motion , was also an important moment .
The results of the vote on this motion of censure - 232 in favour , 293 against and 27 abstentions - show that there are political forces keen to weaken the Commission in this final period of its mandate .
Although there were not enough votes to topple the Commission , it must be realised that this vote has serious consequences .
During this crisis , the Portuguese socialists have constantly tried to defend the interests of Portugal and the overall interests of Europe , which would certainly not have benefited from the fall of the Commission a few months before the European elections in June .
The Danish Social Democrats are satisfied that the Commission is now committed to a plan which will rapidly change the corporate culture of the Commission and increase morale .
We believe that any suspicion of irregularities , waste and fraud should be investigated , either by the new independent office for the combating of internal fraud or by the national police authorities .
In such cases , the Council should be called upon to make use of Article 160 of the Treaty , which states that any Member of the Commission can be compulsorily retired by the Court of Justice , on application by the Council or the Commission , if he has been guilty of serious misconduct .
It is expressly the Council and the Commission itself which have this option , not Parliament , although we could consider including it in a future Treaty amendment .
In this way , we can have cases examined thoroughly , without succumbing to the lynch law of the press .
However , if this option is to work , Mr Santer will of course have to recognise his accountability as President of the Commission .
We shall follow very closely how the Commission keeps to the action plan we have adopted today .
The Commission should also consider a redeployment of all the senior officials in the Commission in order to clear the air .
We support Mr Liikanen 's work on personnel reform , which is key to the whole clearing-up operation .
Mr President , the fact that the Commission - and this proves just how right my group was to vote for the motion of censure - said that it had behaved ineptly or that it had been the victim of its own transparency is neither here nor there .
It simply proves , once again , that the Commission is still incapable of grasping the political dimension .
The Commission has slipped back into a pre-democratic way of thinking .
It has proved incapable of behaving reasonably throughout this disastrous affair .
We were not just worried about nepotism and corruption .
We were also concerned that the Commission has recently become incapable of doing justice to the clear political remit entrusted to it .
It was obvious to us that this risks playing into the hands of those who want renationalisation .
Because we want a strong Europe and need a strong Commission , we had no option but to express our lack of confidence in this Commission .
We hope that the Commission has at last learnt the lesson that we are in a democracy and that it is time to end this pre-democratic mindset and behaviour . We also hope the Commission will now at last be able to take responsibility for creating a strong Europe without nepotism , corruption and affairs .
That is the reason why we voted for the censure motion today .
How sad that the Socialist Group has been playing political games with this , only to get cold feet at the vital moment .
That not only undermines the European ideal , it is also a drain on the energy that we need to implement Agenda 2000 .
I just hope that in view of this vote the Commission will at least have the decency to accept responsibility for its actions and that the Commissioners who stand accused will resign .
Mr President , the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations took the initiative , through Hervé Fabre-Aubrespy , of a motion of censure following the malpractice discovered in the functioning of the European Commission because we consider these errors to be neither accidental nor individual .
They are in fact a result of the nature of the institutional system itself .
The Commission says in its defence that it was overburdened with tasks which it did not have the resources to take on .
We reject this false excuse , because the rush to seize powers from the Member States is part of the system itself , which is always seeking to forestall the legitimate defensive reactions of the nations .
Moreover , of all the institutions , the Commission has always shown itself to be the most zealous promoter of this deplorable policy .
We do not have to go back very far in order to find the Court of Justice ruling of 12 May 1998 , which ousted a whole series of budgetary headings that had been put forward by the Commission without a legal basis .
Some of these headings , such as the poverty programmes , had even been undertaken when the Council had formally opposed them .
Such behaviour , in contempt of the rule of law , is a direct result of the Commission 's sense of superiority towards the nations that make up the Council .
The inevitable consequence of this is fraud , and this is the reason for our motion of censure .
The European institutional system has , for a long time , declared the Commission to be the guardian of an interest that is above that of the nations .
It has refused to allow the Commission to be monitored , and has used a lack of transparency as a deliberate strategy for achieving integration , and through its central figures has moved around considerable sums of money .
A haven for fraud , corruption , waste and nepotism has therefore been created in Brussels , and what was bound to happen has happened .
A sordid little world has been built up around the Commission , where influences are traded , far away from the concerns of citizens .
We are appalled to see that this little world has been granted considerable powers in initiating legislation and managing Europe .
We want to put an end to this system and give the control of the European institutions back to the nations .
Mr President , in legal terms , the censure was not passed , but in political terms the vote of no confidence is evident .
I voted for censure .
I had difficulty doing so , and it was done with regret and against my instincts .
I did so , not out of a desire to take part in a witch hunt , and in this respect I regret that Mrs Cresson was too quickly assigned the role of scapegoat .
I did it for political reasons , because , at a time when enlargement means that the institutions need to be strengthened , the scenario arrived at by Mr Santer and Mrs Green causes us to turn our backs on that reinforcement .
The Commission prefers the tutelage of experts to real parliamentary monitoring and Parliament is surrendering its monitoring powers temporarily , but once again , and it goes on , from one temporary surrender to the next .
I regret , Mr President , that the Commission and some groups have taken part in this game .
It is because I want strong European institutions for a strong Europe that I voted for this censure .
D66 is in favour of a strong Commission and a strong Europe .
As Mr Nordmann just said , it was difficult for us to vote in favour of the motion of censure .
This Commission has relinquished its independence by placing its future in the hands of a committee of experts .
We do not wish to be associated with those of our colleagues who are against a strong Europe , which is why it was so hard for us to vote in favour of the motion .
Nevertheless , the question now is how Europe can become stronger .
With a weakened Commission that will be unable to provide any real impetus over the next few years , or with a new , dynamic Commission ?
This was why D66 voted in the end in favour of the motion , but let there be no mistake about it , we want to see greater democracy , greater authority and greater power in Europe , and not weaker European institutions .
Mr President , the French Socialists refuse to grant a free rein to Jacques Santer 's Commission .
Throughout this crisis of confidence between the European Parliament and the Commission , the French Socialists have firstly tried to secure the collegiality of the Commission and observance of the presumption of innocence .
Pigeon shooting is not a method of parliamentary monitoring .
They have also tried to show their unity and to find the basis for the widest agreement possible within the Socialist Group .
The French Socialists deplore the fact that the President of the Commission took so long to express the solidarity of the college and to make proposals to Parliament in terms of methods to improve the management of the Commission .
They deplore that we had to reach this degree of confusion before the President of that institution finally realised the scale of the malfunctions in the institution for which he was responsible .
What lessons can we draw from this crisis ?
The fight against fraud , corruption and irregularities must be pursued with determination , and the means of doing this must be strengthened .
The collegiality of the Commission must be consolidated .
It is the guarantor of Community integration and the foundation of a common administrative culture .
Otherwise , whoever had a majority at any given time could choose whichever Commissioner they liked as a whipping boy to fit in with their electoral calendar .
The Commission must have at its head a strong political figure .
Today political union is paying for the mistake made by the Council , which , under pressure from the British Conservatives , agreed to nominate a weak President .
I will now conclude , Mr President .
It would have been absurd for the Socialists to have used the strongest political weapon at their disposal in this vote .
We have significantly contributed to limiting the damage .
There is still a long way to go .
The resolution that we have just passed opens the way for this , but the Socialists would like to merit this crazy escalation of events with having revealed the urgent need for a reform of the institutions of the Union before any enlargement can take place .
Mr President , while I am very critical of the Commission 's way of working , I have abstained , along with other colleagues in the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , from the vote on the resolution on discharge for the 1996 financial year and on the motion of censure because I do not agree with any of the texts presented .
Mr President , it was my unshakeable European conviction that made me vote for censure of the Commission .
Indeed , I feel that the crisis situation brought on by the Commission itself , with the support of the Socialist Group , demands a vote of no confidence in order to safeguard the institution .
This vote is justified especially by the fact that the Commission did not comprehend , or is comprehending too late , the following reality : the Maastricht Treaty and the future provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam make the European Parliament into a true political institution which has a duty to assume its political responsibilities .
President Santer 's proposals aimed at improving the transparency and the running of the Commission come too late and at a time of crisis that does not allow us to evaluate them objectively .
The monitoring committee set up by paragraph 1 of the text of the Socialist resolution is placed under the tutelage of the Commission and of Parliament .
That is unacceptable .
The ultimate priority today was to re-establish in the institutional balance the authority of an institution that is , when it is in agreement with the European Parliament , the driving force behind progress in the European Union .
This Commission has a duty to be strong , united , independent , respected by the Council , by Parliament and by the citizens of Europe .
Each of us should now , at the end of this debate , ask ourselves the following question : have I , through my attitude , really contributed to the progress of the Union ?
My vote responded clearly to that challenge .
Applause
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , over the last few days , and again today , there has been an enormous amount of tactical manoeuvring which has dominated the behaviour of the leading political figures in Parliament .
This has somewhat obscured the fact that a motion of censure is actually a very simple question .
The question is : do the elected representatives of the people still have sufficient confidence in the leadership of the central executive body of the European Union ?
The answer to this question has to be either yes or no .
And in my opinion , anyone who listened to Mr Santer on Monday , anyone who has listened to him in recent weeks and has witnessed his behaviour here today , is bound to conclude that given the important tasks ahead of us we can no longer have faith in the leadership abilities of this Commission and its President .
That was what Parliament needed to make a decision about , not about tactical trickery .
This is also the overwhelming view of my social democrat colleagues in the Federal Republic of Germany .
That is why we could see no alternative but to fulfil our parliamentary duty and tell the central administrative institution of the European Union that it is not people who express a lack of confidence who cause an institutional crisis , but people who fail to carry out their distinguished and important duties fully and adequately .
The leader of my group has told us that she has withdrawn the motion of censure submitted by the Socialist Group .
That is not correct .
The motion was submitted by individual members of the Socialist Group .
I would like that to be minuted .
Mr President , it was with some regret that I voted for the motion of censure against the Commission .
But given the current legal position I had no other choice , as there are people in the Commission , such as Mrs Cresson or Mr Marín , whose behaviour and character indicate that they are not fit for their job .
I would like to emphasise that my vote was not directed again President Santer , for whom I have the greatest respect .
Today 's events have demonstrated that there is still an unfortunate lack of democracy in Europe 's institutions .
We need to reform these institutions if Europe is to make real political progress .
The Tindemans Plan provided us with a model that is just as relevant to the current situation as it was all those years ago .
So we do not need to conduct a great deal of research or set up token committees of wise men in order to achieve a substantial reform in the near future .
That is the task facing Parliament in view of today 's events . In this way , in the not too distant future it will be possible - God willing - for a united and enlarged Europe satisfactorily to accomplish its task not only on behalf of the people of Europe but also in the interest of world peace .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my group is divided , as all the groups are to a greater or lesser extent .
I cannot therefore speak on its behalf . However , I can speak , I believe , on behalf of approximately half of the Members of my group who voted against our own group 's resolution , supported the Socialist resolution and voted against the motion of censure .
I must begin by calling on Parliament to have a little modesty .
Last night , at 9 p.m. , a debate was opened here on an own-initiative report by my friend and fellow countryman , Mr Areitio .
Mr Van Miert responded for the Commission .
Ladies and gentlemen , do you know how many Members were here in this Hemicycle with Mr Areitio at 9 p.m. last night ?
There were none .
Can this Parliament therefore cast the first stone ?
Moreover , can we cast an individual stone at any of the Commissioners when we know perfectly well that the College of Commissioners is exactly that , a college , a single unit , and that - whether we like it or not - those are the rules and we have to respect them ?
There are obviously a lot of things that need to be put right .
And I believe that the Commission , presided over by a man of honour , Mr Santer , will keep its promises and make the necessary changes to a system of management that , as we know , is far from perfect .
There was a time when certain Israelites - those in the Bible , not the Israelis - wanted to demolish the temple , and they succeeded in doing so .
But the cost of this was that the Philistines and Samson died .
As I said to my group , the Philistines are of no importance to me , neither those in my group nor in the others .
And Samson is scarcely of any concern to me .
However , what does matter to me is the survival of our temple that has cost us so much to build .
Mr President , I voted against the motion of censure , remembering that Talleyrand said that all that is exaggerated is insignificant .
After the vote on the firm resolution on an in-depth reform of the administrative culture - and I hope , not only that of the Commission , but also that of Parliament , for example - after the undertaking , which was just as firm , by President Santer to deal with all the cases of fraud , mismanagement and nepotism so that those responsible can be punished at whatever level , voting for censure would be exaggerated .
I am happy to see that reason and a sense of responsibility have triumphed and that , along with them , Europe has triumphed .
The Santer Commission has indeed taken on its political responsibilities .
It has indeed completed the introduction of the euro and I hope that after the shocks that the euro has already undergone in the last few days , for which certain sorcerer 's apprentices in this Parliament and their political policies are responsible , I hope that after this vote the euro will once again become a strong currency serving the citizens of the Union .
The Santer Commission has submitted Agenda 2000 to us .
It is up to this Parliament to deal with these important Agenda 2000 proposals , on which the welfare of hundreds of millions of Europeans depends , and which should concern us a lot more than the nepotism of which Mrs Cresson and others are accused .
The Commission is stronger , having come through this test .
I congratulate it .
I give it my renewed confidence , and I say that , today , it is Europe that has won .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what were we supposed to do ?
What have we done ?
We were not supposed to vote for censure , because the motion at the root of this entire turmoil was tabled with an explicit aim : to grant the Commission our confidence .
What have we done ?
We have done three things .
Firstly , we have not voted for censure , but we have not granted our confidence .
In this House an absolute majority of Members that had confidence in the Santer Commission could not be found .
The Commission engaged in a diabolical process , at the end of which it has not gained our confidence .
Moreover , we have made the cowardly decision to prolong the torture instead of executing the Commission .
That is not a brave thing to do .
It is not in accordance with the authority of the institutions .
Finally , the most cowardly thing of all is that we have decided to leave it to others to administer the torture .
We have therefore both weakened the Commission and refused to exercise our own prerogatives .
Today is a day of mourning for the institutions of the European Union .
Mr President , I did not vote in favour of censure , unlike most of the French members of my group .
It seems to me that this motion of censure aimed to interrupt the process of refusal of discharge when it was tabled by Mrs Green .
She played with fire and the political coup that she had plotted was skilfully stolen away from her by Hervé Fabre-Aubrespy .
I am too old for these little games and , what is more , I no longer find them amusing .
This is why I did not join in with the ' Villierite ' manoeuvre that was guided more by a rejection of Europe than by any other motives .
A fortnight after the launch of the euro , our Parliament and our Europe deserved more .
Despite this , the Commission is not being let off without giving us what we are due , and continuing the discharge procedure will now be its priority .
This why I am now giving it an appointment with us in March , and I hope that this time it will be able to answer the questions that we have put to it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope I will not seem like a bad loser if I say that this was an own goal .
All the complications and mess that came to light over the 1996 discharge were supposed to be swept away by means of a vote of confidence , but there has not been a vote of confidence .
I too see a committee of wise men as a poor substitute .
We must take this opportunity to make sure that this Commission - which I have already heard described in the corridors as a ' dead man walking ' - now at least does whatever is necessary to achieve what Mr Martens rather pompously promised us here : an end to bureaucracy and technocracy .
If Parliament had not voted in such great numbers to express its lack of confidence , the Commission would have sat back and said it was just a storm in a teacup .
That is why I am glad - and I thought long and hard about this - to have supported this initiative and that we have effectively had a vote of no-confidence .
I would like to stress once again - and Mr Berthu can confirm this - that the aim of this initiative was to ensure a strong Commission and a true parliamentary system for Europe , and to make sure that we stop resorting to technocratic and bureaucratic practices , combined with a lack of transparency , to hush up shortcomings in Europe .
Lack of transparency is the real cardinal sin , though this does not mean that we can afford to be complacent about nepotism , mismanagement and fraud .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , where do we stand now ? 232 Members have voted for the motion of censure , and 27 have abstained .
So in principle , 260 Members of this House have refused to express their confidence in the Commission .
We should not lose sight of that , that is the real message .
I find it totally unacceptable that Mr Santer steered the debate towards talk of reform of administrative structures , smaller private offices , and organisational change .
What is really at stake here are the personal failings of two Commissioners : Mrs Cresson and Mr Marín .
We are talking here about nepotism and about accepting responsibility for one 's actions .
And that is precisely why I and many others have refused to express our confidence in the Commission .
What will happen next , I wonder ?
The Commission cannot ignore this vote .
Surely we will not carry on as if nothing has happened ?
I am pleased that the CDU / CSU group in the European Parliament unanimously supported this vote of no confidence .
The Socialist Group wants to cover up the Commission 's actions .
I cannot emphasise that - and criticise it - too strongly .
However , one thing has certainly come out of this vote - the relationship of the institutions towards each other has changed .
We should not forget this , despite our disappointment that there was not a majority in favour of the motion of censure . It means that the CDU / CSU Members in this House made the right decision .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a co-signatory of the motion of censure I of course voted for it and I believe that the large number of Members who supported the motion - about 40 % - makes it clear that the Commission no longer has the support of a broad majority .
The Commission has been wounded by this debate , and politically speaking it is dead in the water .
The fact that there was in effect a grand coalition between the majority groups makes the large number of Members who supported the motion of censure all the more significant .
Considering that in comparison with the BSE motion of censure the number supporting the censure vote has almost doubled , there is every reason to claim that confidence in the European Commission has eroded .
It seems that the European Parliament has taken two steps forward and one step back : having launched itself into the air like a roaring tiger , it has come down to earth again with a sad bump . It is regrettable that the European Parliament has relinquished its right of control to a ' committee of experts ' , thus depriving itself of its own rights .
I hope that will not mean that the European Parliament loses credibility , and I particularly regret the tactical manoeuvring of the majority groups .
Although there was wide support for the motion of censure , this is not the place for detailed discussion of the role of the committee of wise men - today should have been a day of political reckoning .
So as a co-signatory I am satisfied with the outcome of the motion of censure , which I think has given the Commission a great deal of food for thought .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as the National Front , we are voting for censure of the European Commission , due to the irregularities in management of which it has been accused by Parliament and which it has disregarded .

I will nevertheless add that I did in fact sign the motion of censure , along with Mr Mégret and Mr Le Gallou , at the express request of Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , who then decided to withdraw our signatures without consulting us , an action which I publicly deplore .
Moreover , I would like to note that the Christian Democrats of the PPE and their allies , along with the Socialists , make up a real block that supports the Commission in and against everything .
We are well aware that this outrageous alliance between those who claim to be right-wing and those who say they are left-wing gives the Commission a theoretical majority .
In my opinion , this is a failure for democracy .
Europe is revealing itself as what it is : a technocratic and oligarchical organisation .
In such a Europe , the interests of citizens , and thus of taxpayers , are censured to some degree .
By not censuring the Commission , I feel that the majority of this Parliament has in fact chosen to censure the interests of the people , and notably those of the French people .
Obviously , I deplore this .
The current motion of censure has as its direct cause the refusal by Parliament to grant discharge for 1996 .
With this House having decided to refer the whole matter back to the committee responsible , I feel that the tabling of this motion of censure is premature .
Furthermore , the Commission has put forward a programme with an appropriate timetable to tackle the problem of fraud in cooperation with our own Parliament .
Added to this , as I do not agree with accusing individual Commissioners without an in-depth investigation into their guilt , I could not in all conscience vote for the motions of censure that have this intention .
Finally , Europe is at an extremely important stage .
Following the introduction of the euro , we are now facing the challenge of Agenda 2000 , the reform of the CAP , enlargement and the Structural Funds , all of which are of enormous importance , particularly for the cohesion countries .
In order to ensure calm and stability and to avoid an institutional crisis , I have voted against the motion of censure .
The Luxembourg Socialist Members of the European Parliament supported the Commission , while expressing their criticisms and their serious concerns regarding the management of certain financial and administrative affairs .
It is for this reason that we welcomed the eight-part plan presented to Parliament by President Santer on Monday .
The measures for financial and administrative reorganisation advocated in the Socialist resolution are along the same lines as the plan put forward by the President of the Commission .
This is why we clearly and plainly rejected censure of the Commission in order to affirm its mandate .
If we want the Commission to improve its management , we need to give it the time to do so .
Unlike some , who took advantage of the vote on discharge in order to weaken the Commission , the Socialists have always insisted on the need for a Commission that remains strong and operational right to the end of its mandate .
The Socialist motion of censure was a motion of confirmation of the Commission .
President Santer had himself requested it , the day before the vote on discharge , in December , in order to clarify relations between Parliament and the Commission .
Without this political initiative on the part of the Socialists , the measures announced by Jacques Santer would never have seen the light of day .
Moreover , the debates on this motion have led to the formation of a coalition in the European Parliament that is hostile to the Commission .
This incongruous coalition goes from the CDU and the Bavarian CSU ( whose vice-president signed the motion of censure from the anti-Maastricht right ) , through the Liberals , to the Greens and the extreme right-wing .
Six months away from the elections , it wants to benefit at all costs from an unparalleled witch hunt that , through the most absurd rumours , is even affecting President Santer himself .
This irresponsible coalition has damaged not only the prestige of the Commission , but also the European Union itself , as a result of its extraordinarily relentless attack on a Commission whose political record , at the time of the introduction of the euro , is largely positive .
The vote of censure against the Commission is a political vote against lack of transparency , maladministration , bureaucracy , the democratic deficit , arrogance towards the European Union 's citizens , and the networks of companies and consultants that feed like parasites on the Community budget which is financed by the European taxpayer .
It is a political vote for a strong Parliament in the European Union , which can intervene decisively and boldly in what is going on .
The intention of this vote is not to cast doubt on the trustworthiness of the Commissioners collectively or individually .
More particularly , I would like to take this opportunity to confirm our confidence in the Greek Commissioner , Christos Papoutsis , who has taken responsibility for areas in which in the past there have been major problems involving scandals and mismanagement , such as tourism and nuclear energy .
I voted for censure of the European Commission because , firstly , I feel that not doing so would mean granting them our confidence , which would be inconceivable , having seen the overwhelming number of cases of irregularities , fraud and malpractice that have been brought to light in various Community policies managed by the Commission .
I reject the trap of the Socialist text , which aims to do nothing less than exonerate the Commission of its serious errors and ensure that the executive remains in place , and I think that we should not hesitate to make the Commission face up to its political responsibilities , which it has so far cunningly shirked .
To vote for censure is to defend the credibility of the institution of Parliament , which has been treated with contempt by the Commission , the latter being more willing to give information to the press than to the committees of the European Parliament .
To vote for censure is , above all , to defend the interests of the citizens and the electorate of Europe , whose money has been misappropriated and squandered by a silent and secretive technocratic institution that has so far been incapable of doing its duty .
There is a great deal at stake .
In my opinion , this is a decisive challenge that clarifies the debate .
We the undersigned voted against the motion of censure against the Commission , as it had not been shown that the Commission was guilty , in the discharge of its official duties , of any one particular action that might result in a call for resignations , although there is cause for comment with regard to its administration .
It is in accordance with Finnish interests that a properly functioning Commission continues to maintain the balance of power between the large Member States and the smaller countries in the final round of the Agenda 2000 talks , in which our country has important national interests to protect .
We nevertheless regard it as vital that the Commission should embark on measures , as requested by Parliament , to improve the administration of its finances and clarify individual responsibilities within the Commission .
Details of abuse and improper conduct must be brought to light and the parties concerned must be brought to justice .
The information that has been given to Parliament in the last few weeks , especially that given to the Committee on Budgetary Control , prevents me from maintaining my confidence in the political management of certain Commissioners .
Parliament has weakened itself by entrusting its task of monitoring the Commission to a committee of experts .
I abstained from the vote of confidence in the Commission as a whole because I cannot condemn an entire institution for the actions of a few within it .
Moreover , I cannot be a party to the political game being played by certain groups , a game which is dictated more by electoral interests in their regions than by an objective assessment of the situation .
If every crisis brings with it a chance of renewal , we can , through our attitude , force the Commission to put an end to malpractice and to excessive bureaucracy .
The June Movement and the People 's Movement have only voted to name individual Commissioners because the largest group in the European Parliament said that it would only vote for its own motion of censure if there was a majority in Parliament in favour of criticising a named Commissioner .
There is a difference between blame and accountability .
You can have accountability without having blame .
The June Movement and the People 's Movement do not have an opinion about who is to blame .
We leave that to disciplinary proceedings and the Court of Justice .
We are voting to censure the Commission as a college because the Commission is accountable and must accept responsibility for the fact that so much has gone wrong and will continue to go wrong .
If the political leadership does not accept accountability , then there is no accountability .
The EU 's budget would then become a matter of helping oneself .
The main problem is that Mr Santer and his colleagues are not leading , but are allowing themselves to be led into a muddle of waste , fraud and corruption .
Mr Santer is a prisoner in his own fortress .
The Personnel Commissioner is a prisoner .
The Director of Personnel is a prisoner .
Only a motion of censure will release the prisoners and create a new culture of openness , closeness to the people and democracy , instead of secrecy , arrogance and bureaucracy .
Mr Santer reacted firmly when he should not have done , but he was not firm when he should have been .
He sacked an official for giving a document to an elected representative .
He ought to have sacked the people who prevent elected representatives from obtaining what they ask for .
That is why the June Movement and the People 's Movement wish to sack Mr Santer 's Commission today .
The events of the last few months , which led the European Parliament to refuse discharge for the 1996 financial year , widely demonstrated a general lack of rigour in the management and monitoring of a number of Community initiatives and programmes .
This lack of rigour , which leads to waste and damages the interests and the image of the European Union , is in itself a reason to express our lack of trust in the Commission .
However , to this is added the Commission 's politically unacceptable handling of the conflict with Parliament : a refusal to hand over documents , political cant , even arrogance , which reveal a culture of impunity that is present throughout the Commission .
Repetitive speeches from the Commission about transparency and the desire for ' open cooperation ' with Parliament disguise an ever present reality .
There is often only transparency concerning widely-known issues and those on which Members have had to prise out information .
Cooperation is only rhetoric : we have lost count of the number of resolutions from Parliament that have still not yielded results , even when they have been adopted by a large majority , and Parliament is frequently kept at arm 's length when it comes to burning issues such as transatlantic relations and trade agreements .
Some people cite the Commission 's supposed efficiency in its role as the driving force behind the Union and the guardian of the Treaties .
The current Commission demonstrates varying levels of rigour : at the will of Mr Van Miert , it niggles over public aid and suspicions of distortion of competition , but it is more than reserved , if not silent , when it comes to implicating certain Member States .
For example , the attitude of the British Government in operation ' Desert Fox ' is a violation of Article J of the Treaty , and with regard to the ' Echelon ' affair , the Commission quite simply refuses to give an answer .
The current breaches in terms of management , transparency , coherence and political initiative are of a structural nature : it is the Commission as a whole that is in question and not only one or two Commissioners .
Those who talk about a political void in the event of censure are wrong .
It is true that it brings on a political crisis , but it is a useful crisis .
In fact , it is an illusion to believe that the Commission can still play a significant role in the various challenges with which the Union is faced ( reform of the CAP and of the Structural Funds , the funding of the Union , enlargement ) with the team of Commissioners currently in place .
The Santer Commission , which was already politically weak from the start , has lost its credibility and its authority !
The best thing it can do for the European Union is to go .
The European Parliament has the opportunity to send a strong signal to European public opinion by censuring the Commission : the time has come to admit that the European institutions are operating in an obsolete manner .
The time has come to make the European institutions , and particularly the Commission , whose hybrid status must be reviewed , more efficient and above all more democratic .
Censuring the Commission is not a solution in itself , but it is the necessary condition for change .
I voted for the motion of censure , because through his actions President Santer has undermined confidence in the Commission to such an extent that - regardless of the decision by Parliament today - it has made its position politically untenable .
It is incapable of acting with the strength required on the important issues currently on the European agenda .
As a Liberal and a devoted friend of Europe , I would like to use my vote to help restore the confidence of Europe 's citizens in the EU institutions and the European idea .
My position does not mean that I deny that , in many ways , the Commission has done a good job and that the vast majority of the Commissioners are capable people deserving of respect .
It is therefore also my hope that the majority of Commissioners should be given the opportunity to fulfil their mandates by being confirmed in their office .
My hope therefore is that the Commission 's President , Mr Santer , will soon be replaced by someone who can restore confidence in the Commission , and in the Union and cooperation in Europe as a whole .
Speaking on behalf of the EPLP and Alan Donnelly as its leader , we have absolutely no hesitation today in voting against Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's motion of censure against the European Commission .
Mr Santer has belatedly recognised that the Commission 's procedures need drastic overhaul if the system that has enabled fraud , nepotism and corruption to have a much regretted place within the institutions of the Community is to be ended .
We also have a commitment from the President of the Commission that the allegations against contractors , officials and Commissioners will be vigorously investigated and prosecuted .
Today it would have been totally wrong for the Parliament to act as judge , jury and executioner in advance of such investigations .
Nevertheless , this is the beginning not the end of the process .
If the Commission 's promised reforms do not turn into reality , and if the report of the Group of Wise Men is not followed to the letter , we give notice that our critical support today cannot be taken for granted in the future .
This vote is less a vote of a confidence than a final warning .
I voted against the motion of censure because I believe that my personal goal of efficient European administration and the concomitant economical use of budget resources can only be achieved if all the European institutions work together to create a new European-level administrative structure .
The undersigned members of the European Parliament are of the opinion that a motion of censure by Parliament against the Commission would have made it virtually impossible for the forthcoming Finnish Presidency to operate normally .
Censure would have led to the appointment of a temporary Commission for the rest of its term , that is , until the end of this year , and this would have had an immediate negative impact on the Finnish Presidency due to start this summer .
However , it should be emphasised that the suspicions of fraud , mismanagement and maladministration that surround the Commission provide grounds for justified and heavy criticism .
The Commission has dealt with the many incidences of neglect in a cumbersome way , while at the same time trying to cover up mistakes .
With the facts that have come to light we have not been able to declare our total confidence in the way the Commission goes about its important work and sees to its enormous responsibilities .
In view of the above we considered that it would be best for us to abstain in the vote on the censure motion .
At the same time we hope that Commission Members Mrs Cresson and Mr Marín will draw their own conclusions from the situation that has arisen and resign of their own accord .
We would further like to emphasise that the Treaty of Rome does not permit Parliament to vote on the issue of confidence in individual Members of the Commission .
The members of the Greek delegation in the Group of the European People 's Party felt a sense of great responsibility in voting against the motion of censure that remained after the withdrawal of the previous motion by the European Socialist Party , which was a stillborn attempt to impress public opinion .
Under no circumstances , especially just as the euro has made its appearance amid high hopes , just as procedures connected with the historic necessity of enlargement are gathering momentum , just when there is a need to promote the CFSP , is it acceptable to generate an artificial institutional crisis and to weaken the Commission .
Only those who refuse to recognise that among the peoples we represent no distinctions are made between the institutional bodies , could rejoice at the authority of any one of the three being undermined .
It is the overall image of Europe that suffers if , without scrutiny of the facts , the reputations of prominent members are sullied and critical functions become tarnished by the breath of scandal .
In the confidence that this heavy cloud will soon disappear , as the President of the Commission has promised , the rejection of the motion of censure is a constructive vote which safeguards the control that the European Parliament has to exercise .
We supported the Liberal Group 's proposal for Commissioners to be individually accountable , with the call for the departure of Commissioners Marín and Cresson .
However , the individual Commissioners have taken shelter behind the Commission as a whole , so it has not been possible to impose accountability on them .
The President of the Commission , Mr Santer , has not shown understanding of the criticism which has been made .
Thus the Commission as a whole has assumed responsibility for all the criticism which has been directed at the Commission by the Court of Auditors , Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control and a large number of Members of Parliament .
We therefore voted in favour of the motion of censure against the Commission .
The failings and irregularities which have been discovered are now being put right , in the interest of everyone .
I have just voted for the motion of censure against the European Commission because of the incorrect , incompetent and scandalous manner in which two Commissioners have performed their duties .
In December , the Commission itself , in a flight of rhetoric , inappropriately dubbed the refusal of a majority in the Parliament to give it a discharge in respect of the 1996 budget as a ' crisis of faith ' .
At the time of that vote , the leader of the Socialist Group , Mrs Green , gave notice of a motion of censure in the hope of effectively achieving a vote of confidence for lack of sufficient votes .
Her feeble tactics , including her theatrical withdrawal of the motion of censure today , will not be forgotten in the forthcoming European elections .
The two Socialist Commissioners who stand accused , Mrs Cresson and Mr Marín , have not acceded to the request that they should resign , which was supported by a large majority of the PPE Group and unanimously by the German group of Christian Democrats .
Confidence in the present Commission has therefore been permanently damaged , as demonstrated by the result of the vote , 232 to 293 .
Mrs Cresson is responsible for the lamentable management of Leonardo , and for mismanagement of funds , nepotism and considerable irregularities in the commissioning of external consultants .
Similarly , Mr Marín has failed to demonstrate economical management and effective implementation of funds and financial control in accordance with regulations .
Neither has so far been prepared to accept full responsibility for their actions .
Furthermore , last week Mrs Cresson again repeatedly demonstrated her contempt for the European Parliament .
Her attempt to trivialise accusations of fraud and to portray herself as the ' victim ' of ' conspiracies ' originating in Germany is laughable .
The Commission has had time enough to root out these problems , as the European Parliament decided to defer the discharge back in March 1998 .
So far , there has been no sign of any follow-up regarding the serious errors made in managing external policies such as ECHO , MED , PHARE and TACIS or the suspicions of corruption on the part of officials .
We have not been given a relevant list of all internal investigations on fraud prevention , and the European Parliament 's democratic control has been hindered by documents being withheld , censored or forged .
During today 's voting I also voted again the committee of wise men suggested by the Commission President in his eight-point plan .
We do not need an additional outside committee of inquiry that will not be able to complete its work in just a few weeks anyway .
I regret this majority decision , which is tantamount to the European Parliament depriving itself of its own rights .
In addition to the European Court of Auditors there is another powerful monitoring body , the European Parliament 's own Committee on Budgetary Control .
That committee is the place for financial investigations .
I am in favour of a strong European Commission , but it will only remain efficient and effective if it is cleaned up .
It would have been in the Commission 's own interest to clear up irregularities , sack corrupt officials and protect those officials who are competent , conscientious and reliable .
It needs to reform itself from within by means of a code of conduct on the appointment of senior officials and appropriate staff regulations .
The culture of cronyism and hiding behind collective decision-making has to come to an end .
Every member of the Commission must be prepared willing to answer for his area of responsibility .
Our citizens have a right to expect a transparent , fair and hard-working Europe which manages the funds entrusted to it with due care .
They also have a right to expect Members of Parliament to exercise their control functions without resorting to party-political tactics .
I believe that the best interests of the European taxpayer are served not by sacking the Commission but by achieving serious and meaningful reform of the Commission 's financial and personnel management .
The allegations are serious : financial irregularities , nepotism , cronyism and even fraud at the heart of the Commission .
In these circumstances Parliament must get at the truth , ensure mechanisms are put in place to rectify the situation and insist that any individual shown to be guilty of criminal activities is prosecuted .
The grand gesture of sacking the entire Commission will not achieve these objectives .
The Socialist proposal to appoint a committee of independent experts to examine how the Commission detects and deals with fraud , mismanagement and nepotism provides a basis for rooting out these unacceptable practices .
The President of the Commission 's belated acceptance of the serious nature and extent of financial mismanagement in his services is welcome .
If Parliament and the Commission work together real progress can be made in ' cleaning up ' the Commission .
If this does not happen the college of Commissioners will cease to have my support .
He who is not punished for a greater crime will be punished for a lesser crime .
Between 1989 and 1992 , the European Commission blithely allowed Great Britain to poison millions of cows .
146 000 British cows were destroyed without Brussels batting an eyelid .
Contaminated feed continued to be in circulation , and the European Commission still said nothing .
Several tens of cases of Creutzfeldt-Jacob 's disease were declared , condemning young Europeans because the cattle disease had perhaps been transmitted to humans .
In any case , the risk was knowingly taken to contaminate millions of human beings .
This was done by the European Commission .
This health risk was taken by the Commission .
Let us not mince our words : in this affair the Commission 's attitude was more than negligent , it was an irresponsible and criminal attitude .
Yet the European Parliament did not punish the Commission .
The motion of censure of 20 February 1997 concerning mad cow disease was not passed .
Also , in 1992 the European Commission , going beyond its powers , did not hesitate to secretly sign the Blair House agreement with the United States , an agreement that sacrificed the agricultural interests of Europe and of our farmers .
There was no punishment in this case either .
On top of that , in the Central American bananas affair , the Commission in Brussels , on its own initiative , made a gift of 12 billion francs ' worth of annual customs duties , to the sole benefit of three American multinationals : Chiquita , Dole and Del Monte .
No motion of censure was tabled , and there was not even a single sign of indignation .
However , for the 3.9 million francs of humanitarian funds for the Balkans and for two of Edith Cresson 's friends , hidden away in her office , the European Commission is finally inciting disapproval .
Europe is a system in which the poisoning of cows leaves us cold , where we are indifferent to a gift of 12 billion francs , but where the quiet fraud of a good traditional Socialist and the good kleptomaniac habits of 1980s socialism provoke reactions , which this time are heated reactions .
This is confirmation of the principal that he who is not punished for a greater crime will be punished for a lesser crime .
But better late than never .
After all , Al Capone was only convicted of tax fraud , after having escaped any punishment for murder , violence , robbery and organised crime .
Today is a watershed in the reform of the European Commission .
It was necessary to threaten the Commission with the sack in order to ensure that Parliament 's demands for more scrutiny of budgetary procedures and financial management were met , and to force the Commission to undertake a root-and-branch review of the Commission 's management of taxpayers ' money .
There can be no tolerance in the Commission of fraud , corruption or financial irregularities .
President Santer has accepted reforms proposed by the leader of the EPLP , Alan Donnelly .
In particular , a panel of experts to scrutinise finances will provide for ongoing rather than retrospective scrutiny allowing a rapid response to any irregularities .
This will begin the process of restoring public confidence , but we have to acknowledge as must the Commission that this has been a real crisis of confidence and that strenuous efforts must be made to overcome the credibility gap .
As Labour 's regional spokesperson , I will be calling for a standing item on the Committee on Regional Policy 's agenda on budgetary implementation and scrutiny , and look forward to working closely with the Commission on monitoring funding under European regional grants so as to ensure transparency and accountability .
To have voted for Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's motion of censure to sack the Commission today , at the critical juncture when the Commission needs to be capable of taking major decisions on Agenda 2000 and reform of regional grants , could have thrown this decision-making process into paralysis .
This would have jeopardised timetables and led to potential delays for future European programmes .
It would be irresponsible to leave our needy regions in Britain with uncertainty and insecurity over future grants .
Our demands have been met and now it is our duty to see the Commission pledges and rhetoric translated into action .
I stress this is only the beginning of a process of stricter and more rigorous financial control and accountability .
Today 's vote constitutes an unprecedented political rejection of the Commission , even though the majority for censure could not be achieved , although only by a few tens of votes .
This is the first time that a motion of censure has obtained such a high score .
Despite the manoeuvres of the two main groups in the European Parliament that were completely opposed to censure , 232 Members ( out of the 552 who are present ) , including all the French Communist and allied Members , and the great majority of the GUE / NGL Group , voted for censure .
This demonstrates the strong discontent that is developing in the Union with regard to the ultra-liberal choices , the excessive role and the arrogant practices of the Commission .
The GUE / NGL Group also wanted to outplay the manoeuvres from the right-wing , attempting to release the Commission from its responsibilities by solely accusing two Socialist Commissioners .
In support of the new situation , we will continue to work towards a progressive reorientation of European construction and for transparency and democracy within the institutions .
The reason that I am voting today for censure of the Commission , as I also did at the time of the BSE crisis , is to express a precise political position without discrediting any one Member of the Commission , which is not our responsibility .
The relentless manner in which accusations have been made against individuals could almost lead me to withdraw from this debate , but my political responsibility demands that I take a clear position .
The Commission has on three occasions demonstrated its inability to deal , transparently and in the interests of European citizens , with such fundamental and varied issues as BSE ( public health ) , international relations ( the GATT , NTM , MAI and P & T agreements ) and the budget ( on several occasions ) .
It seems to me to be incoherent and dangerous for the future of European construction to continue to give our confidence to a Commission that is unceasingly arrogant on a day to day basis , but which says it is sorry and promises to change when sparks fly , without ever fulfilling its promises .
I do not want to grant political confidence to an institution that is too often only concerned with ultra-liberal aims , in contempt of the aspirations and needs of the citizens of Europe .
Parliament has an important investigative role with regard to the work of the Commission .
If Parliament is unwilling to grant a discharge for 1996 , it is logical that the question of censuring the Commission should be raised . And that is what has happened .
The arrogance with which the President of the Commission has received Parliament 's criticism is incredible and unacceptable .
Using suspension to punish an official who has provided Parliament with information about the Commission 's unwillingness to get to grips with fraud and corruption does not demonstrate the openness which is needed to gain the confidence of the citizens of Europe .
The reports of nepotism do not strengthen confidence in the Commission in any way .
An independent investigation of the reports of corruption , fraud and nepotism is essential , and the Commission 's work needs to be substantially improved .
In fact , we have no confidence in the President of the Commission .
Regardless of the outcome of the vote on the motion of censure , the Commission has been seriously weakened in political terms through its own actions .
By rejecting the motion of censure tabled by 70 Members from all political standpoints , the European Parliament has covered up the fraud and serious irregularities in the European Commission , and has therefore lost all credibility in the eyes of its citizens .
In an attempt to protect two Socialist Members of the European Commission , the Frenchwoman Edith Cresson and the Spaniard Manuel Marín , the Socialist party , as usual , has made itself an accomplice to the dishonest - or even the mafiosos - and has taken the actions of the Brussels bureaucrats a little further away from the interests of the nations and of the people .
On this occasion , the National Front has unanimously reaffirmed its vocation : to defend the interests of our native countries and the freedom of the peoples of Europe and in particular of the French .
I voted against the PPE Group 's resolution and for the PSE Group 's resolution for the simple reason that my group 's resolution would have destabilised the Commission at a time when Europe is in need , not of additional problems , but of strength and courage to overcome problems .
I voted for the Socialist resolution because it asks for a committee of inquiry to shed light - as quickly as possible - on the fraud and unscrupulous actions committed in the Commission .
This resolution also takes up the arguments that led Parliament to refuse discharge on the budget in December .
President Santer and the large majority of his Commission have my complete confidence .
I have no doubt that the warning has been heard and that the admonishments from Parliament and the Court of Auditors will be followed up with actions .
Jacques Santer has promised to clean up his Commission , and that is why I rejected the motion of censure .
I want to give the Commission the opportunity to correct its mistakes , to make those at fault face up to their responsibilities and to emerge stronger from this crisis .
With this vote , I am expressing to President Jacques Santer the confidence I have in him and my confidence in the building of a strong , transparent and democratic Europe , a Europe that will know how to avoid fraud and malpractice in the future .
What we are voting on indirectly is to grant the Santer Commission discharge for 1996 , so I shall be voting for the discharge and thus expressing confidence in the Commission presided over by Jacques Santer .
This has been a difficult decision for me too , as the European Court of Auditors ' report quite rightly drew attention to the sloppy way certain Commissioners and some of their officials carried out their work .
However , Jacques Santer is not to blame for that , as with the best will in the world he cannot intervene in his Commissioners ' individual departments .
However , it has to be said that the European Parliament has repeatedly called on both the European institutions and the national authorities to manage the money entrusted to them more carefully .
Unfortunately , the President of the Court of Auditors has once again reported that the Community lost billions last year because individual administrative units failed to cooperate satisfactorily .
But in this case it is not the Commission we are calling upon to discharge its duties properly , but rather the individual Member States , who have failed to equip their administrations so as to enhance European cooperation .
Although the European Court of Auditors and the European Parliament have repeatedly called for improved and more rapid checks , it is obvious that the Member States do not have the will to act here .
Remedial action is called for .
This cannot be achieved by sacking the Santer Commission .
Of course , it would have been in the interest of the Commission as a whole if a couple of Commissioners had accepted political responsibility for their actions , but as they have not done so , we shall in future have to find a way of avoiding a cliff-hanging censure vote potentially leading to the removal of the entire Commission .
As the supreme monitoring body , Parliament should be given the right to fire individual Commissioners and officials who do not carry out their duties in the general interest , even if this does not suit certain governments .
If we cannot achieve this , then I feel sorry for any future Commission President , as the present system , with all its faults , will go unchanged .
All the more so in view of the enlargement of the European Union , which will certainly not make matters any easier .
Furthermore , the European Parliament will not in future be able to opt out of exercising its absolute control function .
In the hope that this will never be necessary again , I shall , as I have already said , vote to grant discharge to the Commission under Jacques Santer .
We voted in favour of the motion of censure against the Commission .
We did so on the basis of the responsibility we have assumed as representatives of the citizens of Sweden and of the rest of the Union .
We tried to disregard irrelevant , party-political considerations .
We cast our votes in order to facilitate the fundamental reforms which could create a credible and honest administration in the Union .
The credibility of the current Commission has been seriously damaged .
The financial mismanagement has been allowed to prevail for far too long .
The Commission President 's promises of improvements , which were given under strong political pressure , cannot revive our confidence .
The inability - and to a large extent unwillingness - to get to grips with the mismanagement has persisted for much too long .
The scale of the mismanagement has been extensively documented , first and foremost through the Court of Auditors ' investigations , and most recently in the report from our Committee on Budgetary Control ( the Bösch report ) .
A complete change in the patterns of behaviour is therefore required .
Our position is based on the fact that the Commission has collective accountability .
Our vote does not cast a shadow over the many conscientious and honest officials to be found in the Commission 's services .
We express our solidarity with Paul van Buitenen , whose actions are evidence of this .
However , we are convinced that only a new Commission can restore confidence in the institution and implement the structural reforms , the new set of rules and the openness which the situation demands .
For the first time in the history of our Parliament , a motion of censure against the European Commission has obtained a number of votes which is close to a simple majority , and these votes come from all the political groups and all the Member States represented in the House .
The extent of this vote of no confidence , which gained 232 votes in the only real motion of censure , which was tabled on the initiative of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , powerfully demonstrates our people 's rejection of the way in which Europe is currently being run .
The repeated scandals that tarnish the Commission in all its fields of intervention are not a matter of chance : they are the result of a system that the Member States have allowed to develop , the structure of which breeds corruption .
This system could be considered to be an actual distortion of democracy , because the result of it is that the responsibilities entrusted by the people to the governments that they elect are in fact carried out , through the Commission , by subcontractors that are not monitored by anyone : consultancy firms , ad hoc service companies , and so on .
Yes , we do need to review the European institutions , but this review needs to be in-depth : that is what we mean when we talk about the need to build ' another Europe ' .
We mean that we must put an end to this absurd process that involves the Member States relinquishing powers to a Commission that is so greedy for powers that it is incapable of exercising them .
The solution does not lie in unmonitored sub-contracting , which leads to wastage and fraud at the expense of the taxpayers in our Member States , nor does it lie in constructing a federal super-bureaucracy .
The fraud that we are discovering and condemning today is nothing more than the result of applying the federalist dogma of the Commission 's sacrosanct independence from the Member States .
Under the cover of this ' independence ' , there has been a quite natural development of the habit of exercising uncontrolled power , a culture of non-transparency , nepotism and arrogance , a society in which there is connivance and complacency , and a contempt for the rule of law . It is a closed world , cut off from the people and from their representatives , and it thinks that it is allowed to do anything : in short , it is the opposite of democracy .
We therefore need to move towards a complete reorientation of European construction if we really want to put an end to this drifting off course of the institutions of the Union that is discrediting the very idea of Europe .
The Member States in the Council must forcibly regain control of the Commission .
Their past laxity , in thoughtlessly allowing a body to develop outside any control , by shirking their responsibilities and giving in to the Commission 's bulimic appetite for power , has endangered the future construction of Europe .
In order to clean the Augean stables , there is today no path to take other than that of setting to work on a Europe that is truly democratic and transparent .
The current system has shown itself to be incapable of reforming itself and incapable of taking account of the desire for reform expressed by the European Parliament : we only have to look at what became of the conclusions of our first two committees of inquiry .
The Commission only finds the energy to condemn those within it that advocate transparency , from Bernard Connolly to Paul van Buitenen .
Obviously , the little plans concocted between the President of the Commission and the Socialist Group to set up not a parliamentary committee of inquiry , but a committee of experts , on the appointment of which the Commission will have a right of veto , are not the worst of the problems to be solved in order to enable us to break the deadlock that is currently blocking the construction of Europe .
I did not vote for the motion of censure but will be prepared to vote for a similar motion in future if the committee of independent experts reveals serious wrongdoing or mismanagement and if culpable Commissioners do not then accept their responsibilities .
To use one of the few political clichés that has not been used this week , the current Commission is drinking in the last chance saloon .
Today I voted to express confidence in the Commission , because my judgement was that the Commission 's departure now would do more harm than good to the Union .
My decision was guided by the fact that the final negotiations on the budget , structural policy and agricultural policy should be able to be completed as soon as possible .
This is in Finland 's interests , especially as far as agricultural policy is concerned .
The issue now is one of recognising responsibility and not of demonstrating power , which has wrongly become an issue for many Members of the European Parliament .
In order to continue the battle against abuses in the EU , to achieve a sound administrative structure and to move away from blaming others , the Commissioners should be personally accountable .
The struggle for a better and more open administration is the key .
That is another reason why I have given my support to the ideas in the resolution from the Liberal Group .
It is also in line with the administrative reforms which have already started .
I also believe that the Commission has made substantial progress in cleaning up its administration .
The fact that mistakes have been uncovered is largely due to increased efforts to bring about a sound and healthy administration .
What has been uncovered is mainly mismanagement , and fortunately not many cases of fraud .
I abstained in the vote on the motion of censure in order to register my protest at the way the Socialist Group has handled the discharge for the 1996 budget .
The author of the report put forward an excellent proposal , now referred to as paragraphs 26 and 27 of the Elles report .
He suggested a work programme that the Commission would have to fulfil by certain predetermined dates , thus allowing Parliament both to keep the debate open and to demand that the Commission put its house in order .
The Socialist Group wanted to close the debate and tabled a motion of censure which it itself was not prepared to vote for .
The motion resulted in the over-politicisation of the entire issue and , even worse , produced a result that was weaker than the proposals in the Elles report .
The committee of experts is a capitulation by the European Parliament .
Things should not have been allowed to get this far .
The motion of censure tabled against the European Commission did not have adequate grounds .
The debates did not provide any new proof , any evidence , or any sound arguments .
I was therefore unable to vote in favour of the motion of censure .
Great political and institutional confusion has arisen .
Public opinion has received a very negative impression of the European institutions .
The same old anti-Europeans have made use of the occasion to damage the stability of the European integration project .
Consideration has not been given to an essential reality of the constitutional and administrative doctrine : that we must differentiate between the responsibilities of government and the responsibilities of administration .
We have also forgotten about the spirit and letter of the Treaty on European Union .
The European Parliament has the ability to monitor all the European Commission 's activities on a daily basis .
This is one of Parliament 's roles , which we carry out through oral and written questions and the periodic reports on the management of the European Union 's activities .
Equally , the European Parliament has power to vote for a motion of censure to prevent the European Commission from continuing in office .
However , this crucial power must be used to assess serious incidences of negligence in the Commission 's essential institutional responsibilities , which , basically , are its ability to initiate legislation and its responsibility as guardian of the Treaties .
Throughout the world , public opinion is aware that in recent years , the European Union has reached a high level of development and achieved some revolutionary goals .
The launch of the single currency has been a vital success .
The launch of negotiations to enlarge the European Union to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe will lead us to a united Europe , a revolutionary institutional model and a factor for global peace and prosperity .
The debate on Agenda 2000 is also underway and will put Europe in a position to face the challenges of the next seven years successfully .
Give all these successes , it would be irresponsible to censure the European Commission , which is undeniably the driving force behind the Community institutions .
This does not prevent us in the European Parliament from continuing with our task of strictly monitoring all the Commission 's activities , and this includes the demand to improve its management structures .
I personally have been calling for changes in the Commission 's procedures for the last 12 years .
Among other proposals , we have been asked to approve rules on administrative procedure and administrative justice , an area where there is a great vacuum in Community legislation .
These rules will provide legal certainty for citizens , as well as increasing efficiency and transparency .
At the same time , they will be an essential instrument in tackling the problems in the economic and administrative management of the European Commission . They will also allow us to distinguish , with legal certainty , between the economic and administrative responsibilities and the major political and institutional responsibilities , to which the final and most serious response is the motion of censure .
The sitting was suspended at 12.40 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.

Thank you , Mr Happart .
I have noted your statement , which will be forwarded as you request .
Mr President , just to clarify the Agenda , I understand that we are now going to continue with the debate on the Van Lancker proposal , then move to the urgencies .
As someone who is a signatory to the urgency at point 5 on the Agenda , I should be glad if you would confirm that we are going to finish the Agenda , which simply means the vote is likely to be delayed by a few minutes rather than , as it were , losing an item of urgency which was , as you are well aware , lost from the Agenda last month for a similar reason .
There are people in the gallery who have come from the United Kingdom to hear this debate .
It would be rather absurd if they had to be told for the second month running : ' come back again next month ' .
I realise the importance of the urgent item to which you are referring , Mr Ford , and I can confirm that our intention is to deal with all the topical and urgent subjects and then proceed to the vote , in other words to delay the vote on the urgencies so that all the items can be dealt with .
Article K.6 EU ; Schengen cooperation ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on the two oral questions to the Council and the Commission and the proposal for a recommendation by Mrs Van Lancker on the annual debate on Article K.6 of the Treaty .
Both the Commission and the Council are represented .
I should like to thank you for coming back this afternoon to fulfil your duty to the House .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , I regret that this interesting debate and your equally interesting statement have been overshadowed by today 's other events .
But I am grateful to you for staying on .
It is a very encouraging sign of the positive attitude of the Council presidency and the Council towards Parliament .
I have three points to make .
First , I am very grateful that you went into considerable detail on the subject of eastward enlargement . As Parliament 's rapporteur on eastward enlargement and internal security , I of course think that these are pivotal subjects .
I have in mind not only the pre-accession strategy and the acquis communautaire , but also a series of measures ranging from jointly combating crime to Europol 's eastward extension , which can be anticipated by means of agreements with the police in the applicant countries . I also have in mind the vital area of education and training , which requires some restructuring of the PHARE programme , but it has been possible to achieve a great deal already .
There are also two long-term objectives which I have mentioned in my report , and which I want to drawn your attention to .
One is the protection of Europe 's future external borders .
I believe that we need to provide support measures to prepare for a common European border protection system , because I feel that we will need such a system in the long term .
I would also point out that we have proposed a European academy for internal security .
The Austrian Presidency was fairly receptive to this idea and I hope that you will seriously consider this project , which would be situated in the border area between the EU and the applicant countries .
Second , I would like to mention the topic of burden sharing .
We need an EU burden-sharing system with quotas for civil war refugees and asylum seekers .
The Austrian Presidency and the European Parliament have carried out some important preparatory work in this area too .
We will judge this presidency by the progress it makes in this field .
Thirdly , without wishing to spark off any internal policy debate , I would ask you to defer the sensitive subjects of citizenship law and thus of EU citizenship law in the individual Member States ...
The President cut the speaker off
Mr President , for me the motion for a resolution and the report we are discussing lack a clear refugee perspective - and by that I mean the perspective of the refugees .
It is increasingly clear that the Dublin Convention and the Schengen Agreement are contributing to the creation of a brutal and restrictive refugee policy in western Europe .
We can already see the unreasonable effects of the Dublin Convention when the principle of the first asylum country is applied to countries which have different criteria for granting asylum .
People are passed around between countries and their applications are not dealt with properly .
We can see that one of the main real motives of the Schengen Agreement appears to be to use methods such as carrier liability , tough visa policies and excessive border controls to prevent asylum seekers from coming to the EU at all in order to be able to seek asylum .
Unfortunately , we can also see how this motion for a resolution defends the totally unreasonable document produced by the Austrian Presidency , which is one long attack on anything that represents a humane and responsible refugee policy .
It is about ' Fortress Europe ' ; it is no longer about taking responsibility for the asylum seekers .
Mr President , I would just like to highlight some of the many points which ought to be discussed .
The aim of Schengen is to bring about the freedom of movement of persons in the EU .
However , Schengen 's rules are centred entirely on border controls , security controls and compensatory measures .
What message does this send to our citizens ?
Only a few articles are concerned with the positive aspect of freedom of movement .
This is not acceptable .
We also fear and are very concerned that Schengen could lead to a less generous and humane policy on refugees and asylum .
There are many things which point towards that .
That is why we are insisting that the UN 's conventions on refugees should apply in all situations , even in the EU .
Schengen also has to be compatible with the intergovernmental Nordic Passport Union , so that freedom of movement in Scandinavia can continue and develop as it has done for 40 years .
It is therefore pleasing that the committee unanimously supports this .
As far as Schengen 's integration into the Treaty is concerned , the negotiations must be open and involve both the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
Access to information and documents must be made easier so that both politicians and citizens are able to participate .
The Greens are of the opinion that the Schengen Convention should be revised and amended , having regard to the principle of subsidiarity , various important basic rights and the legal guarantees designed to protect our citizens ' personal safety and integrity .
We are concerned about the enormous demands which are being made on the applicant countries and their ability to meet the requirements concerning border controls , legislation and so on .
We are therefore calling for flexibility , responsibility and understanding on the part of the EU for the serious problems which these countries are facing .
Mr President , I shall be very brief .
On all the main points , I agree with the views expressed by my Swedish colleagues , Mr Sjöstedt and Mrs Lindholm .
There are two trends in the two proposals we are considering which are decisive for our group , for me personally and for the movement I represent in Denmark .
One is towards a strengthening of Parliament 's power in these areas , which is taking place at the expense of the authority of our national parliaments , and the other is a drive towards integration and an almost imperialistic urge to dominate the world around us , not least Norway and Iceland .
We must oppose the trend to communitarise criminal law and all other areas of law , including police cooperation - in other words , the transfer of the third pillar to the first .
This is rash and ill considered .
It is an alarming development which runs counter to national legal traditions , especially the Danish one , which I support .
Mr President , I would first like to support the rapporteur 's critical remarks about the timing of this debate , which is being held in the presence of representatives of a Council presidency just a few days old .
Our job is to assess the work done by the British and Austrian Presidencies .
Both initially presented a realistic programme and announced improvements in cooperation with Parliament .
In practice , however , things turned out somewhat differently .
Neither the spirit nor the letter of the promises made to us has been honoured .
Many of the decisions foreshadowed have been deferred , and in a number of areas unsatisfactory compromises have been reached .
The most striking example of the European Union 's laborious progress is probably the slow start that Europol has got off to .
I would like to make one more point .
Paragraph 1 ( 2 ) of the version of the Van Lancker report that I have before me seems to suggest that the Treaty of Amsterdam came into force a year ago - this must be one of those pre-cessions the President-in-Office was talking about this morning !
Mr President , it is not easy to say everything that needs to be said about these two important reports in just two minutes .
And I am also going to take a moment to mention the presence here of the Presidency-in-Office , as I believe it is important .
We all know that this does not happen often , although it should be a regular occurrence , and I hope that we will continue to have a Council presence during our debates .
As regards the Nassauer report , I only want to say that it seems to me to be an excellent report and I agree with its contents .
In terms of the report on Schengen cooperation , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his work , as it is a very difficult subject .
And I would thank him , in particular , for the way in which the vote unfolded in committee .
As far as the principles in the report are concerned , I must point out that neither the Schengen Agreement nor the Schengen Protocol establish a hierarchy between the values of liberty and security . Both of these must be respected together if Schengen is to meet the objectives for which it was created .
It has been said that the Schengen acquis is vague .
However , it is not vague ; it is evolutionary , as it is constantly changing .
This is the way it must be and must continue .
The Schengen acquis will continue to change right up until the last moment before it is incorporated at European Union level , and its Executive Committee will continue to do its job .
As a result , we cannot criticise the fact that its evolution may be marked by a certain degree of vagueness .
Secondly , Schengen represents a whole , and it must be incorporated into the Community acquis as a whole .
It cannot be divided up for fear of losing this marvellous instrument that has already guaranteed us freedom of movement within a common area , which is what it was designed for .
And I should like to give you an example of this . I have already mentioned that neither the SIS nor the Schengen Agreement establish a hierarchy of values between security and liberty and , with respect to the SIS specifically , a hierarchy cannot be established in terms of the importance of Article 96 or Article 95 .
We cannot say that it is more important to draw up the list of foreigners than the list on the admission of terrorists .
That all forms part of a whole and must be incorporated as such .
Mr President , regarding Mr Nassauer 's report on police cooperation and the development of EUROPOL , I was very pleased with what we heard from the German presidency in relation to the development of EUROPOL in the context of the newly ratified convention .
I agree entirely with what others have said here : if we are to see any significant further extension of EUROPOL into the operational sphere then we must ensure that there is a proper system of democratic accountability of its activity , involving an enhanced role for this Parliament , and indeed a proper system of independent complaints against any of its activities .
This is essential , just as it is for any national police force .
Above all , in this whole area of judicial and home affairs there is now an overwhelming need for extensive and rapid progress in harmonisation .
The minimal progress we have made in this area , compared with the headlong progress we have made in the financial , economic and many other spheres of Community activity , is now causing serious problems .
We need to do everything we possibly can to catch up in the areas of , for example , extradition , cross-border crime , judicial and court cooperation , including civil matters as the German minister outlined , and legislation regarding nationality and citizenship .
Let me give you one example : I am dealing with the case of a family where the mother is Irish , the father British , and their daughter was born in Holland , but for the last eight years they have lived in Spain - very European .
But this girl , who is now 13 , has no nationality and only a temporary travel document issued as a concession by the Irish authorities .
We must be able to deal properly with the situation of people in these circumstances and not allow a situation to develop where children can be virtually stateless .
We must get to grips with this .
I fully support Mrs van Lancker 's report .
It contains many excellent proposals .
I am glad that the amendments adopted at committee removed some of the mild criticism of the British and Irish position which was agreed at Amsterdam as regards non-participation , for a period at any rate , in the Schengen agreement .
I am sure that as time moves on the situation will change .
We need to be aware of the implications for the whole operation of the European Union of the fact that Schengen will contain two non-EU Member States when Icelandic and Norwegian participation is confirmed .
And the fact that two or three existing EU Member States will not be part of Schengen creates complications which will need to be resolved .
Finally , I was pleased at the references the minister made to the question of the applicant countries .
The Committee on Civil Liberties has had a valuable meeting with parliamentarians from these applicant countries to discuss the whole judiciary and home affairs area .
The influx of people seeking asylum from certain of these eastern European countries at the present time calls into question the situation in certain of these countries and makes it urgently necessary for them to introduce effective legislation to protect their ethnic minorities .
I very much hope that in the ongoing negotiations Council and Commission will ensure that the issue of human rights and the protection of minorities is given the urgent priority it deserves .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , it is true that the Treaty of Amsterdam improves the running of European policy on justice and home affairs .
However , for five years at least , that policy , for example on asylum , is beyond all parliamentary control .
National parliaments no longer have a say in the matter and the European Parliament 's rights are limited to consultation only .
This is insufficient .
It is unacceptable that such an important field as domestic security should be beyond parliamentary control and decision-making and should not be a part of democratic transparency .
My second point concerns the fact that important acts are adopted by the Council of Ministers , and then nothing happens .
These texts , which are essential to the smooth running of the Union and to the security of our citizens , are not ratified and therefore cannot enter into force .
Mr Nassauer 's report cites thirteen such texts , which are among the most important ones .
This amounts to a denial of political efficiency , and to absolute opposition to change .
In other words , in terms of the fight against crime , and asylum and immigration policy , we see a lot of declarations and few actions .
I am not questioning the good will of our leaders .
I am quite simply stating the political reality , which is not very positive , and I strongly urge the Council to draw lessons from this negative situation and ensure that , the next time the Treaties are reviewed , the structures are changed , as the current shortcomings of the institutions are preventing us from doing good .
Our citizens ask us to act , and often we want to but are unable to do so .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , we all agree that the Schengen security system is quite simply essential if we are to achieve freedom of movement .
We should never forget that we can only enjoy freedom of movement if we continue to guarantee security for all our citizens , and if possible even increase it .
The facts demonstrate just how important the Schengen security system really is .
I requested some figures which show that there are approximately 30 000 successful searches made each year , totalling around 120 000 searches by the end of 1998 .
That means that tonnes of drugs have been seized , thousands of stolen cars have been identified at the borders , weapons and stolen works of art have been seized , and thousands of illegal immigrant smugglers have been arrested , or , in the case of illegal immigrants , intercepted at the border .
So Schengen has led to an improvement in security .
This is also proof that the Schengen security system , as already implemented by 10 Member States , is sound .
I would go so far as to say that it is unique in the world , with 6 million data records on missing persons and stolen property , and controls at over 1 500 border crossing points .
So what further progress can we expect ?
I see the emphasis as being on three focal points , which I would like to single out .
First , now that we have seen how well Schengen can function , and how important it is for achieving freedom of movement , we should implement the Schengen Agreement in all our Member States and thus improve security for all Europe 's citizens .
Second , we should offer more support to those Member States faced with tougher challenges , particularly in connection with migration , by means of help with border controls and also help with burden sharing .
Third , we should use the Pre-Accession Pact as a means of offering support to the applicant countries , as accession to the European Union is only possible if the security standards are met .
Mr President , it is understandable that many states in the Schengen zone have been undecided about accepting the institution of a passport-free area in its entirety .
There has been alarm over such issues as the easy transportation of drugs within the internal market , and spillage over the EU 's external borders , which we have had some grim reminders of , especially in signs of organised crime emanating from the east .
The fact is that Schengen is not yet a fully workable system .
When the Treaty of Amsterdam takes effect it will bring with it important changes to the judicial status of the Schengen provisions , bringing them largely within the scope of the first pillar .
For this reason , solving the Schengen problems and dispelling the doubts of ordinary citizens will demand action on the part of this year 's countries holding the presidency , Germany and Finland .
Security arrangements for travel within the Schengen zone may best be ensured through multi-level cooperation , whose key elements will comprise rapid exchanges of information between national authorities , the work of Europol , and highly developed customs information systems .
Because there will be no checks at borders within the zone , the so-called system of invisible surveillance must be effective enough to ensure that the enormous benefit of freedom of movement is not abused by criminal organisations and tax evaders .
There has to be a sustainable balance between citizens ' freedoms and general considerations of security , a system that will maximise the advantages of free movement .
In recent opinion polls Finns said they thought one of the most important tasks during Finland 's presidency would be the prevention of international crime .
This must be borne in mind when this issue is next discussed at the summit in Tampere .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would particularly like to thank those Members who have stressed in their speeches that Schengen is of course a two-part system .
On the one hand we grant our citizens the enormous privilege of freedom of movement , which clearly enhances their quality of life . However , this cannot be allowed to mean a loss of security , and that is why the second part is so vital .
I totally agree with what Mr Pirker said about what needs to be turned into reality .
I mentioned in my report that Germany will be the first country to submit itself to a review under the Schengen Implementation Agreement .
I also agree that we particularly need to help countries with special problems , as regards both burden-sharing and support for applicant countries .
Incidentally , we are not only doing that as part of our EU presidency , we are also trying to do this bilaterally , and in my capacity as Germany 's Minister for the Interior , if you will allow me to mention this in passing , I am also holding various meetings with my colleagues from the applicant countries , with a view to progressing these matters .
Some of the comments I have to make now relate to speeches which we heard this morning , although I do not know if the Members present now were also here then .
The situation here today is a rather unusual one .
Various Members were not sure that the process of informing and involving the Parliament had been as good as it might be .
I think it is fair to say that there has always been an effort to honour the necessary obligations , and the German Presidency will certainly do everything in its power to comply with your wishes .
As far as Schengen is concerned , I would like to point out that we are providing information in accordance with traditional practice , and that we will certainly continue this tradition .
We are trying to do this in a wide range of forums .
My State Secretary last November gave the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs a detailed report on the Schengen situation , covering both integration measures and the forthcoming work programme , and I will certainly be attending the committee in Brussels myself next week in my capacity as minister to report further .
As to whether reports could be improved further , as I said this morning we are happy to take up the suggestion of publishing a written report at the end of the presidency .
I must , however , make it clear that we cannot synchronise publication of the report with the last Council meeting , it will have to be drawn up by the presidency . That is our intention , in any case .
As the presidency , we will honour this undertaking to present a written report .
That would no doubt also considerably facilitate your work in the House .
It will probably not be possible to present a report before the meetings , but I am more than willing to make an oral report after the formal Council meetings .
So I think that we can accommodate each other .
And with regard to the time-limits mentioned earlier , the three-month time limit has been adopted as the norm , and there is nothing we in our presidency capacity can do to alter that .
I was also asked if it is possible to judge whether Parliament 's opinions have been sufficiently taken into account when decisions are adopted .
I could carp and say that the recitals which precede such decisions are too general .
But at the end of the day the position is no different to what you find in many other places : you can only really judge whether your ideas and suggestions have been taken on board or not by looking at the end result or the content of a decision .
I think that it would hardly be feasible to record who had an idea first or presented it most forcefully , to acknowledge authorship , so to speak .
Many problems arise because the situation is neither one thing nor the other .
Regarding the institutional deficit which various members touched upon , I do not dispute its existence , but I think we will have to cope with the situation as it stands .
Furthermore , I would like to remind you that in March we have an interparliamentary conference which is intended to prepare the ground for the Tampere special summit .
Given that there have been quite understandable complaints that adequate information on the action plan has not perhaps always been published in good time , then this would seem to be a good opportunity to reiterate comments made here in Parliament .
I would also like to point out that the next special summit is to establish whether the action plan is to be reviewed in Tampere , and this will be on the agenda of the conference in March .
I would like to emphasise once again that in 1998 Parliament was consulted 15 times and provided with information seven times on justice and home affairs matters , in the hope that some of the criticism expressed here could be tempered somewhat .
Some of you suggested that you had not been provided with full information on the Schengen Information System .
One Member asked if I could redress the balance with written information .
I am very happy to do that , Mr Chanterie .
As I have to adhere to the time limits that apply here , I hope you will forgive me for not going into full detail about the Schengen Information System .
Although it is always possible to generalise , specific issues can be of vital importance in this field .
If we weigh these various issues against each other , it emerges that there are certain fields in which national sovereignty plays an even greater part than in others .
In such cases it is important to see that justice is done to the overall picture .
We are certainly making an effort to arrange matters so that there is adequate democratic control , but I would say that our chances of achieving institutional reform within the six months mentioned here are not great .
In any case , on behalf of the German Presidency , I can only assure you that we will be very glad to comply with our duty of information , and I accordingly look forward to successful cooperation .
Applause
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office .
Mr Mendes Bota has the floor .
I am sorry , Mr President , but I must make a complaint regarding the fact that Portuguese was the only language for which interpretation was not provided during the speech by the President-in-Office of the Council . I find this totally unacceptable .
That is indeed completely out of order , Mr Mendes Bota , being both contrary to our Rules and unlike our excellent interpreters .
We shall look into it immediately so as to put things right .
In the meantime , my thanks again to the President-in-Office .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place this evening at 5.30 p.m.
TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0044 / 99 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on Iraq ; -B4-0059 / 99 by Mr Swoboda and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on future developments in Iraq ; -B4-0079 / 99 by Mr Oostlander and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on Iraq ; -B4-0097 / 99 by Mr Pasty , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the situation in Iraq ; -B4-0098 / 99 by Mr Manisco and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on Iraq ; -B4-0104 / 99 by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the V Group , on Iraq ; -B4-0105 / 99 by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the Iraqi Kurds .
Mr President , during the last part-session , as you know , we held a very comprehensive and detailed debate on Iraq and the American and British air strikes .
Our present discussion is not intended as a repeat of that debate , but is designed to deliver the following clear message : in this House , among the European population and throughout the world there has been perfectly understandable criticism of the bombing raids by the United States and Britain .
That , however , does not mean that we either understand , tolerate or condone what Saddam Hussein and his regime are doing in Iraq , particularly to their own population .
Let me say quite clearly that the defence of the so-called no-fly zones in Iraq is absolutely necessary and warranted , especially for the protection of the Kurds and Shiites .
However widely opinions may differ on the events surrounding the air strikes , we are firmly behind the defence of the no-fly zones .
Secondly , the Kurdish organisations reached an agreement in Washington .
We in this Parliament wish to urge the Kurdish organisations to uphold this agreement , to set aside the argument that interests no one - except perhaps some Kurdish political leaders , but certainly not the Kurdish population and certainly not the Western world - to cooperate and to represent very clearly the interests of the Kurds .
Thirdly , we seek to draw attention to humanitarian issues , to the question of humanitarian aid for Iraq , especially the population of the no-fly zones .
In addition , we should do everything possible to ensure that the entire population suffers as little as possible from the policies of Saddam Hussein , from military actions and from the sanctions .
I believe that sums up our concern .
We want to help the population , not the regime .
That is what we wish to re-emphasise today .
Mr President , this is the first time that we in the House have had a chance to comment on Iraq since the bombings last month .
My group regrets that the bombings were necessary , but under the circumstances we support the US / British action .
It was Saddam Hussein himself who flouted the UN resolutions , who refuses to allow UNSCOM to do its work , and who represses his own people and threatens his neighbours with his weapons .
It was Saddam Hussein who broke the agreement with Kofi Annan .
The bombings were right , and this sort of action could again be justified in future if the Iraqi leader continues down the same path .
We must uphold the UN resolutions , and we must uphold UNSCOM and ensure that it can continue its work .
Campaigns to undermine a just and consistent policy towards Saddam must be stopped .
If we give in to this dictator , we are not just undermining the international rule of law , we are also tolerating repression and threats .
The Union must adopt a hard line en bloc .
The no-fly zones must be maintained , and the people of Iraq must be helped , of course .
Saddam 's policy of starving his people for his own political gain must be unmasked as the inhuman policy it is .
The Union must be prepared to send food aid if Saddam agrees to let his people be helped , but we must send it only through independent organisations .
Saddam must not be allowed to claim these measures as his own doing .
Mr President , I believe this resolution dwells rather too much on past events and does not focus on the fact that a new danger is looming .
It is perfectly clear that the provocations are starting again , that the actions by the Iraqi side , or rather Saddam Hussein 's side , are continuing , with the result that there is a serious risk of war on the horizon .
Saddam Hussein does what he wants , showing utter contempt for everyone .
The very fact that he has spurned the ' food for oil ' programme is itself clear proof that he does whatever he pleases with the Iraqi people .
One simple fact should not be forgotten : this man comes from the town of Tikrit and is only interested in the Tikrit tribe ; all others are only slaves who are used as cannon fodder .
Saddam Hussein is essentially an Arab version of what Hitler was in our part of the world .
He has exactly the same personality profile and pursues exactly the same type of policy , which is why there will be no peace until he has been replaced , until a different government is at the helm .
Actions that signal a real will to replace him are therefore entirely justified .
That is why I have been critical of the air strikes , which are a futile gesture .
Missiles were fired , the people were terrified , but Saddam Hussein was not harmed ; on the contrary , the air strikes gave him an opportunity to strengthen his position still further and aroused worldwide suspicion that the purpose of the whole escapade was to divert attention from certain embarrassing events in the United States .
I even saw in one of our newspapers that they were calling the missiles ' Monica ' .
We should perhaps bring out that point more clearly in the resolution , or at least in the discussion on the resolution .
For that reason , if the House adopts the resolution , which is a good one , it should reject the three amendments , the only real purpose of which is to undermine and water down this resolution .
That is important if we want to send a clear message .
Mr President , let me do a rather unusual thing in the European Parliament and respond to the previous four speakers , not a thing that people often do .
All four of them , in different ways , criticised the US and British bombing of Baghdad last month .
I have to say to them : if you believe that , why is it not in your joint resolution ?
We too should be condemning that bombing , as indeed most of the people of the European Union did when it happened last month .
As one of the speakers pointed out , it was mostly to do with American domestic affairs .
We in the Greens deplore the bombing .
As the speakers have said quite rightly , it strengthens Saddam Hussein , it does not weaken him .
The real policies to weaken Saddam are to back the democratic movements inside Iraq , to lift the sanctions , to help the people restore democracy .
That would be the quickest way of getting rid of Saddam .
Some of us have been around for a long time and have opposed Saddam from the start , when Christian Democrat and Socialist governments around the world were selling him arms and strengthening him .
Let us have a little consistency here in terms of historical perspective , something which Mr von Habsburg is certainly capable of .
Let us say that we should be maintaining our support for democracy .
In particular I want to deplore the role of the British Government in this .
Mr Blair again displayed , despite his warm words about Europe , his lack of commitment .
He is the man who is going around saying that we need a common European defence policy , but at the first sign of action from the US Mr Blair was there announcing his support for the bombing even before the US announced the bombing was happening .
If he is serious about a common foreign European defence policy then he has to demonstrate that by action as well as words .
As for the British Foreign Secretary who was previously a leading supporter of CND in Britain , it is a disgrace that he attaches his name and support to that action as well .
So let us support the Green amendments and let us mention the role of UNSCOM , which has been exposed as a conduit for the CIA .
Let us have an investigation into that issue , which needs to be dealt with before UNSCOM can go back to Iraq with any authority .
Mr President , all the main points have already been made by Mr Bertens as the person who signed the resolution .
I think that however much we may all regret that it has been necessary to take further military action against Iraq , it must be perfectly clear that the person most responsible is Saddam Hussein who , as previous speakers have said , ruthlessly continues to hold his people to ransom , as can be clearly seen from the way in which he blocked the oil for food programme , bringing further suffering for the Iraqi people .
That said , I would like to express our group 's support for the call for the Council to try to define an EU position on this issue .
Mr President , the Commission is very concerned about the events that followed the air strikes of 16 and 19 December 1998 .
Naturally , the Commission and the Member States fully support the implementation of the ' oil for food ' programme , which is administered by the United Nations . This allows the sale of oil up to a value of USD 5 000 million over six months , in order to obtain humanitarian supplies and spare parts and equipment for the oil-producing plants .
The Commission also welcomes the fact that the UN Security Council renewed this ' oil for food ' programme on 24 November 1998 for a further six months .
We are obviously concerned at the slow rate at which the humanitarian aid and spare parts are being supplied , and we hope that the Iraqi Government will give its full support to the application of this programme and establish favourable conditions for its implementation .
Since the Gulf War in 1991 the European Union has been the largest donor of humanitarian aid to Iraq , having given aid to the value of EUR 200 million .
ECHO earmarked EUR 10 million for the first eight months of 1998 and another EUR 4 million for the period from October 1998 to 1999 .
Our commitment , and that of the European Union , is to relieve the suffering of the Iraqi people , and this is what will continue to guide the Commission 's actions , in line , of course , with the Council mandate and decisions .
However , I must point out that the Iraqi Government is creating a lot of problems for us because of the restrictions it is imposing on non-governmental organisations .
This attitude may well threaten the implementation of humanitarian aid programmes financed by the European Union .
As far as the Kurdish conflict is concerned , we must welcome the rapprochement of the two rival Kurdish factions in northern Iraq as a result of the 1998 agreement on a system of power-sharing , and elections are now being prepared in order to set up a Kurdish regional assembly .
The Commission and the Member States will together explore the possibilities for promoting the application of the agreement within the context of the common foreign and security policy .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0054 / 99 by Mr Cunha and Mr Coelho , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the situation in Angola ; -B4-0057 / 99 by Mr Nordmann , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on resumption of the war in Angola ; -B4-0060 / 99 by Mr Newens , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the crisis in the peace process in Angola ; -B4-0075 / 99 by Mr Telkämper and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the crisis in Angola ; -B4-0088 / 99 by Mr Hory and others , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the situation in Angola ; -B4-0094 / 99 by Mr Pasty and others , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the situation in Angola ; -B4-0099 / 99 by Mr Miranda and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Angola .
Mr President , oil and diamonds have fuelled the 25 years of civil war in Angola and are at the root of all the problems .
They are the cause of the poverty and misery of the Angolan people and they are ensuring the prosperity of the arms traffickers and the corrupt politicians .
The number of mines that appear secretly in the night is double that of the mines opened during the day .
The masses of humanitarian aid , including food , seem to be a drop in the ocean for the people who are desperately in need .
The shooting down of two cargo planes chartered by MONUA , causing the death of 23 people , represented a new level of disregard for all the international agreements and institutions .
The war has been rekindled from the ashes of the Lusaka protocol , clearly demonstrating the failure of the UN mission responsible for overseeing its implementation .
The tolerance needed to consider the Angolan problem in a balanced manner and with equal respect for all the parties involved has been exhausted .
We know that the government excels in corruption and incompetence .
But the main party guilty of this carnage is UNITA .
This organisation of Jonas Savimbi , which recently made nearly four billion dollars on the world diamond market , has reinforced its military positions on the ground and its level of equipment . It has not disarmed or facilitated the extension of the state administration and it has disregarded all the accords and all the previous resolutions of the UN Security Council .
The latter has just passed another resolution in order to restrict the satellite communications controlled by UNITA and to prevent the trading of diamonds .
The patience of the international community is wearing thin .
There are powerful economic and geo-strategic interests supplying this machinery of war .
It is time to say that we have had enough .
Those responsible for this conflict must be charged with crimes against humanity .
Plundering and prospering on Angola 's God-given wealth , leaving millions of war and famine victims to die , is a crime against humanity .
Mr President , the situation in Angola is extremely serious , and the resumption of the civil war is particularly worrying .
We have seen a peace process break down .
The Angolan Government , whose legitimacy is doubtful given its failure to complete the presidential election process , has tried to politically and physically destroy those who should have been its partners , and has forced UNITA to take action in self-defence .
That is the current situation .
It is a tragic situation because meanwhile the Angolan people are languishing in unspeakable poverty , while a few of the supposed élite are sharing the oil resources that they have seized .
We must be very firm in showing our disapproval of this situation and our determination in appealing for peace .
Peace is made between those who are fighting .
There will be no destruction of one side or the other . The two parties involved need to finally be able ...
Thank you , Mr Nordmann .
Mr Newens now has the floor for two minutes as the author of a motion for a resolution .
You have the floor , Mr Newens .
Let me just say to the speakers that we must keep strictly to the speaking time .
Mr President , hundreds of thousands of Angolan people are today facing the threat of misery , starvation and death in central Angola as a result of the renewed outbreak of civil war initiated by Dr Savimbi and UNITA , despite all the efforts of the United Nations and other parties to bring peace and relief to this long-suffering country after decades of destruction and merciless hostilities .
Much-needed humanitarian supplies have been cut off after the disgraceful shooting down of two UN planes , whose personnel are still unaccounted for .
The son of the pilot of the first plane was on board the second , which illustrates the tragedy as far as those engaged on missions of mercy are concerned .
Every possible effort must now be made to end this war and sanctions must be tightened .
In particular , action must be taken to prevent UNITA from finding any market for the diamonds which have been used to buy arms and supplies , and De Beers and all other traders must be made to verify their sources of supply and to ensure no monies whatsoever get through to fund this war .
Peace cannot be achieved by armed hostilities and there must be a return to the Lusaka protocol .
We call upon both belligerents to cooperate immediately with the UN in seeking to establish the fate of the occupants of the UN planes which were shot down .
In the interests of the long-suffering people of Angola , it is vital that the UN , subject of course to the safety of its personnel , continues to be involved in Angola .
We appeal to the Commission to assist in the provision of humanitarian aid and , when it is possible , with the clearing of mines .
This war is a major disaster and all possible power must be mobilised to restore peace at long last .
Mr President , we had hoped for peace in Angola .
Such hopes had been raised many times before .
Years ago , Jonas Savimbi was invited here to our Parliament and promised to make peace .
Then he took up arms , and the country was plunged into war again .
Four years ago there was the Lusaka protocol , an agreement that we saw as the basis for many years of peace .
We have been there with various delegations from the European Parliament , and we have seen weapons being surrendered in Huambo , for example .
We parliamentarians , however , criticised the fact that the weapons being surrendered were arms from the Second World War , not the weapons that had been used in the civil war .
In other words , UNITA has been pulling the wool over our eyes for years ; they used a cease-fire to keep the lid on the civil war to some extent over a period of several years , but this civil war scenario was always on their minds , and they wanted to pursue it .
I believe we must take serious note of the UN Security Council resolution , which calls for the enforcement of sanctions against UNITA .
We must take it seriously in two respects .
First of all , there is a need to ensure that UNITA can no longer mine diamonds and buy modern weapons with the proceeds from their sale .
Secondly , these diamonds must not find their way into the European Union , be marketed here and provide the capital for these arms purchases .
So it is up to the Member States not to let these diamonds from Angola enter their markets and to take steps to prevent their sale in the European Union .
On the other hand , as in every war situation , we have a suffering population , a population sucked into the war , generally against their will .
In such cases , Commissioner Marín , it is our duty to keep providing humanitarian aid wherever possible , wherever the people who want to administer that aid are not endangered .
So that it can be administered , I believe it is essential for us to continue the efforts we have been making to ensure that landmines are cleared , to support the removal from that country of the most barbaric weapons in existence .
We should also support the rehabilitation effort .
We visited rehabilitation workshops and can confirm that they are working well .
I believe that both humanitarian aid in general and the specific projects are a very important asset to the suffering population , as well as a good and vital contribution by the European Union , by the Commission , Parliament and the Council - the budgetary authority and the executive .
Mr President , our group has no more sympathy than Mr Nordmann for the Angolan regime , for its internal practices inherited from an Africanised Sovietism , or even for the shameless manner in which it is now interfering in regional affairs .
However , the fact remains that the truth does need to be established and that we do not feel that it is fair to apportion equal blame to the government and to Jonas Savimbi 's uprising , for restarting a civil war for which UNITA bears the overwhelming responsibility , notably by seizing land and towns that in theory had been restored to government authority .
Similarly , we do not think that it is fair to suggest , as in the initial Liberal text , a European boycott of Angolan oil and diamonds .
We feel that it would be much more appropriate to check whether those products are in fact being exported by the Angolan State and not by UNITA , which is using them as a means of ruining both its country and the peace agreements that it has signed .
With regard to those agreements , which were made reluctantly and were never really applied , it is reasonable to demand a return to the Lusaka protocol .
We believe that peace needs to be completely rebuilt following a prior and very serious warning to UNITA , and that this can be done by a new conference in which European Union diplomacy could finally have an opportunity to assert itself .
Mr President , our colleague , Mrs van Bladel , who cannot be present due to family reasons , has asked me to make a statement . After the part-session in December 1997 , through both an urgent debate and questions to the Council , she asked for steps to be taken to prevent a war in Angola .
On three occasions she tabled motions for resolutions that were not accepted by this House , and she therefore considers that Parliament must also bear responsibility for the current situation in Angola .
She also says that , in her opinion , the deep mistrust between the government and UNITA , which has a historical basis , was aggravated by the 1992 massacres and that this is the fundamental reason for the conflict in Angola .
Personally , I believe that the Angolan problem is basically a question of trust , and the climate of distrust is the fault of both sides , not just of UNITA .
It must be said that many clauses of the Lusaka protocol were also flouted by the MPLA Government .
For example , 700 000 weapons were not collected from the civilian population and were consequently used for the bloodshed in 1992 .
The second round of elections was not held .
The armed forces - except for those of UNITA - were not confined to barracks .
The reorganisation of the police force was not carried out .
The presence of the United Nations was not welcomed as was promised .
The national symbols - the flag and anthem - were not changed and are still those of the MPLA party .
The mercenaries were not returned to their countries and , in defiance of the agreement , the government continues to buy arms , particularly from Russia , which is a member of the troika and the UN Security Council .
Compliance with these clauses would have led to mutual trust .
But much more serious is the fact that , the state administration having been extended , this consists not of administrative officials but of the police and the army , which are destroying all the UNITA headquarters and killing or arresting all the leaders of this organisation .
In the meantime , a fictitious UNITA is being created in Luanda . The UN representative was prevented from talking with the real and historic UNITA and the mistrust has grown .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am not representing anyone , only my conscience and my beliefs .
I wanted to relate these facts because the dualistic attitude of always accusing just one of the parties does not seem right to me .
This is not how problems of war are resolved .
Sanctions will not bring peace to Angola .
Only an atmosphere of trust can do that , which this House can help to build .
Mr President , Commissioner , UNITA is without a shadow of a doubt guilty of restarting the war in Angola and must therefore be held responsible . It has not abided by the election results , it has prevented the demilitarisation of its forces and the extension of the state administration to the whole territory and it has disregarded the Lusaka protocol and the recommendations of the UN Security Council .
At the same time , we note that the rearmament of this organisation has only been possible due to clear disregard for the international embargo , making it necessary for the European Union and the whole international community to apply and reinforce the sanctions . The proposal made today by the Commission to investigate the diamond trade that is financing UNITA 's war effort is therefore welcome .
The incredible and disgraceful episode of the shooting down of two MONUA planes in territory occupied and controlled by UNITA together with the fact that hundreds of people have been killed and thousands left homeless by the resumption of this war form the basis for our demands . We want the weapons to be silenced , the peace process to be restarted , UNITA to agree to abide by the Lusaka protocol and the UN decisions , and the UN to decide to extend the mandate of MONUA in order to secure the conditions needed to help the refugees and to proceed with the emergency food aid .
I will end by saying that , in view of UNITA 's continued disregard for the UN decisions , the international community will have to act more firmly . If not , it may be accused of having two different responses in accordance with the location of the conflicts and the convenience of certain countries .
Action must be taken to ensure peace and to help a people tortured by the permanent war waged by one organisation - UNITA - which is becoming increasingly irresponsible and more terrorist-like in its activities .
Mr President , to be perfectly honest , I very much regret that the opinion expressed by many speakers and representatives of the authors is not reflected in the resolution itself .
Although I support the substance of the resolution , it is unfortunately very one-sided .
It depicts UNITA as the only villains of the piece .
This obscures the fact that there is actually a cruel dictatorial regime in power in Luanda and that both sides should really be treated alike , as they are in fact treated in some respects by the United Nations .
It is not enough to condemn the trade in diamonds , Mr Telkämper ; you should also be condemning the oil trade , such as the sale of oil from the Kabinda province , occupied by the government , which , without any compunction , brings in foreign troops to exercise its power in the province .
This oil trade ought to be stopped in exactly the same way as we are now calling for a halt to the trade in diamonds .
I believe it is important that both sides are treated equally .
That is the only way for us to remain credible here .
Mr President , despite all the United Nations ' efforts , the situation in Angola is deteriorating again .
The warring factions are once again squandering the country 's wealth and reducing the people to penury .
It is not fair to blame just one side for this - the government and the army must share some of the guilt .
They have failed to provide stability and are proving extremely two-faced .
We must not allow ourselves to be distracted by political tricks and stratagems .
In my view , neither side is willing to make any serious efforts to achieve lasting peace .
What should we do to try to stop the spiral of violence ?
I hope that the United Nations will not relinquish its efforts and that MONUA will stay on after 26 February .
The international community must continue to provide support , but it will not be easy to maintain donors ' commitment to Angola .
We must try , however .
Finally , Mr President , a point of order .
There is an unfortunate misprint in the joint motion for a resolution , which says that it was tabled on behalf of the ELDR Group by Messrs Bertens , Fassa and Cunha , whereas the last two went over to the PPE Group a considerable time ago .




Mr President , we firmly condemn the resumption of the war in Angola , which constitutes a setback in the peace process , and we believe it is necessary , as emphasised in the resolution we are debating , to start applying the Lusaka protocol and the resolutions of the United Nations Security Council again .
We think UNITA should be urged to respect human rights and to cooperate with the UN special representative , so that a negotiated solution can be found to the current conflict .
This call must also go out to the President of Angola , Mr dos Santos , who has equally failed to respect the rights of opposition Members of Parliament .
They have been persecuted and prevented from carrying out their mandate as directly elected representatives of the people .
Finally we must emphasise that the European Union has a duty to mobilise all the necessary resources to contribute to the humanitarian aid effort and a duty to remind the parties involved that no military solution to the conflict is possible and only a return to negotiations will allow the Angolan people to find peace once again .
Mr Telkämper has a point of order .
We are desperately short of time .
We are not going to have a debate within a debate , but if you want to make a personal comment in response to an earlier comment , please carry on .
Mr President , I can be brief .
Mr Habsburg more or less implied that we were not credible .
What I said was the result of a report compiled by a delegation of the European Parliament that had just visited Huambo in Angola .
We observed time and again that UNITA had violated the peace agreement and had taken up arms again .
I believe the basis must be the Lusaka peace agreement , and we as a Parliament should insist that it be upheld .
It is the basis of a future peace , and we must demand compliance .
That is a credible approach .
To that extent we have a responsibility here , and we want to ensure that the agreement is respected .
Mr President , the European Commission shares the view that the resumption of fighting in Angola is clearly very unfortunate and that any attack against planes not involved in military operations is unacceptable .
It also agrees that UNITA bears the main responsibility for the resumption of fighting and that it obtains funds through illegal trade in diamonds .
The Commission does not have the necessary resources to carry out an investigation into this illegal trade , but we will nevertheless forward Parliament 's concern on this issue to the Council .
The Commission believes that the European Union will only be able to adopt further sanctions through a UN Security Council resolution .
In order to try to help the Angolan people the Commission 's services have monitored the situation as closely as possible , and our monitoring of the European Union 's cooperation will include , among other things , an analysis of the possible redeployment of the aid that the Union is currently providing .
The Union 's aid will undoubtedly depend on the specific possibilities on the ground .
As Mr Telkämper rightly pointed out , this aid includes mine clearance .
However , although this work has not been brought to a complete standstill , it has been restricted by the military operations , and this has meant that it is less safe for the teams that are working in Angola to clear the mines .
The European Commission has , of course , allocated and financed humanitarian aid to help the more vulnerable sections of the Angolan population in various areas .
The implementation of these programmes has also been partially affected by the deterioration of the political and military situation following the resumption of the armed conflict .
The suspension of aid flights by the United Nations after the serious incidents that took place - the shooting down of aircraft - has meant that practically no humanitarian aid can reach the areas most affected by the fighting .
I can therefore confirm that the situation is critical .
The Commission is going to make all efforts to resume the process of providing humanitarian aid as soon as it is safe to do so , and this will involve the participation not only of our delegation 's services but also of the international institutions and the NGOs that are working with us in this field .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on following 25 motions for resolutions :
East Timor and Indonesia
Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the human rights situation in Indonesia ( B4-0056 / 99 ) ; - Marinho and Barros Moura , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the human rights situation in Indonesia and East Timor ( B4-0064 / 99 ) ; - Cunha , Coelho , Costa Neves , Lenz and Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the human rights situation in Indonesia and East Timor ( B4-0066 / 99 ) ; - Dupuis , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the situation in East Timor ( B4-0092 / 99 ) ; - Janssen van Raay and Pasty , on behalf of the UPE Group , on self-determination for the people of East Timor ( B4-0095 / 99 ) ; - Ribeiro , Miranda , Novo , Jové Peres , Elmalan , Manisco and Ripa di Meana , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in East Timor and Indonesia ( B4-0101 / 99 ) ; - Telkämper , Hautala and McKenna , on behalf of the V Group , on Indonesia ( B4-0108 / 99 ) ; Western Sahara
Watson , Fassa , Vallvé and Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on Western Sahara ( B4-0045 / 99 ) ; - Swoboda , García Arias and Schmidbauer , on behalf of the PSE Group , on Western Sahara ( B4-0061 / 99 ) ; - Telkämper and Aelvoet , on behalf of the V Group , on Western Sahara ( B4-0073 / 99 ) ; - Oostlander and Hernández Mollar , on behalf of the PPE Group , on Western Sahara ( B4-0080 / 99 ) ; - Ainardi , Sierra González , Eriksson , Miranda , Ephremidis , Vinci , Carnero González , Marset Campos , Alavanos , Seppänen and Gutiérrez Díaz , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Western Sahara ( B4-0100 / 99 ) ; Trafficking of children in Guatemala
Bertens , André-Léonard , Vallvé and Goerens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the illegal trafficking of babies coming from Guatemala ( B4-0058 / 99 ) ; - van Putten , Kinnock and Newens , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the illegal trafficking of babies coming from Guatemala ( B4-0062 / 99 ) ; - Kreissl-Dörfler , Kerr and Lindholm , on behalf of the V Group , on the illegal trafficking of babies coming from Guatemala ( B4-0076 / 99 ) ; - Leperre-Verrier , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the illegal trafficking of babies coming from Guatemala ( B4-0089 / 99 ) ; - Pasty , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the illegal trafficking of babies coming from Guatemala ( B4-0096 / 99 ) ; - González Álvarez and Novo , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the illegal trafficking of babies coming from Guatemala ( B4-0103 / 99 ) ; Peace process in Colombia
Gasòliba i Böhm and Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the peace process in Colombia ( B4-0055 / 99 ) ; - Miranda de Lage , Howitt and Morgan , on behalf of the PSE Group , and Escolá Hernando , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the peace talks in Colombia ( B4-0063 / 99 ) ; - Kreissl-Dörfler , Aelvoet , McKenna and Lindholm , on behalf of the V Group , on the peace talks in Colombia ( B4-0074 / 99 ) ; - De Esteban Martín , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the peace talks in Colombia ( B4-0085 / 99 ) ; -Puerta , Sornosa Martínez , Elmalan , Novo , Seppänen , Ojala , Alavanos , Theonas and Manisco , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the peace talks in Colombia ( B4-0102 / 99 ) ; Sierra Leone
Telkämper , Aelvoet and Schörling , on behalf of the V Group , on the situation in Sierra Leone ( B4-0072 / 99 ) ; - Hory , Castagnède and Maes , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the situation in Sierra Leone ( B4-0087 / 99 ) ; East Timor and Indonesia
Mr President , Indonesia 's new president , Mr Habibie , is confining his reforms to certain selected measures , whereas what Indonesia needs are different measures which will promote democracy , respect for human rights and economic recovery .
The people of Indonesia are entitled to this .
The government must understand that democracy and human rights are essential elements for giving fresh impetus to economic renewal .
The Union wants to help Indonesia , but it must also take steps to help itself .
When will it release all its political prisoners , including Xanana Gusmao ?
When will the repressive measures in areas such as East Timor , Aceh and Irian Jaya be stopped ?
I hope that the new government will start to work in a genuinely democratic manner and will install a new , legitimate authority that is able to take action .
Indonesia still has a long way to go , as does East Timor .
Mr President , this motion for a resolution could not be more opportune .
The developments in Indonesia had led to the belief that the conditions were being created for the negotiation of peaceful solutions .
However , this was merely cosmetic .
Despite President Habibie having recognised the special status of East Timor owing to its profound religious and cultural differences , nothing has changed in the attitude of Indonesia towards the Timorese . This is despite pre-negotiation agreements having been reached in order to demonstrate the good faith of the parties and despite negotiations having been started .
The disproportionate and aggressive military presence is continuing and has now assumed the role of maintaining order and carrying out criminal investigations in the place of the police force and an independent judicial system .
The military are responsible for new acts of violence , new disappearances and new political imprisonments , and recently in Alas , the hope of the Timorese died along with a still unspecified number of people .
As we have said , this motion for a resolution is extremely urgent and opportune . Its most important elements are the call for the immediate opening of an inquiry under the aegis of the UN to establish the identity of those directly responsible for committing these crimes and the call for negotiations to find a rapid solution involving the democratisation of Indonesia .
In the first ten years of occupation , 200 000 Timorese disappeared .
It needed journalists to witness a massacre for international consciences to be aroused .
We must hope that more massacres are not needed for the UN resolutions to be complied with .
It is time to demand that Indonesia respects human rights , it is time to end the suffering of the Timorese and it is time to submit the dictator Suharto and the military personnel responsible to the force of international justice .
We cannot have two levels of response and two approaches , as demonstrated by the desire of some people to condemn Pinochet and to absolve Suharto .
Mr President , East Timor is once again on our agenda at a time when three important events are occurring .
Firstly , there is the greater isolation of Indonesia due to the change in the official position of the Australian Government on East Timor , applauded by almost all the Australian political parties and criticised only by the Indonesian Government .
Indonesia is becoming increasingly isolated in its claim to continue its military occupation and in its attempts to force the integration of East Timor into its territory .
Secondly , there is the fresh outbreak of human rights abuses .
Since the crackdown against the civilian population in Alas in November , the news reaching us from East Timor , despite being diluted by the censure of the military authorities , has contained worrying signs of repeated human rights abuses . We have also been informed of the creation of armed popular militias by the military , which is attempting by force to sow the seed of terror among those opposed to integration into Indonesia .
Bishop Ximenes Belo recently confirmed the arrival in the capital of East Timor of thousands of Timorese who have been forced out of their houses through violence and terror .
Thirdly , there is the refusal to accept a visit from a delegation from this House .
The Intergovernmental Group on East Timor met yesterday to assess the letter from the Indonesian ambassador refusing visas for Members to visit East Timor .
This refusal is indicative of their fear of this House , which is a shrine for freedom , democracy and respect for human rights .
We will not give up and we believe that the European Parliament should continue to cooperate through the motions for resolutions it has approved and through the one before us today , which we are proposing jointly with colleagues from other parties .
We are sure that , with tenacity , persistence and courage , the path of history can be directed towards respect for the individual and for freedom rather than towards tyranny , violence and disregard for the most basic human rights .
Mr President , a number of speakers have already talked about the lengthy conflict in which Indonesia has illegally occupied East Timor .
The European Parliament has always supported the UN resolutions , and now is a good opportunity to focus attention on them again and put this issue back on the international agenda .
As has rightly been pointed out , Australia , the only country to have recognised the annexation of East Timor , has changed its position .
The new thinking that is rapidly gaining ground at all levels of society in Indonesia could also mean new hope for East Timor .
The Indonesian Government is now coming under increasing pressure to improve democracy and to recognise the independence and right to self-determination of East Timor and other areas whose traditional identity has come under threat from Indonesia , such as Irian Jaya .
Mr President , I should like to say that the problem of East Timor , having been forgotten for many years by the international community , has fortunately now become a subject of almost constant and major debate in the international institutions , in the United Nations , in the American Congress and so on .
I must also applaud the fact that the Council has already stated its position on this matter .
I believe that the Commission has done so too .
This House has also had an important role to play in the debate on this issue by highlighting the problems of Timor and the violations of human rights .
Obviously we support this motion for a resolution but I regret that it does not contain a proposal made by Mr Janssen van Ray that , at the time of the elections in Indonesia , a referendum should be held in East Timor on self-determination .
I believe that self-determination is the path that will have to be followed and for which this House must continue to fight .
Mr President , Indonesia and East Timor are again the subject of an urgent debate in this House . This has occurred periodically as a result of the persistence and insistence needed to ensure that we never forget this people 's heroic struggle over twenty years for their right to self-determination .
Moreover , in addition to the basic need to keep this issue alive , there are always new reasons provided by Indonesia - due to its military occupation and repression - to justify this insistence and repetition .
The current reasons are the recent events in Alas and the violent military repression by Indonesia . We must be informed of the extent and consequences of this .
We therefore repeat the demand for inquiries and visits to East Timor , which Indonesia has refused this House since November 1991 .
We also denounce the manoeuvre caused by Indonesia 's abject weakness , which it is trying to hide . This manoeuvre involves agreeing to the principle of self-determination but it is accompanied by the assumption of Timor as a province of Indonesia , coinciding with a mock referendum at the time of the Indonesian elections next June .
Mr President , President Suharto fell from power in Indonesia last spring , but just six months later Amnesty International has found that promises relating to human rights given by the new president have not been kept .
I am most concerned that force has been used against peaceful demonstrators and that no progress has been made in freeing political prisoners .
I wish in particular to speak about East Timor .
There too repression has increased alarmingly .
There is also reliable information that military power has been increased to a greater extent than official sources would have us believe .
Fortunately , the European Union has recently sat up and started to take notice of East Timor and it was with satisfaction that we noted the conclusions on East Timor reached at the Vienna summit , for example .
Information received only recently reveals that Australia 's attitude has also changed for the better with regard to East Timor 's future .
The aim must be to cautiously set the scene for a national referendum on the future of East Timor .
I would like to ask Commissioner Marín whether European policy on East Timor is becoming more active on specific issues .
For example , would it be conceivable to have an East Timor office in the European Union , in the same way that the Americans have a Kosovo office ?
It would not need to be a fully-fledged diplomatic mission if the matter were deemed too delicate .
Secondly , I would like to stress that the forthcoming parliamentary elections on 7 June in Indonesia require European Union Member States and the Union itself to undertake to send people as observers , not just parliamentary observers but observers from voluntary organisations too .
Finally , I wish to inform you that on behalf of the East Timor Solidarity Group I am at this very moment engaged in negotiations with the Indonesian Government so that Members of Parliament might send an unofficial delegation to East Timor .
Western Sahara
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are witnessing a slow process of progressive pacification in Western Sahara .
It is probably still too early to be able to say that we are optimistic about the outcome , but we cannot fail to welcome the start of the referendum process which may mean the achievement of self-determination for the people of that region .
So it is vital for the European Union to urge the Moroccan Government and the Polisario Front to cooperate fully with the United Nations in the holding , without further delay , of a free , fair and impartial referendum on self-determination for this region , which has witnessed so much fighting and suffering in the past .
Mr President , the European Union stands for democracy , human rights , self-determination , or nothing whatsoever .
There is a real possibility that the United Nations may decide to pull out of illegally-occupied Western Sahara at the end of this month and at this moment in time Kofi Annan is preparing a report to submit to the Security Council by 22 January .
I last had the privilege of meeting him in Algeria in November .
The European Union has been consistent in its support for self-determination and an end to the conflict .
I would like to thank in particular Mr Marín for the work he has done and give thanks for the humanitarian support and for the commitment to logistic support , as we approach a referendum .
We are on the eve of the end of this conflict that has caused so much suffering over 20 years , but we know that the problem today - and this is the view of the United Nations - is that Morocco is yet again up to its tricks of trying to delay and to block an agreement .
Morocco - present again of course in the gallery - cannot be bothered to have meetings with certain people in the European Parliament but is very effective in lobbying , in corrupting and even in acts of burglary in this building .
It is Morocco which is holding up a peaceful resolution .
We in the European Parliament can do even more .
I expect even more from you , Mr Marín - you know so much about this issue and you have been open to dialogue with Morocco and the Polisario Front .
Do not let the people of the Western Sahara down .
Let us make sure that we are fully behind the United Nations and the commitment of Kofi Annan and James Baker and that we can see an end to this conflict .
Mr President , one difference between Angola and the Western Sahara is that there is a cease-fire in the Western Sahara .
A cease-fire , however , is still a step short of peace .
One of the last colonial conflicts is being waged there .
Since the Spaniards withdrew and the Moroccans occupied the country , this means that the old colonial policy has become Europeanised , and I therefore believe that the European Union has an obligation here and a responsibility for this part of Spain 's colonial history .
The people who were forced to flee their homes have been living for decades in refugee camps .
For years , Morocco has vetoed the idea of a referendum , which is why the discussions on the Western Sahara have had a certain sameness over the years .
Now , apparently , the UN wishes to guarantee that the referendum can take place in December 1999 .
That was what we had hoped for , we expect it to take place this year , and Kofi Annan seems to be emphatic about this , as his last visit to the region showed .
This means that we in the European Union are now in demand too and will have to give this process decisive political and logistic support .
We call on Morocco to refrain from obstructing the registration of electors and to stop evading the issue .
It would even be appropriate to encourage direct negotiations between the Sahrawi people and Morocco .
We call on the Council - and the Austrian Presidency gave many encouraging signals in this matter - to ensure that the referendum is guaranteed and that the humanitarian aid is continued until then .
I think we also need observers in the Western Sahara during the run-up to the referendum , not just when it takes place .
We ask the Commission to make the necessary resources available so that the referendum can be guaranteed and the humanitarian aid continued .
One approach we could use relates to the forthcoming fisheries agreement with Morocco , which could be linked to the holding of the referendum .
Whatever its outcome , the Commission and the Council - the troika - should guarantee that , along with the UN , the European Union will provide the necessary security for the referendum to take place .
That is my plea to the German Presidency of the Council .
Mr President , once again we can see just how sensitive this House is towards the issue we are dealing with , and the active role being played by the United Nations on the ground .
There is also significant humanitarian aid being donated , and this should continue .
However , while we are aware of this reality , a mirage is appearing in the sand dunes of the desert : the mirage of the referendum , a referendum that is seemingly never going to be held .
In spite of this , we must prevent feelings of impatience on the part of the United Nations , the international community , the Polisario Front and the Moroccan Government .
And we must avoid such impatience so as not to leave any deep-rooted problems behind , problems that could lead to future conflicts or a permanent state of guerilla warfare .
Therefore , Mr President , we hope that a referendum will be held soon and that its results will be accepted by all .
Mr President , we can welcome the fact that the Secretary-General of the United Nations has personally taken on the matter of Western Sahara .
In November and December he went to the area , and following his meetings with the parties in the conflict , he put forward a set of recommendations in order to break the deadlock in the peace process and to implement the Houston agreements .
The Polisario Front agreed to implement all of these proposals which come as an indivisible package .
However , the Government of Morocco is still rejecting them .
As a result of these blocking manoeuvres , it is responsible for holding up the implementation of the peace process .
The United Nations Security Council has also recognised this .
In its resolution of 17 December , it welcomes the agreement of the Polisario Front and urges the Government of Morocco to implement the United Nations settlement plan .
We are now in the home straight of the referendum process .
In order to ensure that it is carried through , that it is to the holding of a referendum on self-determination in December 1999 , we have to frustrate the attempts by the Government of Morocco to block the process .
The Council and the governments of the Member States can contribute to this by playing a more active role in ensuring the success of the peace process , especially by using all the means they have available to persuade the Government of Morocco to implement the proposals put forward by the Secretary-General of the United Nations in their entirety .
Could the Council not also define a common position , as was requested by the European Parliament on 10 March 1998 , or at least adopt a declaration expressing its support of the United Nations ?
We need to support the compromise resolution in order to send a signal to the Council and to the governments of the Member States and to support the efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations in ensuring the success of the referendum process .
This referendum , which will finally allow the Sahrawi people to express the right to self-determination and independence , is the most appropriate democratic means of finding a fair and lasting solution to the problems of decolonisation in Western Sahara .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish that the President-in-Office was also here to listen to this debate .
I am not going to remind the Commission of something it is already aware of : the importance of the Security Council meeting and the latest resolution , which , in reality , Mr Fabra , already reflects a degree of impatience on the part of the international community .
It is true that we can be patient , and indeed the Sahrawi people have been patient , as they have been waiting endlessly for this referendum to be held .
This is a very delicate situation . On the one hand , we are faced with the suffering of the Sahrawi people , while on the other hand , as a previous speaker pointed out , we know that this cease-fire may be limited .
In light of this resolution , which was unanimously supported by the Security Council , we are calling on the European Commission and the Council to do the same . We want the Commission , Parliament and the Council to clearly set out in one document - in a resolution - their support for the Secretary-General of the United Nations and for the efforts being made .
I would also like to remind you of what the Security Council says and what we are all aware of : the Polisario Front has already accepted all the measures being proposed by the Secretary-General , and is also responding to the Houston agreements and the Secretary-General 's proposal .
We also know that Morocco is continuing to put the matter off , and is apparently still trying to wear down the people and exhaust the patience of the international community .
Commissioner , we are very close to Morocco and we respect and admire its people and its government . We must say to the government - in a friendly but firm manner - that it has to accept the peace plan , that this situation cannot continue .
This is one of our neighbouring countries and it is situated close to the European Union . All the efforts made should be dedicated to helping the development of the Moroccan and Sahrawi people .
Mr President , I believe we all want peace in the Western Sahara , and for that reason we probably all support the purpose of this resolution .
I must say , however , that I personally would have preferred this parliamentary resolution to be tabled after the Security Council resolution .
But let me say that it is surely not enough for everyone to point the finger at Morocco and to blame that country for all the delays .
We should perhaps correct certain fallacies that have even gained currency here in Europe .
If we talk about the people who are entitled to vote in the referendum , we cannot simply exclude those who have been living in what is now the Western Sahara for a good deal more than ten years and who have effectively earned their right of residence .
After all , there is also a great deal of discussion today in the various Member States of the European Union about the specific rights that people acquire by living in our countries for a certain length of time .
These people cannot simply be excluded from a referendum ; similarly , those who are living in the refugee camps in Algeria must also be enfranchised .
But allow me to add a very brief historical footnote , since there is so much talk here about colonialisation , recolonialisation and so on .
The territory of the Western Sahara belonged to Morocco for many centuries before it came into Spanish possession .
I could not let that go unsaid .
Mr President , during the last part-session we held a debate with the Council after 10 Members asked an oral question .
I believe that it is necessary to repeat here some of the things that we said at that stage to the Council .
Firstly , what is lacking here is any sign that the European institutions are playing a visible role in the resolution of this conflict .
There is humanitarian aid ; there is a presence , but it is only relative .
From what we understand the United States has a greater presence . The conflict in the Sahara is more closely linked to the European Union and certain EU countries than to the United States , yet it has a more obvious presence there than we do .
Secondly , and in spite of what Mr von Habsburg says - although I have great respect for him - it is Morocco that has been putting up obstacles to the referendum . We must be clear on this point once and for all .
I would remind you that , in principle , Western Sahara only accepted the Spanish census with an increase of 10 % , and now the Sahrawi people , in the latest proposal by Mr Baker , have accepted another 65 000 potential voters .
Yet Morocco is still putting up obstacles .
It seems as though the referendum is going to be delayed by another year , but this year is crucial .
It is crucial because we must ensure that there are no further obstacles in the path to a fair referendum that will provide an important boost for a brave and valiant race which , under terrible conditions , educates and cares for the health of its people .
Therefore , the European Union should set an example and try to resolve the conflict or help to resolve the conflict , and not leave Mr Baker and the United Nations to work alone .
It should also support the United Nations so that Morocco does not continue to obstruct the resolution of the conflict .
Mr President , I want to express the full support of my group for the compromise resolution , but above all full support for the referendum process in progress in Western Sahara and for the undertakings given to the United Nations by Morocco , the Polisario Front and the individuals involved at this time in this fragile part of the world .
Naturally I would urge Members of this Parliament not to start immediately identifying the guilty and the victims in what is an ongoing and , I admit , difficult process . This is an unfolding situation which calls for close international attention , but we do not need to intervene with greater force than is actually called for by the current problems .
I confirm the full support of our group .
Mr President , Commissioner , what we are seeing here is a clear imbalance between Parliament 's insistence on the issue of Western Sahara and the Council 's silence .
Several months ago , we approved a proposal for a recommendation and in December we held a debate with more than 10 questions .
Today , we are discussing a motion for a resolution that has been signed by practically all the groups in this House .
In spite of this , the Council is maintaining its position of principle - which is important , yet easy - by saying that it supports the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara and the United Nations resolution . But it does not dare to take the necessary second step : helping the Secretary-General to carry out his work to ensure that the Security Council resolutions are applied , in this case by organising and holding a free referendum on self-determination within the time specified .
How can we help the Secretary-General ?
In my view , we can help by stating which party is putting up obstacles and preventing the international legal provisions from being fulfilled .
And today that party is clearly Morocco .
I therefore believe that the Council should be aware that political pressure - along with cooperation - is essential to ensure visibility in this conflict and to help put an end to this situation .
Trafficking of children in Guatemala
Mr President , international gangs in Guatemala are earning dirty money from the illegal trafficking of children .
It is , of course , entirely unacceptable and action must be taken to combat this inhuman abuse of poverty .
I think it is a pity that a recent UNICEF ' fidadigna ' report is not mentioned in the resolution .
The government of Guatemala must ratify the relevant international conventions as soon as possible , and the Union must bring pressure to bear on Guatemala to ensure that it does .
What sort of government would allow its own citizens to be bought and sold ?
The Union must ensure that a careful watch is kept for Guatemalan children at the receiving end , so to speak , and it must also support the aid projects for statutory adoption programmes in Guatemala itself .
In this the tenth anniversary year of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , measures to protect children should be given maximum publicity and should be our very top priority .
Mr President , the previous speaker described just how serious this situation is , and I would like to add the following points .
I think that if we do not do whatever we can about the situation in Guatemala , the problem will spread to other countries .
The threat is already there .
There are other countries where we need to be on our guard , particularly at the moment in Eastern Europe .
However , I am happy enough with the compromise text , because this is a specific issue of which we have a fairly clear picture , no matter how great the scale of the problem , and the Commissioner and his officials can now try to do something about it through their contacts with the Guatemalan government .
The organisation that we mention , Casa Alianza , and its leader have revealed what is going on and are now themselves under threat .
The organisation and its workers , particularly Bruce Harris , deserve Europe 's support .
I too regret that the UNICEF report is not mentioned , and I would add that I am also sorry - I think the liberals had something to do with this - that the resolution does not mention what I said in my original text about the need for DNA testing .
The United Kingdom already requires adoptive parents to prove that it was the child 's legal parents who gave it up for adoption .
At the moment bogus mothers and other poor women are being paid to go to an embassy and say that they want to give their child up .
Other mothers hand their children over themselves .
A DNA test such as the one the UK requires clearly shows whether it is the child 's real parents that are giving it up .
I would therefore call for this DNA test to become a Europe-wide requirement .
Mr President , trafficking in children in Guatemala is a lucrative business .
A veritable Mafia kidnaps children , persuades poverty-stricken women to hand over their children , forges birth certificates and sells the children abroad .
Even a notary public has the power to authorise adoptions .
Prices of 15 000 to 20 000 dollars per child are not unusual .
Under the Guatemalan penal code , trafficking in children is not a crime and does not carry a penalty .
All the countries in the region have amended their laws in recent years in order to eliminate this inhuman and exploitative practice , but Guatemala has not yet taken that step .
It is now high time it did .
Guatemala must also proceed without delay to ratify the Hague Convention on Inter-Country Adoption and must meet its obligations under the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child by promulgating its Juvenile and Adolescent Code .
Adoptions are sometimes a valid last resort , but the child should remain as close as possible to its cultural and geographical roots .
Adoptions , however , can never be a contribution to development aid , because development aid means creating the conditions in which children can grow up in their own countries .
I urge everyone to bear that in mind .
Mr President , once again we have cause to speak on the fate of children in the world .
Today we are discussing the adoption of Guatemalan children .
There is certainly no question of condemning international adoptions , but of considering the conditions in which they are carried out .
In this respect , Guatemala has become a real baby-trafficking location , so that in 1997 it was estimated that more than two thousand children were sold at a price of 15 000 to 20 000 dollars .
It is not difficult to imagine how such a lucrative activity could give rise to abominable practices on the part of the traffickers , who will stop at nothing to protect their dubious trade .
They will therefore not hesitate to intimidate or even threaten those who seek to reform these adoption procedures .
The Member States therefore need to ensure that legal provisions on international adoption are applied , especially with regard to children from Guatemala .
However , above all , we must also encourage the Guatemalan Government to be more strict in dealing with this matter , especially given that hurricane Mitch has recently increased the number of children available for adoption , which means that we should be even more vigilant .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is clear that some people are getting rich through the most despicable and revolting form of trafficking that exists : the trafficking of children .
I believe that the European Union must bring pressure to bear on the Guatemalan Government to prevent this trafficking , and one way of doing this is to help the Guatemalan Attorney General 's Office , which is responsible for ensuring that the adoption procedures comply with legal provisions .
We are in no way opposed to legal adoptions .
We believe that they save many children from an uncertain and terrible fate in some countries . However , I agree with what a previous speaker said that if there were better living conditions in those countries , it would be better for the children to stay in their own country .
In any case , we must prevent the terrible trafficking of children , which is the most despicable form of all trafficking .
Mr President , this problem of the illegal trafficking of children in Guatemala , or children who come from Guatemala , could be on a much wider scale involving many other developing countries .
However , what is certain is that the root of the problem can often be found in the developed world , where there are well-structured and experienced trafficking networks that are involved in the trafficking of children , women and human organs .
I believe that Parliament 's resolutions must always be objective and rigorous , particularly when they relate to friendly countries such as Guatemala . Parliament has frequently recognised the progress achieved by President Arzú 's government in consolidating the peace process , in bringing democracy to Guatemala and in consolidating the rule of law .
It is true that cases involving the trafficking of children have been uncovered in Guatemala .
But this has been happening there for a long time due to the unfortunate decades of civil war that have left behind a high number of orphans . The situation has deteriorated even further as a result of the terrible consequences of hurricane Mitch .
The United Nations mission in Guatemala has the express task of ensuring respect for human rights there , and I believe it is important to highlight the fact that Guatemala forms part of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights .
I am pleased that the Commissioner responsible , Mr Marín , is here this afternoon , and it is only fair that we recognise that , faced with the devastating effects of the hurricane , the European Commission has reacted quickly and effectively .
We hope that it will soon be able to propose a rehabilitation plan for the region in accordance with the Commissioner 's statement .
I therefore want to emphasise once again the need to strengthen cooperation with Guatemala and with all of Central America , and , more importantly , to step up our actions to relieve the suffering of the people and especially that of the children .
Mr President , international adoptions doubled in Guatemala in 1997 : over 2 000 at an average cost of USD 15 0-20 000 .
The most striking thing is that trafficking in children is not classified as a crime under the Guatemalan penal code and even the abduction of children merely carries a sentence of about a year , and that may be suspended .
Furthermore we do not believe international adoption can be penalised because these adoptions , if carried out through the correct channels and with guarantees for the child , almost always offer the chance of a better standard of living .
Nor can we deny that international adoption constitutes an important form of international cooperation .
In expressing serious concern about information reaching us that people working in Guatemala to prevent illegal trafficking in children are being subjected to threats and intimidation , we look to the Commission and the Member States to urge the Guatemalan Government to ensure that adoption procedures are carried out with the proper legal guarantees - national and international - and that the law officers combatting illegal trafficking are protected .
Peace process in Colombia
Mr President , the past 30 years have indeed been dark ones for Colombia , with tens of thousands of people killed , rocketing unemployment and low levels of economic growth that do not reflect the country 's potential .
The drugs barons , on the other hand , are earning a fortune : 80 % of the drugs sold in the US come from Colombia .
President Pastrana has given us renewed hope and has injected fresh impetus into the peace talks .
The last-minute decision of the leader of the FARC not to attend was extremely disappointing .
The Union must , of course , encourage the peace process and make its own contribution to it .
Stability and peace , as everyone knows , are vital to give the economy a fresh boost .
I hope that all our good intentions will bring results here .
I would like to ask the Commissioner a question about the peace process .
A number of ECHO projects are running in the Comunidades de Paz , an organisation of villages that were built a year ago at Apartadó and Rio Sucio in the north of Colombia .
I was there a month ago , and I saw a sign in a field that said ' ECHO is building a hospital here ' .
People there told me that this had been promised eight months ago , but the money had obviously got no further than Bogota .
Bogota is muy , muy , muy , lejos de aqui .
I know that you cannot give me an answer straight away , but perhaps you could think about this , and I will contact you about it later .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating President Pastrana very sincerely on the work he is doing to promote peace in his country . The dialogue held in San Vicente has given rise to real expectations and fulfills the mandate for peace which 10 million people voted for .
However , we must also point out that the FARC has understood the historic importance of the occasion and accepted the challenge to participate in the construction of this new area through dialogue .
We must recognise this , just as we must recognise that there are similarities between President Pastrana 's agenda and the guerrillas ' proposals .
After yesterday 's meeting , the paths towards peace can be seen much more clearly .
Nonetheless , peace has very powerful enemies .
In this case , we must condemn the paramilitary activities and crimes that are taking place .
More than 100 people have been killed with the sole aim of obstructing peace . This is a direct attack on the whole of society .
The will to combat paramilitary activities is crucial in order to make progress .
It is equally vital to wipe out drug trafficking and corruption , and these issues are all on the agenda . However , the most important element is ensuring that the guilty are brought to justice , to ensure that human rights are guaranteed for the entire population .
The paths to peace are those expressed in the mandate from the people . Their voice cannot be ignored , nor can the victims .
The government is responsible for extending and strengthening the rule of law and for protecting those who are fighting for dignity and democratic principles .
However , we can also make certain requests , and I have some of my own .
The first is to ask the guerrillas to free all civilian hostages , and here I would like to thank them for having freed the European development assistant Camino Villanueva .
I would also like to ask the Commission , if possible , to explain how the European Union would be involved in the construction of these areas of peace .
There is hope in Europe and I believe that we here can also provide a response .
Mr President , there can be no peace without human rights .
We had numerous first-hand experiences of that when our delegation visited Colombia in December .
The murders - well over a hundred in number - committed by the paramilitaries have been another horrific reminder of the truth of that proposition .
The paramilitaries are not parties to peace talks .
The paramilitaries are criminal gangs that must be dissolved immediately .
Their members and their paymasters must be brought to justice , and all their helpers in the administration and the armed forces must be summarily dismissed .
Not until the right to life is guaranteed in Colombia will there be hope of real peace .
This means that the warring factions must immediately start to apply the fundamental principles of humanitarianism .
It means that the government must act to protect the victims of the conflict , including more than a million refugees , many of whom are blacks and Indios . No more impunity for lawbreakers !
Reform the administration of justice , particularly the system of military jurisdiction .
Agrarian reform has to be implemented , and economic and social justice must be established .
This is a task for the European Union too .
We should be helping here , instead of competing for pole position in the export markets .
We must pay fair prices and promote regional development , because peace is the reward for completing this process , not the prerequisite for launching it .
Mr President , I can only agree with the words of the previous speakers .
We do have to ask when this circle of violence , murder , kidnapping and hostage-taking will finally end , when the political authorities and the responsible democrats will finally be strong enough to silence the guns and stamp out corruption and drug trafficking .
The Pastrana government - and we congratulate them on this - are using the strength inherent in a new government to open negotiations with the strongest of the warring factions , with all the difficulties this involves .
We can but hope that negotiations with the other groups will follow , that the paramilitary groups as well as the guerrillas will stop the kidnapping , hostage-taking and killing and that the armed forces finally come to realise that their function is not only to defend the power of the state in a military sense , but also to defend democratic and humane practices .
In this respect , not only the armed forces but also , as has been said already , the constitutional State of Colombia - assuming it wishes to become one - certainly still have a very great deal to learn , and we must help them in that learning process .
It is degrading for a country when its name appears at the top of such a blacklist .
But it is even worse and even more horrific for its people .
We call on the Colombian Government to protect the defenders of human rights and shall support their efforts to do so . We shall also support them in their quest for justice and peace .
During our visit to Bogota in December , we also spoke to the UN High Commissioner for Bogota , who has been an extremely courageous champion of human rights .
There was a question mark over the future of her post .
We very much hope that the office of High Commissioner , which is held in high esteem in Colombia , can be preserved , and I should like to ask the Commission whether it is doing everything in its power to ensure that the post will in fact be preserved .
Mr President , Commissioner , I believe that we all welcome the peace proposals , but it is impossible for there to be peace when , as other Members pointed out , more than 100 peasants , including women and children , have been killed indiscriminately in the last few days .
An article I have here by a Columbian who works for Justicia y Paz can express better than we can what conditions are needed to achieve peace in Columbia , and it is not a matter of just sitting down and talking .
He mentions reforming the agricultural legislation so that the land that was stolen from the peasants can be given back to them . He also talks about a law on natural resources , and the fact that four basic needs must be met : housing , health , education and employment .
In other words , vital basic standards must be guaranteed to prevent the situation from continuing in this manner , not only in terms of the murders , but also in terms of a hidden war that would have the same results .
Mr President , since Thursday , 7 January , between 100 and 150 people have been killed in a series of brutal massacres carried out primarily by the AUC paramilitaries .
These were not indiscriminate massacres : the paramilitaries had lists of names - in particular community activists and leaders - and executed the people on those lists .
Many of the victims of the past few days were badly tortured before they were killed and most of the paramilitary attacks were in the north of the country .
So , whilst welcoming the peace talks between President Pastrana and the FARC guerrillas , which began on that day , Thursday , 7 January , we have to condemn the fact that the paramilitaries are seeking to sabotage these peace talks .
The Colombian President has committed his government to taking decisive action against these illegal paramilitary forces .
On Monday , 11 January , Mr Pastrana reiterated the exclusive responsibility of the state to disarm the paramilitaries in his ten-point proposed agenda presented to the FARC .
Yet this has just not happened .
On the contrary , there is well documented and internationally verified evidence of active and ongoing collusion between the Colombian armed forces and these paramilitary groups .
I ask the Commissioner , in closing this debate , whether he could commit himself to making urgent representations to the Colombian Government to discuss the need for immediate and decisive action to be taken against the paramilitary groups to protect the fragile peace process and prevent future tragic loss of life , in particular during the peace talks of these coming weeks .
Mr President , Columbia is a country facing a very difficult situation .
A civil war has been gradually developing there for more than 40 years .
Two significant guerrilla groups control a third of the country and clash with the army on a daily basis . There are many paramilitary groups that are committed to instilling fear among the population by carrying out massacres , and to date they have kidnapped 1 500 people .
Two peace processes have failed in recent years and thousands of people have died .
In the midst of this serious situation , a new opportunity for peace is emerging through an initiative by the new president , President Pastrana .
In my view , this initiative encompasses the feelings of most of the Columbian people .
A group of Members , including myself , recently had the opportunity to get closer to the situation and we met practically all of President Pastrana 's ministers , various social bodies and the main trade unions .
The conclusion I myself reached is that there is a real and genuine desire to achieve peace . I also became aware of just how long and difficult the process will be and , above all , of the need for international support on both political and economic levels .
Our group believes that the European Parliament , and the European Union itself , can play an important role in the peace process in Columbia by adding an international dimension to the support for the process and by providing whatever help might be of use to the parties involved .
Sierra Leone
Mr President , we are dismayed and appalled that the civil war has broken out again in Sierra Leone .
We had hoped that a stable peace could be established between the government and the Revolutionary United Front once the President and the civil government were restored to office in March 1998 .
We should do everything in our power to re-establish peace , and we call on both parties to agree a cease-fire without delay , to open negotiations - and I believe we must support these negotiations - to respect human rights fully and to recognise the international human rights conventions .
For the needy , who always bear the brunt of these conflicts , the provision of humanitarian aid is essential .
We want to ensure that famine does not develop in Sierra Leone and that the refugees in neighbouring countries are cared for , which means that there is a pressing need to conclude a cease-fire in the first instance .
Mr President , everything has already been said in this House about the legitimacy , albeit untoward , of President Kabbah and the illegitimacy of the RUF and the military rebellion .
I will therefore not dwell on these points , and , using Sierra Leone as an example , I would like to make a more general observation concerning a triple failure brought about by unstable countries : that of the UN , that of the OAU and , it must also be said , that of EU diplomacy .
With regard to the UN , if a matter is not sufficiently serious in the eyes of the Americans for it to assert the right to state the rules of international law and to support this with military action , the UN goes from humiliation to rebuff to retreat , and its list of failures , from the UN peacekeepers of the former Belgian Congo to the intervention mission to Sierra Leone , must be a long one .
That list will never come to an end as long as the UN does not have the permanent military resources that it needs to ensure respect of the international law that it is trying to create .
As for the Organisation of African Unity , which is so badly named that it would be better to call it the organisation for connivance between the leaders of African States , it has decided to delegate its powers to regional authorities .
Meanwhile , is it dealing with development or democratic progress that would help reduce the tension ?
Not at all .
Since it was set up , it has been almost exclusively concerned with ensuring the respect of the old colonial borders , thus guaranteeing the continuance of its members ' power structure .
Finally , with regard to the European Union , it must be noted that , in Sierra Leone as elsewhere , it is noticeable by its absence , as it has been unable to attach any real diplomatic influence to its economic aid .
It therefore leaves the way open for the post-colonial diplomacy of its Member States , who have in the past sometimes shown their tendency to fuel crises and , in all cases , their inability to resolve them .
Mr President , in the past few months we have already had to deal with the worsening situation in Sierra Leone on a number of occasions .
In fact , in the course of the last few years , the situation there has steadily deteriorated both politically and in terms of the standard of living of the population .
Because of another attempt by the rebel forces to conquer the country , bloody clashes have again been taking place in the last week , resulting in another thousand victims and making life even more difficult for the civilian population .
In the last few hours news has come through of the abduction of the Archbishop of Freetown , Joseph Hendri Ganda , after Italian missionaries had been taken hostage , one of whom , the Jesuit Father Mario Guerra , is still in the hands of the rebels .

In these circumstances , the first and most urgent requirement , obviously , is to achieve an immediate cease-fire and the release of all the hostages , and to provide for the immediate needs of the population .
The immediate essential is for all harassment of the civilian population to cease and for the aid workers to be able to fulfil their mission .
But at the same time as the legitimate government forces restore order in the country , a start must be made on the more profound work of mediation and national reconciliation which alone can provide a stable political and institutional base for the country and prevent future tragedies .
Here again , the role of the Union must of course be to provide humanitarian aid to meet the urgent needs of the population , including the thousands of refugees in neighbouring countries , and also to take action to promote dialogue , reconciliation and respect for human rights , if necessary through initiatives of its own .
Mr President , Commissioner , and unfortunately in the absence of the German Presidency of the Council , we are all terrified .
That was exactly what the UNHCR observer said about the events in Sierra Leone .
Only recently , we have seen terrible scenes on television . They showed what Foday Sankoh 's rebel forces have described , with awful black humour , as the ' short sleeves ' and the ' long sleeves ' , according to whether they cut off the arms of the civilians - including children and women - just below the shoulder or at the wrist .
There is no doubt that the international community has a responsibility in this matter .
However , the people of Sierra Leone , and particularly the political and military leaders , must find a solution to their own problem .
Efforts are currently being made in this respect .
It has been suggested that the leader of the rebels , whom I just mentioned , be flown from the city where he is imprisoned , Freetown , to Conakry by the Nigerians to take part in negotiations to which he would add the pre-condition of his own release . That would indeed be a surprising turn of events .
But if his freedom meant that his supporters would not act with such brutal cruelty and that the supposedly civilian government - which shoots members of the military junta without allowing them any right of appeal - would not respond in the same way , then some progress would have been achieved .
Two excellent Spanish journalists , Javier Reverte and Alfonso Armada - and I am sure there are excellent journalists in other countries - have recently published very good books on sub-Saharan Africa , and they have asked us all to be understanding .
I believe that we must be understanding , but we must also demand that the armed citizens in Sierra Leone at least behave like human beings .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is extremely important that this resolution has been brought before Parliament , because it may play a part , however small , in re-establishing what is currently lacking in Sierra Leone , as in so many other countries of sub-Saharan Africa , and that is a minimal sense of statehood .
In fact , any semblance of a state has now been lost in that zone .
Armed bands , warlords , arms dealers - and especially dealers in raw materials , which this land is rich in - do as they please , riding roughshod over the most elementary human rights .
It is crucial that the action taken by the European Union should draw attention to the fact that what is most important , even more important than the rule of law , even more important than democracy , is just being a state , so as to contribute to re-establishing at least some of the minimum conditions of civil society .
Mr President , I will go through the debates in the order in which they were held .
I will look firstly at East Timor and Indonesia . The Commission has always supported the democratic process in Indonesia and will naturally provide assistance during the next elections in the form of an overall package .
The details of this have yet to be decided , although it is a subject that is being discussed in the Council , as Mr Bertens is well aware .
On 8 December 1998 , the ambassadors of the European Union troika in Jakarta met President Habibie to gain first-hand information on his plans to implement the measures taken by the People 's Consultative Assembly in relation to the political and economic reforms , and , in particular , its plans to hold democratic , open , free and fair elections .
President Habibie confirmed the following dates : there will be elections on 7 June 1999 and the new members of parliament will be sworn in on 29 August 1999 .
He had no objections to international assistance and monitoring , nor to the presence of international observers during the elections .
As far as East Timor is concerned , the European Union also entirely supports the United Nations initiative to set up a permanent representation of the United Nations in that region .
The European Union has frequently expressed its concern to the Indonesian authorities about the various violent incidents that have taken place in certain parts of East Timor , in which a considerable number of civilians have reportedly died .
A visit to East Timor by the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention is planned for the beginning of February . The European Union also welcomes the creation , in January 1999 , of interest sections that will enable the Portuguese to maintain a presence in Jakarta , with the possibility of free access to East Timor .
The European Union is confident that a final agreement will be reached on the United Nations proposals for a statute of autonomy .
In relation to other East Timor issues , we have informed Parliament on a number of occasions that there is a specific cooperation programme with East Timor , which is , for the most part , implemented through NGOs and the churches in the region .
I will now go on to look at the Sahara , Colombia , the trafficking of children and Sierra Leone . Since it was decided at this morning 's sitting to review the entire working methods of the Commission , the European Parliament and the Council , I am sure I am going to disappoint you , as 90 % of the questions that have been asked should instead be addressed to the Council .
All I can do , in fact , is to repeat what is in the common positions that have already been adopted and that you are all aware of . As a result , I am sorry if I cannot give you an adequate response to the problems relating to Western Sahara , Colombia , Sierra Leone and the trafficking of children .
With regard to Western Sahara , the European Union 's general position is based on the statement by the Presidency of the Council on 29 December last year .
I will therefore pass on Parliament 's concerns to the Council .
As far as the Commission is concerned , we are going to continue to provide humanitarian aid to help the Sahrawi population through NGOs as we have been doing .
We will continue to provide food as well as medical and health assistance for the refugees .
A decision on this was adopted in October 1998 , as you know , and the aid being donated to the Sahrawi people now totals approximately EUR 10 million .

The Commission shares your concerns regarding the serious problems in Guatemala involving the trafficking of children and illegal adoptions .
This is indeed a totally despicable form of trafficking .
We have been following this issue carefully - not only in Guatemala , but also in other countries - and , as far as Guatemala is concerned , a series of specific programmes have been implemented with a view to finding a solution , or part of the solution , for this section of the population .
To be specific , there is a programme in Guatemala costing EUR 2.5 million that acts on three levels .
It is primarily aimed at promoting the application of the Convention on the Rights of the Child , which was ratified by Guatemala in 1989 , in the hope that the Juvenile and Adolescent Code will be implemented .
In other words , the problem is not with the Convention and the Code as such , which we are helping the Guatemalan authorities to develop . Rather , the problem relates to their ability to apply them and their effectiveness in doing so , as is the case in most similar countries .
To make people aware of the new Juvenile and Adolescent Code , staff are being trained and preparations made for the institutions involved , including judges , the secretariat for social welfare , the attorney general 's office , and the institutions responsible for childhood and youth issues . UNICEF is naturally providing a great deal of cooperation on the Code .
Attempts are also being made to ensure that a law on adoption is approved by the National Assembly , as this represents one of the great problems in Guatemala . It is hoped that it will cover both national and international adoptions .
Legal adoption in itself is clearly not the ideal solution for poor families , but it will at least be better to have normal , legal adoptions than illegal ones . In this respect , I would also mention - not only as regards Guatemala , but in general - all the problems related to the trafficking of children , child prostitution and paedophilia , as well as other problems involving third world countries , such as the trafficking of organs .
We need to look at all these issues to gain an overall impression and to deal with them under the principle of joint responsibility .
However , the rich countries are the ones that adopt illegally , that take drugs , that buy organs , and so on . We cannot just look from the North to the South with a critical eye , since we know that the developed countries are the ones that facilitate this type of trade because of their advanced economic and financial situation .
We must therefore redress the balance .
Moving on to Columbia , we will forward your political arguments to the Council and provide details of what the Commission might be able to do .
The Council 's position and thus the European Union 's position is set out in a statement that was made on 8 January 1999 .
I would once again stress that it is very difficult for the Commission to take part in such debates since , apart from telling you what you already know - that we have a Council position , which you will undoubtedly say is of no use - there is very little I can add .
I therefore believe that in the future it would be a good idea for the Council to attend on these occasions so that it can hold a real political debate with you .
As regards the question from Mrs Lenz - and this is indeed a matter for the Commission - Mrs Mazarrasa has informed us that she wishes to leave , as she has been working there for two years .
As you can imagine , human rights work in Columbia is very demanding , and she has therefore decided to leave .
Mrs Robinson came to see us , as a commitment had been made on the part of the European Union to provide the Bogota office with funds for one year only .
Since the human rights situation in Columbia was extremely distressing , we decided to provide funding for a further year and we will have to decide whether or not to continue with this .
I believe that we should because the United Nations , and particularly Mrs Robinson 's office , do not have a great deal of money at their disposal .
So we should provide this funding .
However , I say this very cautiously because , after this morning 's debate , it is not easy for the Commission to take independent decisions . We will therefore keep Parliament informed .
If you agree - and I am sure you will - then we will be able to begin to provide more funds .
We are going to be very meticulous as regards your decisions .
Nonetheless , we must begin to show consistency .
We are approving resolutions that involve expenditure .
And we cannot vote for one thing in the morning and then in the evening call for decisions that involve spending .
I have told you that I agree with the proposal and that we need to continue to provide funding . But from now on , we will have to do so in the way you requested this morning .
I am therefore in favour of continuing to provide funding , and I will put forward a proposal to that effect .
In addition to this , we must look at what we can do to help the peace process .
The European Union as such is not an international player in the process , although it is true that the Commission delegate was invited to the ceremony marking its beginning .
The proposal we made to the previous government , and which still stands for President Pastrana - who is apparently going to visit the European Community soon - involves the implementation of an accompanying policy relating , in particular , either to internal reforms or to displaced persons and refugees . We already have some experience of this following previous conflicts in El Salvador , Nicaragua and Guatemala .
In response to your comments on Sierra Leone , Mr Robles Piquer , the Commission is following events there very closely , particularly the recent fighting between the rebel forces , including the Revolutionary United Front , and the soldiers from the old Sierra Leone army supported by the ECOMOG regional intervention troops .
With other partners , the European Union has condemned the recent attempt by the rebels to overthrow President Kabbah 's legitimately elected government for the second time in two years .
The European Union has decided to give political support to President Kabbah 's government and to all those currently working to resolve this crisis through negotiation . However , as you pointed out , the truth is that the situation is changing every day .
Once the situation has become clearer , the Commission will consider what practical support it can provide to help the peace negotiations .
As regards the Commission 's area of responsibility , that is , the humanitarian situation , I cannot deny that , in view of the circumstances , we have been forced to evacuate all foreign citizens . And as a result , due to the extreme violence particularly in Freetown and its surrounding areas , there is no possibility of providing humanitarian assistance .
I can therefore tell you that the situation in the country is impossible .
The humanitarian aid situation is much better in neighbouring countries such as Liberia and Guinea , where , although the situation is not under control , it is at least somewhat easier to work .
Mr President , there was one point which the Commissioner made that I did not entirely understand .
I very much appreciate what he said about giving his full commitment to Parliament and work .
We will only see the benefit of this in days to come .
However , I do not understand why , when he then gave a list of countries where we want action to be taken , he started talking about budgets .
I think that in the case of Guatemala , for example , Casa Alianza is already being financed by the Commission and is an active member of the European Network on Streetchildren Worldwide , which has also been funded by the Commission in the past , so it should not be a problem .
The Commissioner could ring the delegation there tomorrow and tell them to approach the Guatemalan Government about it .
Mr President , I agree that , as Mr Marín said , a great deal of what we approve here during topical and urgent debates is the responsibility of the Council .
I would therefore like the Presidency of Parliament , which you represent , to explain the situation to me , because we often debate foreign policy issues in these topical and urgent debates , and that is a matter for the Council . Therefore , what can we do as Members of Parliament , or what can Parliament itself do , to guarantee the Council 's presence at these very important debates ?
Perhaps there is a gap in the Rules of Procedure .
If so , I would ask you to make the Presidency of Parliament aware of it so that it can examine this issue and put forward a proposal regarding the Rules to solve this problem .
The Commissioner , I am sure , will allow me to tell him that he is right .
However , I noted that when discussing the various procedural issues ...
The President cut the speaker off
I have been very indulgent but I cannot allow you to go on any longer .
However , I will respond to your point about the attendance of the Council .
The Council is entitled to attend any of our debates and to speak in any of our debates if it so wishes .
There is someone from the Council here taking notes .
There is no one here authorised to speak on behalf of the Council .
But the Council will be aware of our discussion .
Until now there has been no tradition of a representative of the Council presidency being here to speak .
Parliament is free at any time to ask the Council to be present .
If we were to do so I suspect we would have to change the timing of urgencies because no Member State would be able to field a minister at this time on a Thursday .
Mr Marín , do you wish to respond ?
Mr President , when I said that many of the points raised would have been better served by a political debate with the Council , I did not mean to create a dialectical contradiction or highlight the fact that the Council is not here .
This is all being interpreted in a slightly strange manner .
I was not referring to that in any way .
Apart from discussing the common positions and statements approved by the Council , it is very difficult for me to add anything further .
Consequently , I must point out that you have mentioned many political aspects to which I am unable to respond .
That is what I meant .
And since I am unable to do so , I would prefer not to , because these are all subjects that I can refer - or Parliament can refer - to the Council .
But it is the Council that must take the final decision .
As far as Guatemala is concerned , Mrs van Putten , we do have the programme that I mentioned which deals with the children in Guatemala .
However , Guatemala is not the only example of this .
If my memory serves me correctly , I would say that within Latin America the same problem exists in Brazil , where there is another programme , and we also have further programmes for Columbia and four or five other Latin American countries .
With the financial resources we have available , we are first of all trying to implement basic legislation , although this is quite advanced in Guatemala .
Nonetheless , I would stress that the problem is more than just about having legislation ; above all , it is about being able to enforce it .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 5.30 p.m.
Am I right in thinking you have a point of order , Mr Telkämper ?
Madam President , I wanted to take up the suggestion made by the previous President of the sitting , Mr Martin .
There is no disagreement here between the Commission and the Council , or between the Council and Parliament .
I believe the Council should be present , because we parliamentarians have addressed remarks to the Council on several occasions , and it ought to know what we are saying .
If I may give the example of the Western Sahara , the Council 's function with regard to humanitarian aid differs from that of the Commission , for example , and it must be aware of our views .
That is a political necessity .
I would therefore ask you , Madam President , to raise in the Bureau our wish as Members of Parliament that we should be holding a joint sitting on these matters , at which the Commission speaks but the Council is also aware of what is being said .
Yes , Mr Telkämper , I will certainly do that , and I think the Council should indeed be present .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-1096 / 98 by Mr Newens , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the peace process in the Philippines ; -B4-1106 / 98 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the Philippines ; -B4-1147 / 98 by Mrs Lenz and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the Philippines ; -B4-1158 / 98 by Mr Puerta and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the peace process in the Philippines ; -B4-1160 / 98 by Mr Telkämper and Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the V Group , on the Philippines .
Madam President , the European Parliament has long been in favour of a peace process in the Philippines and has in various respects sought to assist this .
Now that an agreement between the government and the National Democratic Front is in force and has been endorsed on both sides , it is important that its proposals are fully implemented and that all consequential steps are taken without delay .
It would appear that goodwill exists on both sides , but some factions which reject the NDF leadership are still not prepared to renounce conflict and a great deal of painstaking work therefore remains to be done if the peace is to be truly comprehensive and lasting .
The issues of human rights , humanitarian aid , land reform and rural development need to be vigorously pursued if the agreement is to be completely successful .
The Commission and the Council - and again we mention the Council - must give full support to this process and we appeal to them on this count .
In conclusion , I call on Parliament to give full and unanimous support to this motion .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , for once we are here in this Chamber , on a Thursday afternoon , to applaud something which actually seems to be good , instead of condemning something dreadful .
The Comprehensive Agreement on Respect for Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law , approved by the Government of the Philippines and the former rebels on 7 August 1998 , is being respected .
Socio-economic projects , development projects , projects to restore full democracy in the country are being approved and it even seems as if human rights may be respected .
So we should not only support this resolution , but we should also study the case of the Phillippines carefully , because it looks like a good example which is worth exporting .
I do not think there is anything further to add except that we must not drop our guard , as support , and not just moral support , from the European Union is certainly still necessary if the process of democratisation is to continue and be consolidated .
Madam President , the Philippines is a country that has a variety of ties with Europe , some of which , unfortunately , have certain adverse repercussions from a European point of view .
Foremost among these is sex tourism , the causes of which lie primarily in Europe .
What we are discussing here is a resolution on the peace process in the Philippines , the process of establishing peace between the government and the National Democratic Front .
This peace process should benefit the people and their country .
The potentially violent disputes must not be allowed to continue ; efforts for peace , social and economic reforms and land reform must come to dominate the political landscape .
Human rights can only benefit from such efforts .
They are part of this process .
At least the people of the Philippines are well aware of the value of democracy .
They are also aware of the value of international humanitarian conventions .
There are many non-governmental organisations in the Philippines - social and church organisations - which care for people and promote peace .
I very much hope that the assistance provided by the European Union will also reach its target there too , for there is a need to mobilise all forces to assist in this complex process in a country which is , of course , already democratic , with a view to reconstructing peace and democracy .
We call on the government and the political parties to intensify their efforts , and we call on the European Union to support these efforts .
May I take this opportunity to say , Commissioner , that I am not sure whether I am entirely happy about your sudden solicitude for the Council .
We are not used to that here .
The point of the question I asked you before , and of many other questions besides , was to ascertain who has a say in the use of EU funds .
That was the point I raised .
Madam President , the peace process in the Philippines has certainly been a lengthy process .
The European Union and Parliament , of course , have also made important contributions to the peace effort .
I can certainly recall visits by several delegations in the EC-ASEAN framework , for example in the early days of Mrs Aquino 's government . At that time we gave strong backing to the process .
There is goodwill on both sides - on the NDFP side and on the government side - as has been said .
We must support and encourage this goodwill .
It seems to me that there are two especially important points .
The first is the monitoring of human rights observance , and the second is the essential land reform .
This takes us back to the institutional conflict between the Commission and the Council .
I believe - and I should like to say this quite explicitly today , Mr Marín - that the Commission has done valuable and significant work with regard to the Philippines .
It is , of course , important that projects are implemented and that there is no possibility of projects being implemented in which human rights are infringed .
But that is a political issue .
The call for land reform is addressed to the Council .
That is why I shall close by repeating my request that you in the Bureau , as David Martin suggested before , should ask the Council to attend these debates , to hear these messages for itself and to organise this new practice jointly with ourselves .
Thank you , Mr Telkämper .
The message has been heard .
Madam President , Commissioner , I welcome the fact that the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and the National Democratic Front of the Philippines have been engaged in building a peace process .
It is particularly pleasing that this has taken place with good faith being shown on both sides and also that they have been addressing political , human rights and social and economic issues .
However , it is a source of regret that latterly this process has slowed down and it is indeed a worrying development .
It is vitally important that this trend is reversed and that we accelerate the progress of the peace negotiations .
An important element in ensuring that this happens , as has already been said by Mr Smith in proposing the resolution , is the role of both the Council and the Commission .
In this context I would certainly like to underline the proposal contained in paragraph 4 of the compromise text , which urges these two bodies to provide whatever support and assistance is necessary to facilitate the peace negotiations .
In underlining that point I would ask the Members of the House to support this particular compromise resolution .
Madam President , at the first meeting between senior officials of the European Community and the Philippine Government , held in Manila in December 1997 , it was decided that the main target of European Union assistance should be the redevelopment and reform of rural areas , issues that affect only the indigenous Muslim population in Mindanao .
As a result , three projects costing a total of EUR 21 million are currently being implemented with a view to encouraging and consolidating the peace process between the Philippine Government and the NDF .
Moreover , the Commission is currently drawing up a project costing EUR 14 million to strengthen the communities affected by the agrarian reform in the four provinces in the centre of Mindanao . Preference will be given in this project to the Muslim and indigenous people in the region 's provinces .
In accordance , too , with the aim of the Philippine Government , the project will be aimed at the Muslim communities , particularly the rebel repatriates who have become beneficiaries of the agrarian reform of approximately 37 communities .
Its aim is to provide assistance to improve the quality of the land , to organise and strengthen farmers ' associations and to supply the basic social infrastructure . It also aims to guarantee water supply , build schools and health centres , promote productivity and undertake projects with minor infrastructures .
This is a summary of the European Union 's participation in the process of rural redevelopment and reform in the Mindanao region . And indeed , it is one of the key elements in the peace process that was negotiated some years ago with the Moro Liberation Front .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-1094 / 98 by Mr Ford and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the relocation of the Xerox Corporation ; -B4-0077 / 99 by Mr Lagendijk and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the relocation of the Xerox Corporation ; -B4-0081 / 99 by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and Mr Pronk , on behalf of the PPE Group , on relocation by Rank Xerox .
Madam President , speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group on the relocation of jobs by the Xerox Corporation , first I should like to apologise on behalf of my co-signatory , Mr Metten , who , because of the delay in this debate has had to return to Holland .
With respect to our resolution let me be clear .
Our resolution deals with the transfer of 250 jobs from Venray in Holland , and over 500 jobs from Mitcheldean in the United Kingdom , to Ireland .
However this resolution is not an attack on Ireland or the Irish ; nor is it an attack on the peace process .
We will be voting in favour of Amendment No 6 tabled by Mrs Ahern and Mrs McKenna which points out that the creation of employment in the Dundalk region is an important support for peace and reconciliation in the border area and welcomes in principle the initiative to create jobs in the region .
The joint resolution on behalf of the Socialist Group , the Christian Democrat Group and the GUE Group deals with two major separate issues .
First is the failure by the Xerox Corporation , an American-based multinational , to adequately consult with the workforce , particularly in Mitcheldean and with local government in both locations .
The company claims they have followed the letter of the law , but testimony from the workforce in Mitcheldean , two of whom were seated in the gallery today , suggests that the spirit of the law suffered from gross abuse .
They - the Xerox Corporation - claim they went through the presentation of a fait accompli in slow motion .
The company told me earlier this week that the consultation started on 7 April 1998 and the final decision was not made until September .
Since that time , however , I have been given a copy of a photograph and a press report that shows a picture of Irish Deputy Prime Minister Mrs Mary Harney with Mr Bill Good , Deputy Managing Director of Xerox , announcing the new plant on 2 June .
The period of genuine consultation was so short that the process was little short of a farce .
I hope the Xerox Corporation , when this resolution is passed , will try again , try harder and try properly .
The second issue we deal with is the more general concern about the possible use of European aid to shuffle jobs around Europe .
We are very much in favour of job creation with a rising 20 million unemployed in the European Union , but Xerox is an example - by no means the only one , by no means the worst and , unfortunately , by no means the last - where , on closer inspection , what are claimed to be shiny new jobs being created turn out to be a mirage .
They are somebody else 's job , kidnapped and held to ransom and eventually sold across Europe to the highest bidder .
The ' somebody else 's jobs ' are devastating families and communities .
In the Forest of Dean , an area with high unemployment , Xerox is the single largest employer .
This is not an appropriate use of Community funds .
This is not an appropriate use of European assistance .
This is not an appropriate use of national assistance .
We should all be clear about this .
Ireland has suffered as much as any .
Fruit of the Loom recently moved on to richer pastures .
We should all learn from each other that getting engaged in this kind of Dutch auction is not the way forward in terms of job creation .
I spoke to Xerox this week .
They have moved a little .
They have at least now agreed to consider applications for job transfer from individuals with appropriate qualifications , which is why we have to reject Amendment No 5 by Mr Dupuis , on behalf of the ARE Group which claims that Xerox is considering such requests .
It is a doubtful claim when the principle was only agreed two days ago .
Xerox is one particular example of an all too common problem .
We have good cause to complain and to protest about this case in particular , but we also have a responsibility to use Parliamentary power to change the rules to protect tomorrow 's victims as well .
Madam President , it is always a cause for deep concern when people lose their jobs and it is perfectly proper and natural to raise matters regarding consultation and compliance with EU regulations .
However , to target the creation of jobs for others , particularly in a region like Dundalk , which needs economic stability to copperfasten the process of peace and reconciliation , is unacceptable .
Therefore I very much welcome Mr Ford 's comments , and the fact that he agrees with my amendment - which states the principle of the creation of jobs in that area - is important .
Relocation concerns the movement of industrial facilities from one Member State to another and is of concern to the EU in so far as state aid or Structural Funds are , or seem to be , fuelling and encouraging such relocation .
Many factors , however , can contribute to a commercial decision to relocate a plant .
In this context , it is a matter of constant criticism in Ireland that members of government , in particular prime ministers and deputy prime ministers , rush to announce decisions before they are properly constituted .
I would criticise Mrs Harney for so doing , if , as was said , she did that at a time in the process when consultations should have been taking place .
However , in Ireland we refuse to be cast in the role of villain because of one or two high-profile relocations in recent years .
We have also been the losers of important projects and significant job numbers .
Structural funds are not a factor in these packages , and the policy that state aid should be recouped if an enterprise relocates has been the consistent policy and practice of the Industrial Development Authority in Ireland .
This is simply a matter of best practice in industrial policy and the correct management of public finances .
Madam President , the reason we have tabled this resolution is not because we want to criticise the way in which Xerox has dealt with its works councils .
We have no such criticisms .
We also do not wish to criticise the way the Irish authorities have tried to make sure they secured this Xerox plant in order to bring jobs to the area .
What we do criticise is that European funding has been able to be used to relocate the electronics division from the Venray plant to a new location in Ireland .
Xerox claims that this is not a relocation , but some staff and part of the company are being moved .
What we want to know is why the Commission agreed that this multinational , which as we know wants to downsize worldwide , should be allowed , either by being provided with a suitable site or with subsidies , to transfer part of its staff to its plant in Ireland .
How can European Union funding , in other words taxpayers ' money , be used to create such a distortion of competition ?
Madam President , this is not a very suitable subject to deal with through urgency .
First of all , most of the investment in Ireland is in entirely new projects and does not involve the relocation of jobs .
The incentives given to Xerox in Ireland comply fully with EU competition policy .
No European money whatsoever has been involved in the project .
So there is a serious mistake there .
The UK gets 40 % of all foreign investment which comes into the European Union .
Are we to have a Commission inquiry into this , with allegations that because it gets 40 % of all investment there is something wrong ?
Recently we have seen headlines in Dutch and Irish newspapers about jet aircraft being chartered to fly workers from the west of Ireland to jobs in the Netherlands because the Netherlands cannot get workers to do this work .
Yet we cannot get enough workers for our own labour-intensive industries in Ireland .
Are we going to ask the Commission to investigate that ?
Please do not be jealous of Ireland because we have had economic growth for the last year or two .
Ireland represents 1 % of the European Union , 1 % of the economy .
The 8 000 net jobs which we gained last year , our best year ever , will not solve the problem in Holland or the UK .
Please , MEPs , do not try to tell your constituents that it is the economic boom in Ireland that is taking jobs out of your constituencies .
That is a total distortion of the truth and an abuse of the urgency procedure in this Parliament .
Madam President , while I welcome the more moderate tone of the compromise resolution , I still cannot endorse it as it implies an unacceptable criticism of Ireland which is untrue .
Should it not be adopted , I am even more opposed to the thrust and the tenor of the Socialist and Green resolutions , nor can I support the EPP resolution .
Structural Funds are not a factor in these type of packages .
Our state aid to industry is reasonable and permissible and has been approved by the Commission .
It is declining in response to our increased development , public expenditure reductions and new European Union rules .
The question of relocation has been discussed in the Industry Council and Commissioner van Miert believes that the existing rules are more than adequate to prevent abuse of state aids and that no further action can be called for by the Commission .
I am proud of our record in securing inward investment .
Many factors can contribute to relocation decisions .
In Ireland we now have a talented and well-educated workforce and a good skills base , and the aid profile of the workforce in Dundalk is right .
We have the language skills and the necessary flexibility , productivity and labour costs .
Our wise investment in telecommunications has enabled us to benefit from one of the most advanced networks in Europe .
I would point out to the British proponents of the original urgency motion that their own Labour Government was the most vociferous when the German Government recently mooted the introduction of a harmonised tax system in the European Union .
How can you call in effect for a realignment of taxes in the Member States while such a move is opposed by your own government ?
The Irish Government has reached an agreement with the European Commission with regard to regulating our corporation tax regime .
Naturally I welcome the Xerox decision to relocate in Ireland and I would urge it to do its utmost to avoid the need for any redundancies .
Madam President , I do not think that we should be surprised at how things have developed .
Certain colleagues in this House have constantly broadened the scope of our urgency procedure .
We have discussed doping , and today we are faced with an even more serious matter , the individual case of a company .
Imagine how many company cases could be brought before this House and would convert it , as it is now , into a Parliament for unions and bosses in which no-one has the documentation and no-one can judge by the evidence .
In this case , there are a number of inaccuracies , and a number of things that are frankly false .
Moreover , we are talking about relocation .
My colleagues should know that , in a single market , it is no longer a question of relocation , but of a choice on the part of companies who have every right to go wherever they please , wherever they feel offers the best conditions for them to produce .
Therefore , as we can do no more than limit the damage , I strongly urge my colleagues to adopt the amendments tabled by the Group of the European Radical Alliance in order to try to set the record straight and not to punish an American company that has done some restructuring in the Netherlands and in the United Kingdom , and which , in addition , has created 1 000 jobs in another country of the European Union .
We should , and we must , congratulate them .
This is why I invite our colleagues to vote in favour of the amendments from the ARE Group and I welcome the fact that there are still Americans who have confidence , who come to invest in our countries and who carry out restructuring when it is necessary .
Madam President , the resolution before us on the relocation of a major company from one Member State to another brings us face to face with a familiar but fundamental problem .
What it boils down to is that huge amounts of money from the Structural and Cohesion Funds can be used directly or indirectly not really to create new jobs , but to attract firms and jobs from other Member States .
To put it bluntly but accurately , it is a sort of organised theft of employment .
I have to say that I do not know enough about the case in question to be able to judge , and I actually think that Ireland in particular has made a huge effort over the last few years to use the European funds intelligently and efficiently , which unfortunately cannot be said of all the other Member States or regions .
Generally speaking , however , the problems of how the European funds are used remain enormous .
There are problems of waste and fraud - as I am sure the Commission will agree - there are problems with the improper allocation of funds , and there are problems with jobs being relocated rather than created .
My province of West Flanders too has similar problems , with the neighbouring province in Wallonia luring firms with the 30 billion francs of Structural Fund money that it has at its disposal .
The Commission knows about this and acknowledges that it is a problem , but up to now it has done nothing about it .
If it is not tackled at its roots , I fear that the time will soon come when the people of Europe will no longer be prepared to show solidarity , and this would be a great pity .
If we want to prevent this , then it is high time we did something about it .
Madam President , most of what has to be said about this issue has been said .
But I would just like to return to the fact that many colleagues are under the misconception that European funds have been used in an unethical way to attract the Xerox Corporation to Ireland .
I believe that what has attracted Xerox and many other high-tech companies to Ireland has been the decision on the part of successive Irish Governments to target education for young people and to prepare them for these high-tech jobs , which has resulted in Ireland becoming an attractive place for the location of such companies .
I should also like to say that I fully understand the anguish , particularly in the UK , of the workforce who perceive this as an attack on their jobs .
I accept their point that they were not given adequate consultation and if there was any , it was a very superficial kind of consultation , which in fact went against the works directive that this Parliament has supported .
That having been said , I welcome the jobs that are coming to Dundalk , a sad black spot that is desperately in need of better development and more jobs .
I hope that we can resolve this in a way that is acceptable to all of us .
Obviously there is not a strong difference of opinion between us here .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
VOTES ( continuation )
We live in an internal market operating within the European Union where there is free movement of goods , persons , services and capital across the territories of fifteen Member States covering a population of close to 340 million people .
However , there is no common VAT system operating within the European Union at this time , and the present lack of uniformity in this regard has led to fragmentation of the workings of the single market operating across fifteen different fiscal areas .
The fact that it is impossible to know about all the VAT provisions in force in the other Member States of the EU means that taxpayers have to operate in a situation of legal uncertainty as well as having to work with various different bureaucratic structures in different Member States of the EU .
VAT is one of the areas covered by the second phase of the SLIM initiative ( Simpler Legislation for the Internal Market ) in which the European Commission has shown considerable interest .
In particular , SLIM has identified the need to bring in simpler VAT refund procedures which would assist business across the European Union in the payment of refunds for the sale of goods or the provision of services .
As part of the ongoing work to improve the common VAT system , the European Commission has put forward proposals concerning the right to deduct VAT costs that have been incurred .
It seeks to change the current system by which traders have to go through exceedingly complex and costly procedures to ask for a refund from the tax authorities in the Member State in which the VAT was incurred .
This will be replaced with a simpler system under which companies can use their regular VAT return to deduct VAT incurred in another Member State .
The proposal also seeks to lay down common rules for the right to deduct VAT on certain categories of expenditure which have an element of private consumption such as food , drink , hotel accommodation and passenger cars .
I support measures which help business prosper and operate more effectively within the territories of the EU .
The European Union must introduce fair and definitive rules governing the common VAT system based on the principle of a single place of taxation and deduction .
I support the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy of the European Parliament which has expressed strong support for a proposal by the European Commission to strengthen international coordination in order to meet the challenges of globalisation and the information society .
The European Commission has examined the problems caused by the interaction between traditional regulation and the requirements of the on-line economy and it tries to identify areas where strengthened international coordination is needed .
It does not propose a specific solution to these questions as such and it does not suggest that global regulation should be introduced for the Internet or that new international entities should be created .
However , I believe that the idea to establish an Internet charter which will be a legally non-binding document setting out internationally agreed objectives and principles in areas such as taxation , liability , jurisdiction and data protection would be a very good idea indeed .
From a European perspective , the main purpose of this charter would be to ensure that European companies and organisations can fully participate in the opportunity offered by the Internet and electronic commerce so as to avoid premature and conflicting regulations and to ensure that the interests of consumers are safeguarded at all times .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy of Parliament is right to endorse the European Commission 's proposal for an international initiative for the Internet and electronic commerce .
Such a document would ensure that a set of internationally agreed objectives be drawn up in close cooperation with other countries , most notably the United States of America , and would encourage simplified regulatory governance of the Internet .
Information technology has made extraordinary strides in recent years and the advent of the Internet has brought the benefits of IT into many homes and businesses in recent times .
The setting up of an Internet charter would be a very sensible idea and one which would be for the benefit of consumers .
The rights of consumers must be of paramount consideration for the European Commission and the European Parliament at all times .
From an Irish perspective I welcome the recent initiative by the Irish Government which seeks to make Ireland the centre of electronic commerce in Europe in the very near future .
The global electronic market requires technical , legal and commercial regulation of a flexible kind which does not prevent the electronic market from developing .
I therefore agree with the Commission that a broad dialogue between the authorities , business , consumers and international organisations is absolutely essential .
For the same reason , I have long supported the creation of an international Internet Charter , and I therefore welcome this proposal from the Commission .
However , I also support the extensions of the charter recommended by the committee , for example to protect the interests of consumers and avoid conflicting legislation , both inside and outside the EU .
Although there are a number of good points in Mrs Larive 's report , we decided in the end to vote against the resolution .
I should like to outline the main considerations that led us to this conclusion .
It is clear from the outset that it is not easy to apply the principles of the single market to commercial communications while at the same time meeting the public interest objectives .
Each Member State has its own rules on the admissibility of commercial communications , and the wide range of laws , rules and practices reflect the diversity of the religious , cultural and social values held by people in the Member States .
So it is more than just a legal problem .
Promoting efficiency is a good thing , but when the need for efficiency takes precedence over ethical and cultural aspects - such as by saying that they do not come within the concept of ' the general good ' - then as legislator you no longer have any means of guaranteeing the necessary respect for fundamental values or of preventing people from being hurt or offended by things said in commercial communications .
The recognition of religious , cultural and social differences in the Member States should therefore be given full consideration in any legislation on cross-border commercial communications .
Recitals D and H and paragraphs 2 and 5 of the resolution call for exactly the opposite .
Finally , it must be seen as an omission that not a single mention is made of the harm done indirectly to the environment by the fact that many commercial communications simply encourage consumerism .
The economic , social and employment benefits derived from postal services cannot be negated or reduced by the rush to free market liberalisation , as there are no guarantees that this move will allow the essential services on cost and universality to continue .
In Ireland the local post offices play a very important role as a contact point for people , especially the elderly .
Also , of all the public utilities , people employed in the Post Office generally live in their working area and contribute to the local economy and community development .
Therefore , it is vital that any moves towards liberalisation will have to be preceded by a full state-by-state evaluation of the economic , employment , social and community effects .
The gradual and controlled liberalisation of the postal services has been underway since the adoption of Directive 97 / 67 / EC .
The Luxembourg Socialists have always stressed the social and economic importance of the postal services and the need to provide quality services .
They also insist on a universal service that is not a minimum service , but one which ensures optimum coverage of the whole national territory .
The Commission had announced that it would present a new proposal on the gradual and controlled liberalisation of the postal services before the end of 1998 , but nothing came of it .
We therefore support the wish of the European Parliament to evaluate the consequences of liberalisation before any further progress is made .
This evaluation must be based on the Commission 's feasibility studies , but also on Parliament 's own analysis , in cooperation with the postal services in the Member States .
It is clear that the evaluation must take into account not only short-term profitability , but also the consequences for employment , the social benefits for all consumers , and efficiency for the economy .
This is the manner in which the Luxembourg Socialists will approach any other moves towards liberalisation on the part of the Commission .
I welcome the resolution on the liberalisation of postal services .
It puts its finger on the causes for concern and the risks which liberalisation could bring with it .
Efficient postal services are a right for all EU citizens and should not fall victim to the whims of the market .
I look forward to becoming acquainted with the various feasibility studies which the Commission has carried out .
Mrs Van Lancker must be congratulated on what has been exemplary cooperation in this sensitive area .
Schengen creates the conditions for freedom of movement which we are seeking .
It is in all of our interests that the Schengen Convention should work effectively , without undermining integrity .
And indeed on these issues there is reason to praise the report .
My concern is the Nordic Passport Union .
In Scandinavia , we have an effective system of freedom of movement , and it is important that this can still be maintained when Schengen becomes part of the Treaty .
This requires better Scandinavian adaptation to EU legislation .
One example is the extradition legislation in Norway .
Other examples can also be found where coordination in Scandinavia is necessary .
The Nordic Council should go through the legislation to find areas which involve Schengen in order to achieve a common Nordic harmonisation .
The police and customs cooperation in Scandinavia , the Nordic Passport Union and the common travel zone between the UK and Ireland are all examples of effective ways of developing freedom of movement which do not involve creating more police controls than in other countries .
The legislation in the Nordic countries is not uniform , but there is a significant degree of approximation .
This shows that such approximation could also take place at European level , in step with the increase in day-to-day interaction between the Union 's citizens , thereby also strengthening our common sense of identity and culture .
Legal approximation between countries must always be handled very carefully .
However , it is clear that this is needed within the Union .
It would make living together in the Union easier .
It has been possible to detect a certain north / south divide in the concept of right and wrong in the debates this week , as far as irregularities in the Commission are concerned .
Approximation between our countries with regard to a concept of justice would be welcome , exactly as has taken place in Scandinavia .
Finally , I would like to thank the presidency for its kind words about my reports on organised crime , especially the latest on preventative measures , which I hope will be able to provide a stimulus towards developing a common approach to legal issues .
Madam President , the recommendation that the European Parliament has just adopted on Schengen cooperation calmly states that ' the countervailing police and judicial cooperation measures cannot therefore under any circumstances ' - I stress , under any circumstances - ' take precedence over consolidation of this area of freedom and security and continuing to ensure the free movement of persons . '
In other words , the free movement of persons is a priority and the countervailing security measures must , in all cases , take second place .
This astonishing statement sheds a very dangerous light on Articles 61 onwards of the Treaty of Amsterdam and could be sufficient cause for France to halt the ratification of the Treaty in order to find out more .
In particular , we would find it intolerable if the Council working group , which is currently considering the division of the Schengen acquis between the first and third pillars , were to block the Schengen safeguard clause .
This clause must be introduced in its current form and without the slightest restriction into the first pillar , notwithstanding the recitals of the Schengen Protocol , which , absurdly , seem to state the contrary .
If necessary , the French Government will have to go as far as using force on this issue , as it is so crucial for the security of our fellow citizens .
I would like to conclude by expanding a little on this .
For a week now , in the debates on fraud , we have been hearing the Commission say that if everything is going badly it is because it is overloaded with tasks that it does not have the resources to undertake .
Now , the recommendation on Schengen that we have just adopted after the Amsterdam Treaty demands that an unthinkable number of new tasks be transferred to the Commission , from the international criminal networks in Naples to tracking down illegal immigrants in the suburban areas of France .
Do we not think , by any chance , that things are already going badly enough ?
Justice and home affairs issues should be dealt with first and foremost by the national parliaments .
We do not support the Schengen rules and their incorporation into the Union framework , which will deprive Member States of their right to take direct decisions on several justice and home affairs issues , such as those involving visas and asylum .
Cooperation in the fight against crime is necessary .
This should primarily take place between the national police authorities and Interpol , and not by building up a competing European police organisation , Europol .
The reason why cooperation in the field of justice and home affairs has not progressed more quickly probably lies in the fact that these issues are national ones and should therefore be decided at national level .
However , cooperation in distributing flows of refugees in the event of crises is desirable .
Schengen is supposed to be about the free movement of persons .
However , only a few articles deal with freedom of movement , while most of the Schengen rules are concerned with border and security controls .
The register of persons which is being built up around Schengen is unacceptable , and violates personal integrity .
Schengen could also lead to a less generous refugee and asylum policy .
The whole Schengen system must be revised .
Schengen could also have an adverse effect on the Nordic Passport Union , and we have therefore voted against the report .
Protection of families and children
The next item is the report ( A4-0004 / 99 ) by Mrs Hermange , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the protection of families and children .
Madam President , Robert Debré , the renowned pediatrician , used to say that our children are our eternity .
Now , in the construction of Europe , children and families are the ones who are most forgotten in the mechanisms that are being put in place for cooperation and solidarity .
This is unacceptable , as our children face particular risks such as road accidents , drug addiction , sexual abuse , stress at school , illiteracy , instability , and paedophile networks .
It is also unacceptable that 250 million children worldwide are at work , and that we in the developed countries buy , at a low cost , some of the products made by those same children .
It is unacceptable that more than a million children are used for prostitution and for the perverse satisfaction of western tourists .
It is also unacceptable that some families are tormented by distress .
While we were having what is certainly an important political debate these last few days , a few Members among us have been considering a very delicate matter , that of the Lancelin-Tiemann affair in which children were kidnapped by their father because procedures are not harmonised between two countries .
This is why , on behalf of the committee , I am presenting to you today an own-initiative report which has the sole objective of instigating a real political will to create a global approach to family policy based on giving the priority to children and on four principles : taking account of the diversity of family models , placing children at the heart of the European debate , going beyond the socio-economic approach of policies geared solely to benefits , and respecting equal opportunities for men and women .
Firstly , this approach means , as in the first measure in the report , drawing up family impact statements geared to the well-being of children to accompany all proposals for Community acts .
Secondly , at an institutional level , a series of measures should be implemented as quickly as possible , notably the extraordinary European Council meeting in order to debate the consequences of the demographic , family and child protection policies pursued by the various Member States . There should also be regular debate on family affairs and children in the Council of Ministers , and the unit within the European Commission that is devoted to those policies should be restructured .
In this respect , I would very much like the European Commission 's inter-departmental group on matters related to childhood to be revived , especially as there are particular problems with the legal basis for budgetary headings concerning children .
I would also like to point out that , in order to implement this European strategy , I advocate the adoption of guidelines for action in favour of children drawn up with the partners in government after consultation with Parliament and in close collaboration with family organisations and solidarity organisations working directly or indirectly to improve the social integration of children in Europe .
With regard to child protection policy , certain proposals should be highlighted .
In the field of health care policy , we want to set up a European perinatal epidemiological network composed of regional perinatal surveillance units for each set of data and a common European perinatal database , which is something that urgently needs to be put in place in order to combat infant and maternal mortality .
With regard to parenting and education , which is a serious problem nowadays , we must implement strategies for relations between mothers and children from a very young age . Also , the establishment of schools for parents and out-of-school associations , which will improve children 's integration into social life , should be encouraged .
In the field of prevention and of protection from danger in childhood , I would like to encourage the Member States to appoint children 's ombudsmen with the task of reaching an amicable settlement in conflicts involving young people under the age of 18 .
Finally , in order to prevent ill treatment and violence , I propose the creation of a European centre for children in danger , which would have the task of promoting the exchange of know-how and making available a European register of children who have disappeared and of culprits who have received sentences , drawn up in cooperation with the national police and judicial authorities and Europol .
Also , events that are unfortunately too frequent highlight the need to design , on the basis of the consideration currently being given to the European judicial area , a coordinated mechanism among our countries in the area of family law , for the well-being of our children .
These , Madam President , are the main measures that I would like to submit to the House .
On 24 November last year , the Committee on Women 's Rights unanimously supported my opinion .
The committee feels that pursuing a family policy at European level is impossible and undesirable for the following reasons .
Firstly , family policy is typically one of the areas where the principle of subsidiarity applies .
The Member States do not need the Community in order to have an efficient family policy .
Secondly , there is no definition of a European family , nor do we need one .
Differences in culture and tradition make it impossible to find a common basis for formulating proposals for such a policy .
The Committee on Women 's Rights is therefore against the rapporteur 's proposals calling for a European Council of Ministers on family policy , and all the other proposals for a special family policy at European level .
All that Europe can be responsible for is ensuring that , when new policy measures are introduced , account is taken of their effects on the situation of families in the Member States .
More European interference in the family could mean that families would suffer . The Committee on Women 's Rights agrees with the rapporteur 's proposals regarding the protection of children and their rights , provided that they are consistent with the existing international legal framework and that they are cross-border measures .
The Liberal Group is against any European interference in family matters , and will therefore support only those paragraphs that are aimed at providing better protection for children .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at the start of my speech I should like to thank the rapporteur for her willingness to compromise , because that is the only reason why the House has now been presented with a report that we in the Socialist Group are able to support .
We undoubtedly had problems in the initial stages , because I need hardly say that many things have already been decided here by Parliament in a similar manner .
But we also had problems because Mrs Hermange 's first version incorporated many elements of social policy that were completely unacceptable to us , such as the expression ' Europe without Europeans ' or the suggestion that Europe was committing suicide by letting its birth rate fall .
These and other misleading statements certainly made us have serious doubts at the start of the process .
There was also the fact , of course , that our committee became embroiled in an decidedly impassioned discussion on the enshrining of the traditional family model .
I shall return to that in a moment .
And then suddenly we had a number of amendments from other committee members which would have totally distorted the report ; moreover , I have to say that the committees asked for an opinion did not exactly make things any easier for us .
The Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs even changed draftsmen , one draftsman having tried to refer the entire matter back on the subsidiarity issue .
That was not the position of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
It is our view that the family is definitely a matter which the European Union is competent to deal with politically at European level .
What is more , we in the European Parliament are a more suitable forum than national parliaments for the discussion of this issue , since everywhere in the Member States there are ideological battles about the concept of the family , about what does and does not constitute a family .
We in the European Parliament , with the mutual tolerance and respect we practise , are undoubtedly in a position to reach agreement on a modern family model , thereby setting an example for this debate in the Member States .
Before I move on , let me examine some aspects of subsidiarity .
I do not share the previous speaker 's view that the subject under discussion has nothing at all to do with our area of responsibility .
Of course , I would not wish to interpret our remit too broadly , because the family should naturally be first and foremost a matter of national and preferably local government policy .
But as we know , policies on the family are also invariably associated with issues of sexual equality , which makes them a partly European responsibility .
Let us recall the guidelines for 1999 , which include a new pillar specifically dedicated to equal opportunities , and the call for modern forms of work organisation .
What else does that mean but giving women and men , fathers and mothers , new opportunities to combine work with family responsibilities through changes in the organisation of workplaces and social structures ?
This position , incidentally , has also been adopted by the European Court of Justice , which has delivered several relevant judgments on subjects such as part-time work and equal pay .
This is another argument in favour of the European dimension .
We jointly adopted the European legislation on parental leave , which is another contribution to a modern , enlightened policy on the family .
The fact that the amount of parental leave taken is so unevenly distributed between men and women in Europe should , I believe , provide some important food for thought in the Member States .
Let me mention just three statistics : 30 % of all parental leave in Sweden is taken by fathers , in Germany the figure is 3 % , and when the data were collected in Greece , only three men - yes , three men - were on parental leave .
That too is an indication of how we in Europe can learn from each other .
Let me finish with a point which is of great importance to me , a point that should stir us into action .
We have legally guaranteed freedom of movement for employees in the European Union , and that naturally extends to their families too .
For that reason and because of the single market , we have a duty - a shared duty , of course - to pursue a European policy on the family .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I really do not understand why some Members are citing violation of the subsidiarity principle as their reason for wanting to vote against this report .
I really cannot identify any such violation .
What could be more important to us than our children ?
That is precisely what makes this report necessary .
The subject is so wide and touches on so many areas that several reports ought actually to have been devoted to it .
The term ' family ' is not a purely national or European one , but is a worldwide concept which means many different things to many different people .
The only thing I am sure of is that we can talk of a family when children have been born and are being brought up .
The subject can be described as European in scope , because families in Europe are in similar situations and have similar problems .
There are two reasons why it is very important that Europe should provide answers here .
The first is that Europe is growing old and grey .
This has critical repercussions , and not just on social security systems .
The second is that Europe is becoming lonely .
There are an increasing number of one-person households and elderly people living alone .
Our society is becoming perceptibly more individualistic .
The weakest link in the social chain , namely our children , are being exposed to more and more dangers .
Television and the Internet without frontiers are bringing repulsive material into our homes .
Organised criminals have long been aware of the potential of children .
The report deals with the protection of families and children .
Both need protection and support .
My last point relates to a welcome development , but one which has extensive ramifications .
More and more women in Europe are going out to work and have to be able to juggle their occupational and family responsibilities .
These developments have momentous repercussions , which must be reflected in political decisions .
Europe has to provide answers here , because families are far more important than we tend to realise .
We speak so often of social exclusion ; the family is the most natural remedy .
Where does a person spend the most important years of the social integration process ?
In the family !
What is the most suitable framework for the care of elderly and disabled people ?
The family !
To express this in a simple formula , social policy begins with a policy on the family .
In the age of the euro and the single market , the term ' welfare ' must not be entirely reduced to the growth of the gross domestic product .
The family is an essential element of quality welfare .
It is of inestimable value to us . At this point , let me thank the rapporteur once again for her constructive cooperation and for this excellent report .
I hope that these ideas are followed up and that the report does not turn out to have been a mere paper exercise .
Madam President , much of what has been said here makes good sense .
The basis of a secure environment for growing up is often an upbringing in a secure family .
However , families can look very different .
They may have two parents or a single parent , which is often the case around Europe today .
It is of course important for each of us in our own countries to ensure that people can combine work with shared responsibility at home .
There are many dividing lines and differences between children 's chances of growing up in secure conditions .
Not only are there the differences between families , but also substantial differences between large towns and rural areas .
In rural areas , isolation is often a major factor in making children feel insecure , which we must of course combat by establishing more secure conditions for growing up by means of various kinds of support .
Poverty , exclusion , the more demanding pace of work in our modern world and , not least , unemployment all have a strong effect on children .
With 18 to 20 million unemployed people in Europe , our children are naturally affected .
It is therefore important to ensure that we can give them the security which enables social problems to be avoided in the future .
Several speakers have already mentioned this .
However , we in the Liberal Group believe that it is going too far to propose that the family ministers should meet regularly , that there should be a special unit within the Commission for family affairs , and perhaps a directive on childcare .
These are issues which first and foremost concern the most private of all areas , the close relationship between parents and children .
This should be handled within the family and in communities , in other words close to home .
These are communal , social , regional and national issues .
In Sweden we have a children 's ombudsman , which works extremely well .
It is something we can imagine other countries introducing too .
The task of the children 's ombudsman is to look after the rights and interests of children .
However , this is hardly something which should be regulated through a European family policy .
It is clear that a major effort is required to combat violence against women and children , which is increasing precisely because social circumstances are difficult for many people today .
Such problems stem from a hard working life and high unemployment .
Crisis centres are needed . These already exist in Sweden and the Nordic region , as well as elsewhere .
We have talked about the sexual exploitation of children .
Obviously this must be combated , but it should be done by proper methods at the proper level .
One thing which I believe we can do together here is to ensure that , in the negotiations with new Member States , we oppose in every way the abuse of children and the trafficking in children which is taking place , with children being exported from Eastern Europe and non-European countries .
From a Liberal perspective , we would like to say that all of this is extremely important and has to be addressed .
However , it must be done in a proper way and in the proper place .
Family policy , childcare and raising children are first and foremost national issues which should be dealt with at national level .
We must draw a line between what are children 's rights and what are private matters of family policy and childcare .
As elected representatives , we have an obligation to protect children through such things as the Convention on the Rights of the Child .
This is essentially a good report , but we cannot support the proposals designed to introduce a European family policy .
Madam President , it is fortunate that we have reports to discuss in this House like the Hermange report , and I would say the same about the Sainjon report that we adopted yesterday .
It is fortunate that this House still finds time to discuss these matters and to adopt resolutions like those resulting from these reports , on which the rapporteurs must be congratulated .
It is fortunate that in discussing these reports and adopting these resolutions , we can find justification for some of the reasons for our presence in this House , having deserved - if this is what we deserve - the vote and representation of our voters .
Notwithstanding our general agreement , this does not mean that we have no comments and reservations to make or that we totally agree with the motion for a resolution tabled by Mrs Hermange on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
However , in order to express these comments and reservations , we have these debates which , through everyone 's contributions , aim to improve what would already be satisfactory .
We do not totally agree with this proposal , not just due to the precise terms chosen but also due to the fact that we believe there is an omission or an aspect that is not sufficiently developed in the report .
We feel that it would actually be very appropriate for there to be a closer connection between the subject of the protection of families and children and the social consequences of a specific economic strategy and the interests that this serves .
It is true , as stated by the rapporteur , that ' the reconciliation by mothers and fathers of professional life and family life is a key factor in a modern family policy ' . This same concern can be detected in paragraph 14 .
However , we believe that the extent of this connection is insufficient and that the wording is not totally satisfactory . We have therefore tabled two amendments in order to specifically strengthen this aspect , as we feel it is necessary , and to contribute in a small way to improving the motion for a resolution to be adopted , without causing any imbalance .
We have the honour of being the first signatory of the motion for a resolution on child labour that is contained in this report . We would like to highlight the connection between the deregulation of working relations and the employment of the labour force being made clandestine , the consequences of this for the protection of families and children and the promotion , tolerance and concealment of child labour .
Our other amendment involves removing a value judgment from what can only be an objective reference .
Although it can be said that the directive on part-time work has the purpose of allowing , on a voluntary and non-discriminatory basis , improved reconciliation of family life and professional life , it is wrong to state that the directive makes this reconciliation ' easier ' .
Finally , and to end as I started , it is fortunate that we have these opportunities to discuss such matters in this House , but much more is needed .
We need to ensure that the requests , recommendations and demands contained in this motion for a resolution are not ignored or given less importance than the aims that are regarded as more important due to the fact that all political and social action is conditioned by the reactions of the so-called markets .
Madam President , the problem we have in this debate is to know what it is we are talking about when we talk about families .
When I was growing up in Scotland we used to have an event called the Kerr Jaunt .
This comprised two large buses going to the seaside once a year with 150 people aboard .
That was an extended family .
I suspect that when she speaks about the family Mrs Hermange means the nuclear family of two parents : one husband at work , a mother at home looking after one child - indeed , only part of one child , given the birthrate in Europe at the present time .
The truth is that picture of the family is a declining picture of the family .
Families are a very disparate entity across the Union and therefore to try to adopt common social policies , legal policies and economic policies which deal with all families is probably a mistake .
Instead , we have to look for the best practice and best policy to deal with issues which may impact upon the way in which people want to live their lives , bring up children and live together , which varies considerably across the Member States .
Therefore , we need good policies for social security which , for example , include the notion of disaggregation , i.e. the notion of treating women independently from men , in their own right , with entitlements and access to social security , the question of children 's rights , children 's benefits and children 's allowances , which relate to children and the cost of children , to the question of child care and the protection of children and to enshrining these rights .
The Swedish model we heard about from Mr Lindqvist with its children 's Ombudsmen is very good .
All these things are separate in a sense from family policies but may add up to the same thing .
Whether we need the kind of policies at European level that Mrs Hermange suggests is open to question and although I am a federalist , there are areas here where subsidiarity has to operate .
I suspect that many other Members may feel the same .
We may achieve the same objectives by going about it in a different way .
That may be the way we have to approach it .
There is a slight moral overtone in the report , suggesting that single parent families are somehow deficient .
The evidence is very clear from all my social research over the years that where single parent families are properly supported in terms of social security and legal rights and child care , they are just as successful as nuclear families .
We have to encourage and allow that diversity across Europe .
Madam President , it is clear from reading this report that it contains a lot of vague statements .
Politicians are gradually beginning to become aware of the ageing of the population , and we might have expected this report to head off in this direction .
But it would be naive simply to opt for a birth rate policy , particularly at European level .
What we need to achieve is a society in which parents can have as many children as they want and children can develop their full potential .
In our view this is primarily a task for the Member States , the regions and the local authorities , as other people have said .
I would have preferred the report to have dwelt rather less on this point , but I would stress that it is an important task nonetheless .
The report has a rather moralising tone , as if it were telling people what they should and should not do .
Looking at our various initiatives , we can see that there is often a lot more happening than could ever be listed in this report .
The protection of children is still a major concern , and I would point out that various countries still have serious problems here and that European and international measures are needed .
I would simply mention the international networks for the sexual exploitation of children , sex tourism , child pornography and so on .
The international Convention on the Rights of the Child requires reports to be produced at various levels , including European level , on how the convention is being implemented , and I am therefore very pleased with one of the practical measures in Mrs Hermange 's report calling for a specific unit to deal with child protection .
Sweden has already set an example here , and Flanders too has a commissioner for the rights of children .
I shall be putting forward a proposal on this subject to Parliament shortly , but it is still being translated at the moment .
The terminology used in legislation on the protection of children is also something that we should be able to harmonise .
We approved the fight against child labour in the Sainjon report , so we do not need to keep coming back to it in other reports .
I would make a special plea for efforts to be made to track down children who have disappeared and to combat child abductions .
These are international agreements that Europe simply must subscribe to .
Madam President , I congratulate our colleague , Mrs Hermange , for the work that she has done and especially for the very extensive explanatory statement which enables us to consider the family from every point of view and to see how it is in fact at the heart of the reality of European life and how it should be at the heart of all sectorial policies .
Family policy is therefore not so much a policy in itself as a concern that should inspire all those who think about any aspect of economic , social and cultural life in the various countries of Europe .
I will leave the question of discussing a common family policy for the Community for the explanation of vote on 28 January , and I would just like to emphasise certain points that were watered down in the final report that was presented to us due to compromise amendments .
I do think that you were right to stress the need for economic justice for families .
Families are not charity cases for governments and their policies .
No , families are at the very heart of the creation of national wealth .
I think that here we can see a change of mentality to which your report could contribute , but we need to go further .
When we consider the question of the cost of living , we have to take into account those who have family responsibilities and should not take an overly individual , or rather individualistic , view in our calculations .
I would like to conclude with a point that I consider to be very important .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have no hesitations about talking about a political model .
In Europe we are referring to democracy .
We do not hesitate to talk about models when we are discussing social issues .
We talk about the European social model , which combines responsibility , personal initiative and solidarity .
So I must ask why we are so reluctant to mention the existence of a European family model in which men and women , with equal responsibility , in a loving relationship , are capable of engaging with society and with the children that will be born of that union , and of taking on that responsibility .
Madam President , it is very encouraging to see the European Parliament taking an interest in the future of the family as a basic social unit .
Should we therefore also agree on what we mean by a family and by a home ?
The current trends in the development of morals are leading the very concept of the family to be devalued .
I will not expand too much on this subject , as others have already done so before me .
I would simply like to propose going to Brazil , for example , to see what becomes of children there who are from broken or single-parent families .
Protection of the family and of children is a very broad subject .
Today , Madam President , I would like to deal with only one of the many issues , but one that affects just about all children and that has a very profound influence on them .
That issue is violence on television , and I am surprised that this serious problem has not been dealt with in the report .
Here are a few figures : in a week chosen at random , the French weekly ' Le Point ' counted 670 murders , 15 rapes , 848 fights , 419 shootings , 14 abductions , 32 hostage situations and 27 scenes of torture .
Scientists have observed a correlation , and sometimes even a causal relationship , between the violence in the images seen by children and their level of aggression in real life .
Television is indeed guilty of encouraging violence .
Regardless of age , exposure to violence on television leads to an increase in childhood aggressiveness .
There is more and more violence on television .
In the space of 40 years , the number of murders has multiplied by one thousand .
Also , you should be aware that in the days following the portrayal of a suicide , the rate of real suicides among adolescents increases by 13.5 % among girls and 5.2 % among boys .
You will understand , Madam President , why I am particularly surprised that the issue of violence on television was ignored in this report , but maybe that would be touching on commercial interests that are beyond us .
Unfortunately , it would not be the first time .
Madam President , in the context of this debate , I want to express my concern at the totally inadequate cooperation and coordination throughout the European Union in response to the increasing activity of international paedophile groups .
The recent report entitled ' Child Abuse on the Internet ' , along with other research , indicates the scale of paedophile abuse of information technology .
It has recently been revealed that international paedophile groups are targeting child-friendly sites on the Internet to trace potential victims .
It has been estimated that some 20 000 paedophiles in Europe use the Internet daily .
While I appreciate that this is a complex technical issue , there is more that could be done to police this particular abuse .
I am also concerned that recently in my own country we have seen an increase in a number of attempted child abductions , especially over the last couple of months .
It is believed that this is the work of British paedophiles who have fled their native country .
This illustrates the need for better cooperation between law enforcement agencies in various Member States .
EU Member States need to consider ways in which we could harmonise our laws to exchange or compile registers of serious sex offenders .
Certainly I , personally , would support the concept of an EU-wide list .
We also need to place movement restrictions on those who have finished custodial sentences .
There are many ways we can tackle this problem .
There are many ideas .
I would like to see some attempt throughout the EU to coordinate activity .
Madam President , the basic tenor of this report , which places the child at the centre of the European discussion , is to be very warmly welcomed .
And in very many details too , it strikes exactly the right note and addresses reality in a very frank and open manner .
I do not think the question of subsidiarity or competence arises here at all .
The family and the protection of children are naturally a matter for local authorities , municipal administrations and civic and charitable associations .
But the family is also a European and a global phenomenon , so why should European policymakers not concern themselves with the family , and why should there not be a special interest in the protection of children at European level ?
It is necessary to break down the walls of silence , because there is far too much maltreatment of children in disturbed family environments .
Among the many proposals in this report , those that deal with the subject of child abuse are very important .
Where does the sexual abuse of children begin ?
Probably in the family environment .
But a long time ago it began to assume a very global dimension , and what is happening on the Internet and in the domain of mass tourism may perhaps be termed the globalisation of perversion .
I should like to mention two more points that I consider very interesting and constructive , namely the call for a special meeting of the European Council devoted to child protection policy and the suggestion for the creation of a European centre for children , one of the principal tasks of which would be to compile and maintain a database on missing children and convicted child abductors , in cooperation with the national authorities and Europol .
Madam President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Hermange on having taken the initiative to draw up a report on the protection of the family and children in the European Union .
This is an extremely important issue since the changes currently taking place in our society , be they demographic , sociological , ethnological or scientific , greatly influence the family .
The Commission notes the requests made in the resolution , although it admits that issues relating to the family are still the responsibility of the Member States themselves .
The birth rate is falling in almost all the Member States of the Union , fewer people are getting married , more couples are living together without marrying and more children are born out of wedlock , while the divorce rate is continuing to rise .
These are the trends that are currently influencing the family unit and , indeed , society as a whole .
There is a constant interest in the situation of families and its implications for our social and employment policies . It is also becoming increasingly evident that we need greater international cooperation on issues relating to the family as part of the global effort to promote social progress and development .
Although the Community has no direct responsibility in the area of family policy , it is paying increasing attention to the analysis and understanding of the social and economic repercussions these new trends and social changes have on families .
There are striking differences between the Member States as far as family policy is concerned .
These are based on the different ideas of the role of the State in economic and social life , the family 's position in society , its rights and obligations , the roles of men and women within the family and the principle of the rights of the child .
However , the family has always been highly valued and will continue to be highly valued in all the countries of the European Union .
The Commission is promoting a series of measures and policies aimed at reconciling work and family life : the challenge of finding a balance between these two areas is vital for a whole range of employment and social matters .
Issues that directly affect the family include the changes in the composition of the workforce , the new forms of labour organisation , the restructuring of social protection , and the changes in the distribution between men and women of tasks involving the care of dependents .
The directives on pregnant workers , parental leave and part-time work are all valuable examples of the European Union 's commitment to helping men and women in their family lives .
The recommendation on child care suggests that we should adopt initiatives that aim to provide child-care services for parents who work or who are still undergoing training , that pay greater attention in the workplace to the needs of workers with children and that encourage men to participate in caring for children .
The employment guidelines are also providing a great boost in terms of helping to reconcile family and professional life .
The employment guidelines for 1999 put even greater emphasis on the issue of reconciling family and job responsibilities as an integral part of the European employment strategy .
I would like to end by saying that the European Union must make substantial efforts to determine the similarities and differences in the way that the Member States react to the changes I mentioned , and to promote , at Community level , exchanges of information and the gathering of experience relating to all family issues .
Thank you , Mr Marín .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 28 January 1999 during the part-session in Brussels .
Code of conduct for EU firms in developing countries
The next item is the report ( A4-0508 / 98 ) by Mr Howitt , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on EU standards for European enterprises operating in developing countries : towards a European code of conduct .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it will be no secret to the rapporteur that I harbour numerous doubts concerning the legality of the measures he proposes , of which , for reasons of time , I shall only be able to cite a few representative examples .
The cases you describe relate to glaring and despicable abuses .
We shall have to make every possible effort to scrutinise international law for ways and means of developing a code of conduct that will justify the conviction on moral grounds of the European firms which violate these principles of human rights .
On the other hand , we shall have to take care - and this is a point that has frequently come to my attention here in Parliament - to exercise our responsibility for keeping our reports within the legal bounds we have set for ourselves .
I strongly support the involvement of non-governmental organisations in the development of the existing guidelines for an international code of conduct , such as those followed by the OECD .
We must realise , however , that it is Utopian to call for a European legal framework governing EU-based companies with worldwide operations , and that such a framework would even be illegal because of its extraterritorial character .
We cannot condemn the Helms-Burton or D 'Amato legislation for claiming extraterritorial jurisdiction , and then think that we can introduce the same sort of thing here .
The law is the law !
For that reason , I rather regret that there are four , five or six other cases which will be relevant to tomorrow 's vote and which deviate from established legal standards .
For that reason , Mr Howitt , I should be glad if you would exercise some flexibility and tolerance at the vote in plenary tomorrow , otherwise I believe the form in which you wish to organise the vote will be unacceptable to many Members , at least to those in the European People 's Party , even though you undoubtedly have a legitimate case .
Madam President , first , on behalf of myself and my group , I want to thank Mr Howitt for pressing for this own-initiative report from the Committee on Development and Cooperation and for having done some excellent work courageously , correctly and diligently . The report is the result of serious analysis of the international situation and of listening to the opinions of representatives of civil society , and is distinguished by the creativity of the proposals put forward .
The subject of the report is not simple , because of its obvious implications in dealing with the presence and activities of European firms operating in developing countries in terms of respect for the principles , standards and aims linked to recognition of fundamental human and social rights .
First let us say what it is not about .
It is not about wanting to impose rules artificially which make European firms less competitive or hamper them more in international competition .
It is not about wanting to invent new rules , nor does it propose to .
It is simply - although we are well aware that this is not a simple thing - a matter of wanting to guarantee effective respect , by European firms , for international and European standards which already exist but are often simply ignored or actually violated .
It is a matter of creating a solid European political and legal base which strengthens and increases the credibility of the Union 's commitment and that of its Member States to affirm those standards at international level without hiding behind the easy alibi of always leaving it to other authorities to shoulder the burden of taking action .
We think the European Union has something to say and a lot to do here , starting with itself .
I would add that , on this subject too - and here I would like to reassure Mr Kittelmann - the Group of the Party of European Socialists has worked to secure a wide consensus with the other groups in the European Parliament , even though they often started from very different points of view .
I hope we have succeeded and that the vote on the Howitt report , which should take place tomorrow , can be as positive and consensual as possible .
What are the fundamental factors underpinning this report ?
First , there is the conviction that , especially in the age of globalisation , it is necessary to promote and integrate different intervention instruments to guarantee and promote human , social and economic rights , respect for the environment and sustainable development .
Secondly , there is the conviction that the actions of the various players operating on the international scene - regional and international organisations , national and local authorities , civil society organisations , companies - while differing , perhaps profoundly , in motivations and aims , are equally important in terms of their real impact on the actual situation of individuals , the local community and the people .
Research into optimising the action taken by the various players - public and private - in the different sectors and regions of the world is fundamental to pursuing the objectives of development and justice which ought to characterise the world of tomorrow .
In this context it is very important to support the process , already underway , of companies operating in third countries setting up their own voluntary codes of conduct .
But these codes cannot take the place of the obligation to respect principles , standards and rules ratified by law .
They can anticipate or supplement action by the public authorities to protect individual and collective rights .
So there is no contradiction between voluntary codes of conduct and codes with a legal basis ; instead they should be complementary .
For codes of conduct - voluntary or not - standards , principles and instruments of control to be realistic and effective , they must necessarily be based on the direct involvement of all those concerned : institutions , companies , trade unions , NGOs , etc .
Finally , development cooperation policy and economic cooperation policy in general must be able to respond to principles and aims which are diverse , yet consistent .
Of the various proposals contained in the report being debated today , the one I consider central is the European Parliament 's request to the Commission and the Council to put forward proposals on developing an appropriate legal basis for establishing a European multilateral framework governing companies ' operations worldwide and to organise , for this purpose , consultations with those groups in society which would be covered by that code .
If we succeed in doing that , I think the European Parliament will have made no small contribution to promoting a vision of the world and of international relations which corresponds to the expectations of the citizens of Europe and the developing countries , who are right to look to Europe as a positive factor for fairness and development .
Madam President , I am sure that the examples used by the rapporteur at the start of his presentation are not in any way figments of someone 's imagination , but there are also plenty of examples of companies conducting their foreign investments in a responsible manner .
If we look at these flagrant abuses that have been allowed to occur on the one hand and the many valuable global contributions of European companies on the other , we must surely have reason to hope that we can reach a solution in the end and bring about a reduction in the number of cases that we have been so loudly lamenting today .
I also see this whole thing in the context of our noble aim of supporting good governance , wherever it exists , through our development cooperation .
In my view , this also involves encouraging the countries of the third world to ensure that their own legislation , their jurisprudence and the implementation of their statutes and case-law create the sort of standards and provisions which would more or less eliminate the issue of extraterritoriality raised by Mr Kittelmann .
It is right to view the report in the context of a number of agreements , standards and conventions .
I believe we should really focus on the need to ensure that the decisions which have already been taken are actually implemented , and that we monitor the way in which promises are being honoured .
The numerous declarations that have already been made in this area were one of the reasons why the committee members from my group did not necessarily see it as a priority for the committee to produce this report on its own initiative and why we were initially opposed to dealing with this subject at the present time .
On the other hand , these codes of conduct are absolutely acceptable to us if they are adopted on a voluntary basis and if there is scope for us to publicise the involvement of companies in such schemes , including details of their compliance or non-compliance with the code of conduct , so that pressure can also be exerted by public opinion , which is certainly a very potent instrument .
I have already indicated that we are opposed to the exercise of extraterritorial jurisdiction .
I am not entirely convinced of the cogency of the examples cited by the rapporteur , because the question of arms exports concerns the Member States , which deal with such matters on the basis of their own export regulations .
We should not create a situation in which the appearance of weapons in any country legitimises some kind of recourse against the country of origin .
We should also beware of bracketing the infringement of social and environmental standards with child abuse , of all things , because the latter involves a paramount legal interest which is unquestionably eligible for extraterritorial protection , whereas I cannot see that the same applies to the former .
The third critical issue in this report was the question of a so-called monitoring mechanism .
All manner of bodies were to cooperate within this mechanism , which would be coordinated by the European Parliament .
We cannot see any legal basis for such a mechanism .
During the negotiations we arrived at a number of compromises , and I hope that the report is acceptable in its present form and that we are all flexible enough to steer it successfully through the final vote .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too want to thank Mr Howitt sincerely for his wide-ranging , in-depth and articulate work and for the generous and passionate commitment he has put into drafting this report .
It would be extremely serious if the Howitt report were to be read in a light unfavourable to business .
As liberals , we are far from opposing the involvement of companies in developing countries , and believe it is an absolute and essential condition for that economic development which is the logical premise of all human development .
Of course , it is necessary to prevent certain extremely negative cases from ending up polluting the climate and causing foreign involvement to be considered unsuitable .
From this point of view the Howitt report is undoubtedly helpful .
So ' yes ' to the voluntary code of conduct for companies ; ' yes ' to a European code of conduct which would have to be largely based on existing international standards ; ' yes ' to clear , precise and agreed procedures for identifying any infringements or violations of the established rules backed by verification guarantees .
But an equally strong and clear ' no ' to the kind of temporary platform suggested in the Howitt report for the interim period , under the auspices and the aegis of the European Parliament , which , in our opinion as liberals , carries the risk of turning into a kind of people 's court , without adequate guarantees , and is liable to be counterproductive at the end of the day .
So we rely on Mr Howitt 's good sense as regards the amendments we have tabled on this .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to codes of conduct for multinational enterprises operating in developing countries , the position of this group can be summed up as follows . We are in favour of the principle of codes of conduct adopted on a voluntary and non-compulsory basis .
We are in favour of the multilateralism that would allow these codes to be defined within appropriate bodies , such as the OECD and the ILO , and that would make these codes applicable to all European and non-European multinationals .
Finally , we support the guarantee of impartiality of the bodies responsible for verifying compliance with the codes thus defined .
This is why our group is tabling several amendments to ensure what , in our opinion , is a more balanced position , along the lines of what this House adopted in January 1998 on relocations and direct foreign investment .
However , we cannot support certain proposals in the report .
The rapporteur measures with extraterritorial effect covering human and workers ' rights , the environment and the prevention of corruption .
Yet the European Union and Parliament are fighting against extraterritorial laws that the United States are trying to impose , such as the Helms-Burton Act .
It is therefore not appropriate to go down the same road .
With regard to the European Monitoring Platform , if such a body were created at some point , the proposals relating to both its composition and its tasks should be seriously reconsidered .
Our group has therefore tabled an amendment aimed at establishing transparent processes for the operation of this body and , in particular , for the appointment of experts of recognised competence and authority . This would involve processes to identify complaints , the guarantee that all parties would receive notification of complaints and the proof accompanying this , and the guarantee of possibilities of recourse .
In terms of Parliament 's role , we are not in favour of a temporary European Monitoring Platform under the auspices of Parliament , nor of the appointment of special rapporteurs within this as these proposals seem to involve activities that do not fall within the competence of a parliamentary assembly .
Madam President , we welcome Mr Howitt 's report on EU standards for European firms operating in developing countries .
The development of a European code of conduct is a very important aim which we must pursue vigorously .
It is an excellent idea to create a legal basis for this , Mr Howitt .
A model code of conduct is a necessity .
It is important that a European monitoring mechanism should be created , but a crucial factor from our point of view is the form that the monitoring and verification are to take .
Without monitoring and verification , a code of this type is an irrelevance .
The principle of voluntary action is important to us and must also underlie the legal basis in this domain . Each firm must be free to commit itself as far as it feels able .
There must , however , be some compulsory minimum standards .
This reflects the ethics of our Community , and these ethics must also be applied in our dealings with the rest of the world .
So there should be binding standards as a minimum basis , supplemented by voluntary undertakings .
The cooperation you propose in the new global agreement with the ACP countries is important , and represents another addition that we support .
We are also in favour of stepping up the initiatives at European level .
I did not entirely understand what Mr Kittelmann was saying .
He spoke of morality and said that we shall find ways and means of developing this at some time .
I do not know how he intends to accomplish that .
He also seemed to make a slip of the tongue .
He was speaking on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , yet he said in conclusion that the PPE Group could not accept the report .
Mrs Günther then seemed to say the opposite .
To borrow loosely from Brecht , first bellies are filled , then comes morality , and we know that capital is a great shark , and when it makes a killing in international business , the leftovers are few .
I also believe that this cannot be compared with the Helms-Burton Act .
Helms-Burton is a repressive measure on an international scale .
The aim of the present initiative is to create our own code of conduct for European firms .
We have other versions of this in the Basle Convention , in the Rhine Agreement within Europe , and in connection with the toxic waste that is shipped from Europe to South Africa , for instance , as the British example illustrates .
So we already have self-imposed codes of conduct to which we have committed ourselves .
That is why it is right and important that this initiative should be taken .
We support it and hope that a large majority of the House will do likewise .
Madam President , a short while ago we were talking about the protection of families and children , and now we are talking about the sustainable social and economic development that should form the basis for this , not just in the West but also in the developing countries .
Unrestrained globalisation cannot guarantee such development and can only , at best , provide a chance of achieving it .
But striving for maximum profit can also derail sustainable development .
Earlier this week , we debated the Sainjon report which is along the same lines .
Poor countries cannot force people to adopt a code of good conduct , nor can wealthy countries .
Many multinationals have a budget many times greater than that of many developing countries .
It is difficult , even for international organisations , to get a grip on these developments , yet they remain the greatest challenge that we face as a political community .
Our failure to create an international legal order based on internationally accepted rules , such as when the World Trade Organisation was founded , was in many respects a missed opportunity as far as I am concerned , because then we could have achieved a great deal .
So we are going to have to make do with the possibilities we have .
We are going to have to maintain a sense of moderation and realism , and the whole thing will have to be monitored very closely , because it will not work on its own .
We naturally welcome voluntary codes of conduct , but they are not enough .
We think we can count on the increasing awareness of Europe 's consumers , who will not want to be party to exploitation .
This is why I would call for binding agreements and warn against hypocrisy .
I would like to finish here , because this would not be the first time that the countries of Europe , in claiming to support fine principles , were actually just protecting themselves against developments in developing countries .
Madam President , I should first like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report .
Operating standards deserve constant attention , particularly when they relate to trade with developing countries .
We need to put an end to exploitation in these countries .
European undertakings must be held responsible for establishing dangerous industries in countries where there is no labour inspection , for example .
In recent years , increasing attention has been given to codes of conduct in European firms , and a large number of multinationals have - perhaps under pressure from international pressure groups and public opinion - voluntarily undertaken to respect human rights in business and to publish an annual social report .

The European Union must support these developments , and this is why I am in favour of a voluntary European code of conduct , which will make it easy for businesses to trade ethically and responsibly , and will ensure that responsibility stays where it belongs : with the firms themselves .
The work we do with international organisations is another way of promoting compliance with international codes of conduct .
I do not think it makes sense to introduce all manner of European legislation and authorities , which would simply add to Europe 's bureaucracy , and after the debates earlier this week , I think we would all agree that this is the last thing we need .
Finally , I have to say that I agree with Mrs Maij-Weggen that the developing countries must be involved as much as possible in the development of codes of conduct , but I see no reason to postpone the vote on this report because of this .
Madam President , I would largely endorse the congratulations to the rapporteur , but I would like to look at what this report means for the future , because I think it is an important document that will now trigger an entire debate on this issue .
At Mr Howitt 's request , I would like to mention six points .
Firstly , what would the developments now being proposed mean for small and medium-sized firms ?
After all , many of these also operate in developing countries , so should not the same or similar measures apply to them ?
Secondly , should we not look at what we are already doing for environmental protection , in other words the covenants ?
What does the type of covenant we are looking at mean for firms here ?
Is there not work to be done in this field ?
And the same applies for quality marks .
Thirdly , I sympathise with the argument which businesses put forward that if only European firms are affected , their competitiveness could suffer .
Take Shell in Nigeria .
We were right to put pressure on Shell , but in the end we have to accept that Canadazen and other non-European oil companies have reaped the benefit .
Fourth , what are we doing about the informal sector ?
This is not covered adequately in the report , because the informal sector also supplies to businesses , and this is where help must be provided .
I have already dealt with my fifth point , which was that only European firms would be affected .
Sixth , how to involve the firms themselves in the discussions .
This too was not covered in sufficient depth , and in future I think it is important to involve firms both large and small in the debate .
I shall finish here , but I think that we are going to have to have a much broader debate on this issue in future .
Madam President , I should first of all like to congratulate Mr Howitt on his report .
Although we do not agree with all the points he makes , we support the main thrust of his report and the principle of the need for a code of conduct for multinational companies , though I agree with the previous speaker that this does not mean that SMEs should not be included .
The need for such a code has become obvious from the large number of incidents or even disasters in the third world for which a number of firms have been responsible in recent years .
Think of the environmental pollution in Ogoniland in Nigeria , the problems of slave labour used in laying oil pipelines in Burma - which the European Union punished by taking away the preferential system - and the use of child labour in India , Pakistan and the Philippines .
These are all problems that we can prevent from happening in western Europe because we have legislation and a reasonably good inspection system , but the developing countries do not have this sort of legislation .
This gives carte blanche not just to the good firms , which some are , of course , but also to the bad firms , which then flout social and environmental legislation that they would have to respect in their own countries .
The developing countries , it has become clear , are the ones that most desperately need our help .
I would also point out here that this is also a good thing for the decent companies too .
Shell now has a code of conduct , but it has also told us that the Canadian and American companies in Nigeria do not follow it , and this has led to distortion of competition .
So we will have to be careful that goodwill on the part of certain companies does not itself lead to bad practices because codes of conduct are not universally accepted .
This is why a European code of conduct is both useful and necessary , and I support the idea .
What we do not think would be useful is an institution such as a monitoring platform that would result in far too much bureaucracy .
It would also not be a good idea to grant extraterritorial powers , and it would not be possible either , because the WTO would not allow it .
We would have preferred this issue to be put to the ACP Assembly again , but I understand that the rapporteur did not want this .
Perhaps we could approve the report tomorrow and still put it to the Assembly ?
I think this would be a good idea .
I intend to support the proposal .
Of course we shall have to wait and see how the vote goes , but I hope that there will be broad support for this excellent report by Mr Howitt , for which I would like to thank him once again .
Madam President , there is no easy way for poor countries to introduce the same standards and conditions in working life as rich countries .
If things were so simple that it was possible to increase prosperity quickly in developing countries by means of conventions , declarations , international conferences and sanctions adopted by third countries , then there would be no poor countries and no conditions for workers which we would consider substandard .
Unfortunately , however , things are not as simple as that .
Many countries are interested in attracting foreign investment to increase the availability of capital , enterprise and technology and thereby boost growth and employment .
Growth provides the real opportunity to improve working conditions , increase wages and extend social benefits .
Of course there are some irregularities in many places , but there are already rules to deal with that .
Now that we are considering the fundamental problem , it should be pointed out that countries which have relied on international investment have achieved far more progress than countries which have shut themselves off behind all kinds of socialist regulations .
That is why the economic development of Thailand has been much faster than that of Tanzania ; poverty reigns in Cuba , but not in Taiwan ; North Korea is characterised by exploitation , but South Korea is not .
Foreign entrepreneurs have contributed to improvements in wages and social conditions .
I think that this is still what we must use as a basis for judging what further efforts need to be made .
However , I think the report lacks sufficient understanding of this process ; instead , it portrays international investment more as a means of exploitation which needs to be regulated .
If it is the case that host countries do not know what is best for them , then the EU should use extraterritorial measures , which we otherwise oppose , to ensure that our objective is achieved .
All reports have their good points , and this one is no exception .
However , it does not make a sufficiently constructive contribution , because in my view it is based on the wrong premise .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur on the production of this report .
Ironically the European Union can take pride in its achievement in improving health , safety and working conditions through the implementation of the social chapter .
We also strongly support the protection of human rights and we are always strengthening legislation to protect the environment .
It is not acceptable that at one and the same time as we improve the quality of life internally within the European Union that some EU firms are breaching health and safety rules or exploiting labour and are causing serious and permanent damage to the environment in developing countries .
It is totally immoral that we should increase the prosperity of the European Union at the expense of the people of developing countries .
I support the adoption of a code of conduct and the establishment of a European monitoring platform .
We must ensure that EU firms operating outside the EU treat their employees fairly , both in terms of the remuneration they receive and adequate health and safety standards in their workplace .
We must also prevent the construction of projects or the manufacture of products that have devastating consequences for the environment in these places .
I agree with the rapporteur 's comments when he introduced his report that voluntary codes of conduct and binding agreements are not necessarily mutually exclusive .
They are in fact complementary to one another and should form the basis of our strategy in this particular area .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is well-known that the European Union is the leading world donor of development aid .
But coordinated support is needed to ensure that governments of developing countries can incorporate standards that are already accepted internationally into their own national legislation .
So supporting European firms in this context is fundamental , because they are the major direct investors in developing countries and play a decisive role in sustainable global socio-economic development .
In contributing directly to the economic development of the poorest regions , business has a great social responsibility , especially as regards human rights .
This is why I think it would be useful to draft a European code of conduct which could help to ensure the better harmonisation of voluntary national codes of conduct on the basis of international standards .
The main objective of this code would be to guarantee the application of minimum standards relating to the environment , health and safety at work , the abolition of child labour , the protection of women 's rights and , obviously , respect for basic human rights .
We must provide for an evolving and gradual approach to the rules of this code , identifying positive incentives for companies undertaking to observe the new arrangements .
But I do not agree with setting up a European Monitoring Platform , as already proposed by some trade associations , to monitor the situation and assess reports empirically .
Not only can it not determine wages in developing countries but , as it stands , it will certainly not improve working conditions and , above all , there is no legal basis for European monitoring .
But it is important to recognise that the impact of liberalisation on the international community has both positive and negative effects .
Progressive expansion of social awareness , international recognition of human rights and free movement of goods , persons , capital and services could be counted among the positive aspects .
Unfortunately rights are sometimes threatened by environmental conditions and by the vast gap between rich and poor .
Madam President , there is no shortage of conventions , charters and declarations containing standards on labour rights , human rights , minority and indigenous peoples ' rights , the environment or the fight against fraud and corruption .
The ILO , the UN , the OECD , the FAO , the WHO and the World Bank can provide a suitable ethical and legal supply of standards as the starting point for determining a European code of conduct intended for European enterprises operating commercially in developing countries .
Unfortunately , the profits of many European and American multinationals are stained by connivance with authoritarian regimes in which practices of oppression , abuse and exploitation of workers completely undermine the basic rules on fair competition .
These practices are an attack on the rights of people in fragile social situations , and involve , in particular , women and children who are subject to actual practices of forced labour .
The governments of developing countries must be made take responsibility for the implementation of standards that respect fundamental labour principles and rights .
However , the problem lies in the difficulty of imposing effective sanctions to penalise transgressors .
One practical solution may be positive discrimination , by providing special support and incentives to those countries that demonstrate good governance .
Specific initiatives must be undertaken .
We agree with the establishment of the European Monitoring Platform , bringing together trade associations , trade unions , NGOs and public bodies , with the initial impetus being provided by the European Parliament acting as a catalyst . However , it should do more than this in order to stay within its competence .
Although sharing some of the concerns of our colleague Mrs Günther , we congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Howitt , on the report he has presented .
It gives expression to the idea that the practice of fair trade is essentially a different philosophy from that of being in the world for a share of the spoils .
Madam President , I would first of all like to thank Mr Howitt and Parliament for their initiative and their action to increase the protection of the rights of workers throughout the world and , in particular , those in developing countries who work , either directly or indirectly , for European companies .
Over recent years , public opinion has been very sensitive towards these issues and progress has been achieved , thanks to the action of the European Parliament at times .
I am thinking specifically of the initiatives - which were then implemented by the Commission - always to include a system of incentives as regards , for example , the Generalised System of Preferences in the so-called social and environmental clauses .
A certain amount of progress has certainly been made in that area in recent years within the European Union and in its trade instruments and development .

Turning now more specifically to codes of conduct and social standards , following the technical meetings held in the European Parliament , with experts invited along to discuss the issue , the Commission considers that the voluntary nature of these codes is important and that , along with this , it is above all important to try to find ways of encouraging cooperation . Thus , with social pressure and incentives , European firms will gradually come to accept that when they work abroad they must meet certain basic standards in terms of labour and social rights .
Against the background of this generally positive philosophy , I would like to make a few more specific comments .
For years , the Commission has supported the voluntary initiatives of companies , industries , trade unions and NGOs to promote codes of conduct , and has particularly encouraged dialogue between the various partners .
Thus , in February 1998 , a joint conference was held in Brussels in conjunction with the North American Department of Labour , where companies , trade union organisations and NGOs came together . The aim of this conference was to analyse the possibilities and limits of codes of conduct and social standards , and to consider what role public authorities might be able to play in this process .
The conference was followed by a seminar in November , which looked at issues involving the monitoring of codes of conduct and social standards , and by a visit to the United States in December 1998 .
However , we must not forget that codes of conduct - and this is something I want to make clear on behalf of the Commission - can under no circumstances replace national and international labour regulations , which , at the end of the day , are the only way to guarantee universal respect for the fundamental rights of workers .
What do I mean by this ?
What I mean is that a code of conduct can be important and positive and can apply a great deal of social pressure , yet it is also very important for a country receiving development aid to incorporate the international conventions on the protection of workers into its own national legislation .
In other words , it must be a combined effort , as not all countries receiving aid from us have incorporated certain basic regulations on protection into their national legislation .
As regards the legal basis for establishing a European framework governing companies ' operations worldwide , the Commission believes that priority must be given to incentive schemes and measures involving a participative rather than a repressive approach .
In other words , we have never agreed with the idea of certification .
We have always thought more in terms of positive discrimination and incentives rather than sanctions .
Moreover , the Commission - and the European Union as a whole - believes that multilateral agreements are more important than unilateral rules with an international element .
I do not need to explain the Helms Burton dispute to you .
The European Union does not support such measures with extraterritorial effect .
As a result , to maintain some degree of logic , since we opposed the extraterritorial measures advocated by the United States Congress , it would be difficult for the European Union to apply extraterritorial laws even if they have what I believe to be noble objectives , such as social protection and the protection of the environment .
We must be consistent and we must therefore introduce this type of approach internally through dialogue and through incentives .
As regards the possibility of creating a European monitoring platform , it is true that the Commission had not included this in its conclusions of the November seminar .
However , we are prepared to help the partners involved to come together to create links through the various initiatives and we are equally prepared to encourage exchanges , to promote and share experiences , and to increase the visibility of the companies who apply these codes .
In other words , the Commission can collate all the experiences , all the codes and all the actions taken by each company , not only in Europe , but also in the United States . Indeed , some US companies have already introduced codes of ethical behaviour when working abroad .
In this respect , we are open to whatever Parliament decides .
Finally , the Commission is also willing , if the partners so wish , to set up a network that will allow us to work on the content of the codes and pool the various elements involved . It would also deal with the delicate question of independent monitoring .
This is a very sensitive issue because if we establish a monitoring system , it will have to be extremely objective and neutral in order to prevent situations from naturally being judged according to economic interests , a company 's interests or simply political interests .
In any case , as has already been mentioned , subsidies have been requested by the European trade union federations for textiles , clothing and leather .
And , in principle , the Commission 's response will be to work with the trade unions and federations for the textiles , clothing and leather industries with a view to providing them with financial mechanisms that will allow them to form their own networks .
As regards the financial resources required , which you asked about , line B7-6000 is available to cofinance a large number of NGOs , so we should be able to encourage this method of increasing awareness .
In any event , we are already taking action here , and I hope that we can continue to do so .
Last year , funding was granted , in particular , to those NGOs who worked under the ' fair trade ' slogan , which I am sure you have heard of .
On a practical level , a ' fair trade ' campaign was run in all the supermarkets in Europe involving products from this type of trade , for which an amount was credited at the checkout .
We can continue with these sorts of awareness-raising measures .
Thank you , Mr Marín .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
The day has ended rather more quietly than it began !
The sitting was closed at 8.50 p.m.
VOTES
Mr President , to be consistent with the agreement that we have just voted in this section of paragraphs , we are going to be supporting the wording ' monitoring mechanism ' in both paragraphs 13 and 14 rather than the wording in English ' European monitoring platform ' .
I should like to make an oral amendment , with the House 's support , to Amendment No 6 from the PPE ; we accept it in its entirety , but , removing the word ' international ' , which has been agreed with their group .
On Paragraph 24
Mr President , in response to the barracking , it was not my wish to make an oral amendment , but we have come to a compromise and it seems to be sticking as far as the vote this morning is concerned .
Paragraph 24 has caused a lot of discussion between the political groups .
We have managed to come to a compromise on only a very short part of this paragraph .
I will read the slightly amended wording of the first line carefully .
It is extremely short .
It is : ' request the European Council clarify the scope of the 1968 Brussels Convention ' .
Mr Wolf has the floor to speak against this oral amendment .
Mr President , I object because this changes the meaning of the paragraph and I do not think we should do this orally .
Mr Wolf , you are fully within your rights to oppose this amendment but for this to take effect you must have the support of 12 Members .
Therefore , if there are 12 Members who support you , the oral amendment will be rejected .
If not , then the amendment will stay .
The oral amendment was rejected as more than 12 Members supported Mr Wolf 's proposal
On Amendment 23
Mr President , there are two elements to this UPE amendment .
The first is to delete five words and as rapporteur I recommend against that deletion .
The second amendment is to add in the words later ' the OECD Committee for International Investment and Multinational Enterprises ' .
It is to that second part that I advise the House to vote in favour .
It is not the whole of the first paragraph , just the deletion of those five words that I recommend against .
I gather that the five words in English come to eleven in the Spanish text .
In any event , this is a purely linguistic problem .
Laughter
On this occasion , ladies and gentlemen , the Spanish win 11-5 .
Parliament adopted the resolution
I should like to congratulate Mr Howitt and to thank you all once again for your cooperation during that complicated vote .
Everyone knows that poverty is the rule in developing countries .
The wealth of the 15 richest people in the world exceeds the total gross domestic product ( GDP ) of sub-Saharan Africa .
There is a high risk that this underdevelopment in the countries of the third world will continue or even become more marked .
The sale of raw materials is the most important area of trade for the economies of the developing countries , but the prices of raw materials have either reached their peak or are steadily falling .
There is no hope of these prices rising again because the number of synthetic products that can replace them is increasing .
These same countries are falling even further behind in education and in terms of access to new technologies .
Faced with this worrying picture , we are witnessing the merger of large multinationals , some with a budget in excess of that of countries such as Austria or Denmark .
Together , they control 70 % of world trade .
The counterforce provided by the political parties , trade unions and independent media is becoming increasingly ineffective and this means that the public are seeing them as increasingly powerless .
In view of the state of the world and the concentration of the economy , some are tempted to surrender given the lack of proposals for a realistic alternative .
However , the world is always changing and the worst approach would be to despair and throw in the towel .
Potentially , humanity has reached a stage of development where - for the first time in its history - everyone could be fed , housed , cared for and educated , for just a few per cent of the global budget .
The scandal of poverty is therefore not totally inevitable and I am pleased that this is indicated in the reports - such as that by Mr Howitt - which intend to regulate the laws of the market .
Recital A of his motion for a resolution stresses that ' the EU ... and European enterprises ... can play a decisive role in global sustainable social and economic development ' .
The ' Euroworks councils ' were set up without any provisions for sanctions in the event of the rules being transgressed , which meant that certain European multinationals did not take them seriously . In light of this experience , I approve the three-fold action proposed here .
The first element of this involves establishing a European framework governing companies ' operations worldwide . It also includes the definition of a code of conduct incorporating the minimum international standards that ensure respect for human rights , minority and indigenous peoples ' rights , working conditions , the environment and the fight against corruption .
The second element involves setting up an independent ' European Monitoring Platform ' responsible for monitoring the application of this code of conduct and for verifying that the activities carried out in the host countries are socially and environmentally sustainable .
The final element involves legal actions against enterprises that fail to honour their commitments .
I regard this structure as completely justified .
The EU still has to act to introduce such a code of conduct . In addition , it has yet to to set up effective monitoring mechanisms and apply sanctions in the event of transgressions through agreements within the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) .
The political world and public opinion must win this battle , essentially through the help of NGOs .
The European Union is the largest donor of development aid while European enterprises are the largest direct investors in developing countries .
As the rapporteur points out , Europe 's attitude can therefore play a decisive role in ensuring global sustainable social and economic development .
I am personally convinced that a worthy social policy must be based on wealth production that allows only sustainable economic development .
I am also convinced that economic expansion based on social injustice cannot last .
In this respect , Parliament must approve and support the voluntary initiatives taken to complement the international rules and obligations that fall to national authorities , with a view to promoting codes of conduct , provided that these are drawn up by all the parties concerned and are monitored and controlled in an effective and independent manner .
We must support the idea of drawing up a model code of conduct comprising the existing minimum international standards and the establishment of a European Monitoring Platform responsible for ensuring that these standards are adhered to . However , this monitoring platform must work in close collaboration with all the partners and must not eventually become an instrument used as an elaborate form of protection against the goods and services supplied by emerging and developing countries .
Finally , it would be beneficial if legal action against enterprises that failed seriously to meet their commitments in an emerging or developing country were taken in the EU country where they have their registered offices . Equally , legislation should be drawn up to allow legal action against multinationals in this respect to be taken before the European courts .
However , these ideas must be subject to lengthy discussion because if care is not taken to prevent this , they could also be diverted from their primary aim towards protectionist ends .
I voted against the Howitt report .
Although the rapporteur 's aim to define minimum working standards applying to trade with developing countries , the method suggested is illogical and dangerous because it limits a global issue to the European context .
These codes of conduct must be negotiated within a global context so that we can find a compulsory mechanism that can be applied fairly to all enterprises , both in third countries and in the Member States of the European Union .
Otherwise , we will inevitably be left with patchy and non-compulsory measures .
We must , on the one hand , rigorously ensure that the existing international rules , particularly within the context of the ILO , are effectively applied by all , and on the other hand , develop the rules of the WTO so that they take account of the essential issues of social and environmental dumping .
This is the direct responsibility of the Member States and the Commission .
The European Parliament does not add anything to the debate by merely making lofty proposals and may , in fact , detract from it , thereby risking penalising our European enterprises alone .
Democracy , rule of law and human rights in EU / ACP partnership
The next item is the report ( A4-0411 / 98 ) by Mr Fernández Martín , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the Commission communication entitled ' Democratisation , the rule of law , respect for human rights and good governance : the challenges of the partnership between the European Union and the ACP States ' ( COM ( 98 ) 0146 - C4-0390 / 98 ) .
I give the floor to Mr Pomés Ruiz , who is deputising for the rapporteur .
Mr President , it is an honour for me to present Fernando Fernández Martín 's excellent report to this House . His report seeks to give renewed momentum to relations between the European Union and the ACP states .
Of course , the content of this report contains a real political challenge for the future of our relations with the ACP states . This is clearly highlighted in the title of the document the Commission has submitted to Parliament .
The Lomé IV Convention already had one innovative aspect in that it referred to the respect for and promotion of human rights in the actual body of the Convention .
The review of the Lomé IV Convention in 1995 introduced an explicit reference to the recognition and application of democratic principles in Article 5 , and to the consolidation of the rule of law and good governance in Article 366a .
Article 224 goes into more detail on these issues .
What we must now do is move beyond the theoretical debate of concepts that are full of good intentions and move towards defining specific measures that will facilitate the transition from theory to practice .
We must make our friends in the ACP states aware that , to a certain extent , these guidelines should be seen as an attempt to participate in matters that come under their competences , responsibilities and sovereignty .
I must say that many of the guidelines and measures we advocate in this report would not have any effect and would be inefficient if they were not adopted by the various ACP actors , and especially by civil society in the ACP states , as civil society is the ultimate beneficiary of such measures .
I would also add that the Union must remain vigilant and must adopt exemplary sanctions to deal with some of the problems we must address . One such problem is corruption where , for example , infringements involve natural or legal persons or European companies .
As one of the most brilliant European thinkers of the end of this century said , corruption is the cancer that corrodes democracy .
Corruption , in whatever form it takes , inevitably leads to an economic system that smiles on immediate profit , arbitrary acts and individual interests and is opposed to any concept of transparency , fairness and the rule of law .
Through the reports by Mr Martens and Mr Rocard , the European Parliament is demanding a new political dimension in European Union-ACP relations , based on the promotion of democratic principles and on respect for human rights .
In this field , education is an essential environment for political action seeking to encourage the strengthening of a strong and healthy civil society .
It is vital that such action pays special attention to the specific role of women and to protecting the rights of minors , who in some cases are victims of forms of indigenous slavery that is humiliating and that insults the dignity of human beings .
Strengthening the rule of law and democracy must include developing the conditions in which the courts of justice , the police and the army operate .
It must encourage support for the media who seek to provide true information and remain independent of the public authorities . Society must be strengthened through citizens ' associations , professional organisations and trade unions .
We realise that these objectives , which , although ambitious are no less urgent or utopian , cannot be achieved without working on dialogue both between the European Union and the ACP countries and among the ACP states themselves .
This dialogue must be as broad and as intense as possible , covering all issues and areas affected .
In addition , it must include not only representatives from each state , but , in particular , members and organisations from the political opposition , representatives of the legislature and judiciary , as well as representatives from civil society and from non-governmental organisations .
For this purpose , we support the strengthening of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly 's role as the preferred forum for developing such a dialogue .
Mr President , the Commission communication on EU support for the promotion of democracy , the rule of law , respect for human rights and good governance in the ACP countries is a good document on an equally good initiative by the Commission .
This is the view of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , whose opinion I have drawn up for the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy had certain comments which it has tabled as amendments , such as the fact that the communication does not take sufficient account of the unique existing EU-ACP structure , which enables both sides to consult each other about human rights , democracy and good governance through the EU-ACP Council and the EU-ACP Assembly .
Instead of introducing a lot of new structures , we feel that the existing structures should be put to optimum use .
Secondly , where a certain ACP country has violated human rights or there is a serious lack of good governance or democracy , the EU-ACP Assembly can send delegations , draw up reports for discussion in the Assembly and take measures on that basis .
Instead of introducing a great many official reports , we feel it would always be better to give preference to and to make better use of this route via the Assembly .
This would avoid duplication of effort and place the emphasis on a political approach rather than an official one , which is generally more effective .
Thirdly , most ACP countries have signed international conventions in the field of human rights and democracy .
This means that these countries are themselves obliged to report on a regular basis and to evaluate the reports in their parliaments .
If the European Union intends to take action , then account must be taken of the fact that these countries have their own responsibilities here .
All of these points are set out in amendments which have been incorporated by Mr Fernández Martín .
We are therefore very happy with his report and we hope that the Commission will react favourably to it and to our amendments .
Mr President , one of the greatest challenges of our time is how we can help the general principles of democracy and the rule of law to take root in developing countries .
Physical and spiritual development is possible only in circumstances where there is general protection under the law and equality of social rights .
The hustle and bustle of finance requires clear legislation for its protection .
A major task of the European Union is to promote democracy , respect for human rights and the adoption of the principles of the rule of law .
It has already done much to further this cause , and will continue to do so . Money has been set aside for this purpose in the budget .
The cultivation of democracy has to begin at the beginning .
The birth and growth of political parties have to be encouraged .
We must support openness , honesty and legality in government .
Local traditions and customs often hamper developments .
Corruption and the custom of favouring relatives are fairly common and , worst of all , widely accepted and tolerated .
In such circumstances it is difficult to use European Union funds wisely , because that can also easily lead to abuse .
That is why the implementation of democracy programmes is difficult and demands an enormous sense of responsibility on the part of the authorities concerned .
When it was preparing last year 's budget Parliament decided that an interinstitutional working party , including a representative from the European Parliament , should be set up to decide on funds - how to spend them and follow them up - to promote democracy , respect for human rights , and the furtherance of the rule of law .
The purpose of this working party would be to aid the implementation and follow-up phase of these programmes .
It is to be hoped that this system of coordination will get off the ground as soon as possible .
Mr President , first I would like to congratulate Mr Fernández Martín on the intelligent and balanced work he has done on this report , and give him my best wishes .
What is the main thrust of the Commission 's communication and the parliamentary report we are examining ?
It is nothing less than the recognition that democracy , the affirmation of the state of law , respect for and promotion of human rights , the fight against corruption and the implementation of good governance are not just universal principles and aims which should obviously be promoted all over the world , they are also , and above all , essential conditions for success in implementing policies for healthy , balanced and genuine development .
In short we do not want to ' export ' models to our partners in the third world , and the ACP countries in particular .
We do not want to impose the principles and practices of the world 's most developed countries , but we do want to affirm what is now recognised objectively : that democracy and human rights are the foundations on which a modern society can develop , and not the end result of development .
Of course we know a close correlation exists between democracy and development , but that can never be used as an excuse to justify anti-democratic regimes and violations of the most elementary human rights , to deny the right to participate in decision-making , to tolerate widespread corruption , and so on .
In the course of the last few years we have been able to witness , in many ACP countries , the turbulent , and even sometimes contradictory , emergence of civil society , which is demanding space , guarantees and rules , calling for the reorganisation of the authorities , and demanding that the authorities gear their action to the collective interest and the welfare of the citizens .
It is on that basis that a start has been made on new processes of democratisation on the continent of Africa and elsewhere .
The Union 's approach has evolved a great deal over the years and since the start of the 1990s the focus has been on the issue of democracy as an aim of all development cooperation .
Of course it is still useful to calibrate the instruments according to the two main types of possible measures .
First there are measures of ' negative discrimination ' whereby sanctions are applied to countries responsible for human rights violations , involving active intervention .
This makes the negative approach ' expensive ' and ' inconvenient ' .
The problem is that this approach , while necessary , often fails to secure the agreed participation of all those involved in international cooperation with a country , often rendering the measures useless .
However the accent is now being rightly placed on the need for ' positive measures ' , that is , measures which , through direct cooperation , create conditions for effectively implementing the commitments set out in Article 5 of the Lomé Convention .
Given that I agree with everything contained in both the Commission 's communication and Mr Fernández Martín 's report , I do not want to go into the substance of the various initiatives proposed .
I would just emphasise that , almost inevitably , there is a risk of an omission .
We need to consider whether , in some cases , the rules and procedures set out in the current Lomé Convention relating to contracts , the allocation and management of financial resources , and respect for commercial rules of origin , may not be the subject of mismanagement and even corruption in some ACP countries .
To be more specific , the problem is that the lack of transparency and knowledge about the instruments of the Convention , which concentrates enormous power in the hands of the national organisers in ACP countries , can certainly give rise to problems of mismanagement , corruption or misuse of the resources .
I think this is a point to be looked at carefully when it comes to renegotiating the rules for the next Convention .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on his excellent report and being brave enough to highlight such issues as corruption and the lack of pluralism in some States .
We are all aware that many developing nations are in a serious financial situation because corruption is adding to the debt problem .
Sadly , in many ways , democracy - or the lack of it - go hand in hand with corruption .
Having used democracy to gain power , some do not wish to relinquish that power .
For that reason , we need good governance as well as democracy if we are to combat corruption .
The whole structure of our Lomé agreement is based on democracy , human rights and good governance .
I should like to tell the Commissioner that fine words are not enough .
We cannot force nations to abide by these principles but we can use incentives .
The whole thrust of any new arrangement after 2000 will have a much more political dimension , and we must insist on political pluralism in countries receiving aid programmes .
It is up to nations themselves to develop this .
As our rapporteur says , measures should be put in place to assist those ACP nations struggling towards democracy .
Regional cooperation should help in this .
I totally support that but we must strike the right balance .
There are a growing number of applicant States which are altering their constitutions in such a way that political pluralism will be impossible and opposition parties will never have the chance to come to power .
We should not tolerate that .
What incentive is there for responsible nations struggling to stay within the rules if other nations which flout those rules of democracy continue to receive support ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group I would like to endorse the praise that has been showered on the rapporteur , Mr Fernández Martín . I must say he has worked with uncommon speed .
In fact few reports have been put together so fast since the Committee on Development and Cooperation came into being .
The picture he paints of relations between the African , Caribbean and Pacific countries and the countries of the European Union is very interesting .
He is quite right to highlight the move from a purely economic approach to a form of cooperation which instead puts the accent strongly on human rights , evolution towards democracy , and aid from the European Union countries to establish the rule of law in the developing countries , not just in form but also , and above all , in substance .
We should not forget that simply affirming the rules and principles of modern western constitutions is not enough to make democracy exist automatically , nor is establishing democracy enough to create conditions of genuine development automatically .
This is why the Fernández Martín report wisely puts the accent on specific local characteristics as well .
We cannot assume that our institutional models are universal , eternal and incontestable , nor can we think of superimposing them uncritically on the situation in countries with very different histories from our own .
But one thing is certain : the battle against corruption , embezzlement and bad governance must be fiercely fought , both in Europe and in the developing countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group , I should also like to welcome both the Commission 's initiative and the report by Mr Fernández Martín .
I must mention the Commission 's initiative because I regard this as extremely opportune .
As the Convention will soon be renewed , I believe that this is the time to clarify how the European Union interprets the contents of this Convention on human rights , democracy , the rule of law and good governance .
A few months ago in this House , Commissioner Deus Pinheiro threw down the challenge involving the need to consider how the European Union cooperates with the ACP countries and with developing countries . This related , in particular , to those countries that have violent regimes in which fundamental rights are not respected , those where corruption forms part of daily life , and , above all , those where the existence of conflicts may result in cooperation funds being diverted to the war effort .
However , it is refreshing to note that , in recent years , many ACP countries have implemented significant institutional reforms , often under very difficult socioeconomic and political conditions . And the fundamental values of the rule of law , the participation of the people , good governance and the protection of human rights have formed the structural objectives of these governments .
Anyone participating in the ACP assemblies can confirm this concern on the part of these countries .
The new ACP-EU partnership must be given a strong political dimension based on the promotion of the values of democracy , as only a democratic state can guarantee full respect for human rights .
Furthermore , the Convention must include detailed and very clear provisions on measures to combat corruption , accompanied by very specific sanctions that can be applied to the ACP country , to the Member States or to the economic operators .
Finally , we also believe that the appropriate institutional framework for the debate on the new concepts of the Convention and the pursuit of this policy is a new ACP-EU Joint Assembly that has been adapted and restructured .
Mr President , our group will also be supporting Mr Fernández Martín 's excellent report .
We have spent many years debating democracy , the rule of law , human rights and good governance in developing countries and in the ACP countries .
Negotiating the Lomé IV Convention played an important role , and this report is the next step .
It is important to create the necessary infrastructure to bring about the separation of powers .
To achieve this , however , many countries need support , which we should provide in the areas of development policy and cooperation with the ACP countries .
It is vital that the Joint Assembly is itself pluralistic , and that it is a body which is representative of the various parties and not of authoritarian regimes .
We must act together to ensure this .
We must also act together regarding the allocation of funds .
If we in the EU wish to combat corruption - which was the subject of yesterday 's debate - then this also applies to cooperation with the ACP countries .

We should also look into the areas where , by means of infrastructure measures , human rights are being violated by the present international economic system - as Mr Fernández Martín points out in paragraph 7 of his report - that is , due to the debt burden issue , structural adjustment measures or the fact that European companies force the indigenous population to submit to structural adjustment measures , which is often an obstacle to the introduction of the rule of law and the separation of powers .
Mr President , in the Commission document on relations between the European Union and the ACP countries I found an excellent definition of good governance : ' Good governance refers to the transparent and accountable management of all a country 's resources ' .
If we replace the word ' country ' by ' European Union ' , then we can clearly see that we have no right at all to be paternalistic towards the ACP countries .
I have the impression that we are using the term political dialogue to conceal the fact that what we are really trying to do is to impose a western political system on the ACP countries .
The poor results of the Lomé Convention as revealed in the Commission 's 1997 Green Paper led to a wide-ranging discussion about whether the Convention should be continued .
If there was to be a new convention in 2000 , then its substance would have to be completely different , and we now appear to have decided that this new substance should be political .
The failures of the past are all put down to inadequate government structures , corruption and other practices , in an attempt to find political solutions for economic problems .
I have serious doubts as to whether this is the right approach .
I also think that the European Union is not the right place for this sort of political dialogue .
We would do better to channel our efforts into promoting the genuine involvement of the developing countries in the world economy , even if this could work against our own economic interests .
Mr President , may I congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work and stress how important it is that in future the promotion of human rights becomes a priority component of the EU 's development policy .
I consider it important to give special emphasis to the fight against corruption , which is an evil that is all too present in many ACP countries .
Without wishing to polemicise over this issue I would however like to say that the EU must in future set a good example .
We cannot preach water and drink whiskey .
It is also a matter of priority to give urgent attention to the situation of children and to protecting the rights of children in the context of dialogue between the European Union and the ACP countries .
The only effective way to achieve a lasting improvement in the fate of socially deprived or sexually abused children in some of the countries involved is to convey an unmistakably clear message and impose certain conditions within the framework of development policy .
If the ' democracy and human rights ' dimension is to become an essential component of the Community 's foreign and development policy , children must be the focus of our attention .
We must not permit the growing phenomenon of child labour and the sexual abuse of children , which is taking place on an enormous scale , in any of our partner countries .
Even though worrying developments in the environment sector are not necessarily taking place on our own doorstep , we must also , in view of the significant global interdependencies that are being created , integrate environmental aspects into our relations with the ACP countries .
Mr President , I would of course like to endorse the congratulations offered to Mr Fernández Martín .
I naturally attach great importance to this report and to the Commission report , because the ever-recurring conflicts between the United States of America and Europe can be attributed not least to the fact that we have particularly close economic ties with 70 countries throughout the world and that great mutual support exists .
I believe that it is quite natural that we , as Europeans , should attempt to introduce and support , in these 70 countries with which we cooperate , certain principles which we have recognised as being correct , and that we look upon them practically as a basic condition in this area .
Allow me , however , to make a slight criticism of this report that seems to me to be very important .
It relates to the fact that , once national rights have been established , we naturally place a great deal of emphasis on human rights and thus on the individual .
The fact that there are certain groups which also have rights is unfortunately being ignored .
The groups I am specifically referring to are the minority groups and the various ethnic groups which live in these countries and which unfortunately are not mentioned in this report .
We see only too often that it is these very minority groups which are treated abominably and have no rights whatsoever .
In this connection I have in mind certain African countries , for example in the Great Lakes region .
If we look at what is happening in Rwanda and Burundi , it is my belief that it is enormously important for us , as a European Parliament that continually supports not only individual human rights but also the rights of ethnic groups , to ensure that the rights of these groups are guaranteed at an international level , which is not the case at the moment .
Mr President , I applaud the way in which the Union 's human rights policy is being progressively extended .
If it is to have maximum effect a human rights policy must be clear , transparent , fair and consistent .
Various proposals are put forward in this document , some of them good , some of them not so good .
I agree with some of what the previous speaker , Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , said about this .
In its communication , the Commission rightly proposes to extend dialogue with the ACP countries with the aim of promoting democracy and human rights there .
It also suggests a combination of positive and negative instruments in order to achieve this , and this balance is vital for success , in my view .
The rapporteur , Mr Fernández Martín , is therefore right to point out that Parliament must have a say in any decision on suspending ACP cooperation .
Finally , I would urge the Commission to prepare a similar communication on the implementation of democracy and human rights policy in other regions .
The Union 's policy on this in all areas of the world must be based on clear criteria .
You know what they are , I have already listed them : fairness , clarity , transparency , consistency and making allowance for the fact that not everyone in the world has managed to come as far as we have .
Nevertheless , in this case I entirely agree with my colleague , friend and fellow countryman Mr Blokland that once in a while we need to put our own house in order here .
Mr President , in September 1998 negotiations started between the EU and the ACP to agree the successor to the Lomé Convention .
I welcome the fact that a fundamental basis for this negotiation is a strengthening and deepening of political dialogue , an element which had been largely missing in the previous discussions .
One of the major components of the political dialogue is the subject of this report , namely democratisation , the protection of human rights and the operation of the rule of law .
The report considers these issues thoroughly and I support its recommendations to include stronger provisions on the human rights front and to tackle corruption , and particularly important , its recommendations for the use of sanctions .
I support the strategy outlined in this report , I congratulate the rapporteur and I hope Parliament overwhelmingly approves it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to thank Parliament for its proposal for a resolution on the Commission 's communication entitled ' Democratisation , the rule of law , respect for human rights and good governance : the challenges of the partnership between the European Union and the ACP States ' .
And I should particularly like to thank the author of this report , Mr Fernández Martín , for the quality of his work , as well as Mr Pomés who spoke on his behalf .
I should also like to thank all those speakers who participated in the debate .
The importance of including human rights , the rule of law and democratic principles in EU policy in general , and in its external relations in particular , has grown over the last decade . This is mainly due to the belief that there can be no lasting human development without an institutional and political environment that respects these principles .
However , each country must decide upon the political and economic model around which it will organise its communal life , whilst respecting the general principles of human rights as well as the conventions and international and regional legal instruments on such issues .
This communication follows the same lines as previous communications from the Commission on these issues , particular that of May 1995 on the inclusion and respect for democratic principles in agreements between the Community and third countries . It is also along the same lines as the November 1995 communication on the European Union and the external dimension of its human rights policy entitled ' From Rome to Maastricht and beyond ' , as well as the March 1996 communication on the European Union and the issue of conflicts in Africa : ' Peace-building , conflict prevention and beyond ' .
This communication responds to three requirements : the need to clarify for ACP members how the European Commission interprets these principles ; the need to contribute in terms of stepping up the debate in the ACP states ; and the need to prepare and facilitate the debate on the future relations between the ACP states and the European Union .
Therefore , the Commission believes that it is necessary to draw up a specific communication on the ACP states . The aims of this communication will be to clarify the concepts that appear in Article 5 of the revised Lomé IV Convention , to draw up an action plan for coordinating dialogue with ACP countries , to strengthen the debate on such matters in these countries , and to give special emphasis to a series of specific measures and priority actions .
As regards principles and objectives , the Commission welcomes Parliament 's approval and the fact that it responds to the guidelines from the reports by Mr Rocard and Mr Martens .
The Commission once again stresses the principle that the promotion of human rights , the rule of law and democratic principles forms an integral part of the European Union 's development policy and constitutes an essential element of the Lomé Convention . The Commission also shares Parliament 's concern that good governance be added to this with an explicit reference to combating corruption , as stipulated in the negotiating mandate for the ACP states and the European Union .
In relation to the action programme , the Commission is delighted that Parliament supports the positive approach in these matters , the suggestion to the ACP states that they propose criteria relating to the promotion of human rights , and the recognition of the specific social , economic , political and cultural situation of each ACP state . As a result , they will be able to define objectives , priority actions and the pace of development , as well as assessing what has been achieved .
Finally , I should like to stress that it is only through dialogue between the Community and the ACP states on such issues that the political and institutional dimensions of cooperation will be able to flourish , as will respect for the sovereignty and distinct characteristics of the countries in question . We therefore support the proposals in the current resolution on how to forge ahead on these matters , with a view to negotiating the ACP-European Union Convention .
We also support the need to define and institutionalise the process and the arrangements for this dialogue in the next ACP-European Union Convention - as defined in the negotiating mandate - as well as the importance of developing and extending this dialogue by including the various actors from civil society . Advantages are to be gained by developing this dialogue to negotiate national and regional indicative programmes .
Finally , we share Parliament 's view on the need to make the most of , and strengthen , the joint institutions , including the Assembly , in order to promote and develop this dialogue .
In terms of determining specific measures and priority actions that will have to be taken , we do , of course , agree with the proposals in the resolution on the importance of supporting actions to help vulnerable groups , particularly the rights of children and of army and police personnel . These have been implemented over recent years through projects financed by budgetary headings from Chapter B-7 , European initiatives for democracy .
Finally , let me repeat what Mr Fernández Martín said in his report and welcome the laudable efforts and progress made in many ACP states over the last few years in spite of the difficult economic conditions they face .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Parliament adopted the resolution
The priority given to the promotion of human rights , the rule of law and democratic principles in the European Union 's policy on development aid must be welcomed once again .
It can never be stressed enough how the efforts made in these areas by developing countries must not only be welcomed but also encouraged , and , above all , they should be supported as they are more often than not made under difficult socioeconomic conditions .
Another priority to be added to the next ACP-EU Convention must be the promotion of good governance and the fight against corruption , together with the instruments and specific measures needed to implement these .
It is not actually possible to have a socially balanced policy on economic development as long as most of a country 's resources are being diverted into the pockets of a few people .
Similarly , another condition that I feel is essential to any sustainable development is that the new Convention should pay particular attention to our partners ' respect for and implementation of the minimum international standards of the ILO .
This Convention must also ensure that the economic and social partners become stronger in the ACP countries and that a permanent and constructive dialogue is established between them .
In more general terms , it is once again important to support and extend the role of civil society in drawing up and implementing development and democratisation programmes among our partners .
To conclude , I would also highlight the essential role played by women in all stable development processes and I would emphasise , together with our rapporteur , the need to constantly ensure that greater consideration is given to their legal and social rights as well as to their increased participation in political life .
Export of renewable energy technologies
The next item is the report ( A4-0477 / 98 ) by Mr Elchlepp , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the new prospects of the European Union in exporting technology and services for the use of renewable energy .
I give the floor to the rapporteur , Mr Elchlepp .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report draws our attention to a new , extremely promising , but unfortunately under-utilised opportunity for Europe to export to and cooperate with third countries in the field of renewable energies , and also proposes a practical plan of action .
It is a happy coincidence that , in this very area , Europe is in an ideal position to merge its interests in the export and labour markets with the interests of third countries in cost-effective , suitably adapted energy supply systems .
The fact that renewable energies are an essential part of a responsible energy and environmental policy which may yet achieve the climate protection objectives set out in Kyoto is , hopefully , well-known .
But forecasts show that , because of both financial and non-financial considerations , wind power , solar energy , biomass and other energy sources in the renewable energies sector deserve to have much stronger support in the EU 's industrial and employment policy .
That is why I expect the new German Presidency to set new trends in this area .
Back in 1995 , in the Commission 's White Paper ' An energy policy for the European Union ' , a clear statement was made concerning renewable energies , also from the point of view of foreign economic policy , and in the 1997 White Paper ' Energy for the future - renewable sources of energy ' , the one million solar roofs programme for photovoltaic systems was introduced , which would satisfy half the energy requirements in third countries , and at the same time provide an opportunity to promote exports for our domestic industries in Europe .
Yet I ask myself : where are the actions ?
I ask the Commission : where are the implementation proposals ?
I ask the Council : where are the necessary funds , the majority of which must be provided by the Member States ?
Two things need to be done . Firstly , we need a long-term European strategy to encourage exports in the renewable energies sector ; this will include the entire export chain and will be trans-sectoral in nature , and it will help in particular our small and medium-sized enterprises to gain a foothold in world markets .
Our SMEs often lack reliable information on overseas markets , which I was able to gain first-hand knowledge of during a visit I made yesterday evening to such an enterprise in my own constituency which exports solar vessel systems to third countries .
As is made clear in a report , out of 17 potentially relevant EU support programmes , there is not a single one that aims specifically to provide export support for renewable energies .
Many of these programmes are unsuited to small and medium-sized enterprises , as only large projects requiring at least EUR 1 million are being supported .
The lack of market information and problems in finding business partners are further obstacles , as I have seen for myself .
In order to synchronise and significantly strengthen appropriate foreign trade activities in Europe , I am calling for a ' European Export Council for Renewable Energies ' , which will in particular help SMEs through effective advice and facilitate their access to the world 's future markets .
This Export Council could be funded jointly by the EU and by industrial associations in the renewables sector .
It should first and foremost serve as a point of coordination , encourage the foundation of export cooperatives , link these up with strong partners in the target countries and support premarketing activities .
Haste is paramount .
The competition in the USA and Japan never sleeps .
In the USA there is already a ' US Export Council for Renewable Energies ' , which has offices in the client countries of the future and also has generous funding .
I will quote some figures to illustrate the importance of the sector as a whole .
For the period 1990-2010 the overall world market in renewable energies will be almost EUR 1 800 billion .
The annual productive investment volume is estimated at EUR 86 billion .
The photovoltaic sector , which is not even the biggest sector , is recording an annual market growth of 15 % .
Even in the wind energy sector an average market growth of 26 % is being projected in emergent and developing countries for the period 1998-2002 .
Employment opportunities are also considerable .
The Commission itself has talked of between 500 000 and 900 000 new jobs by the year 2010 , and an equal number of jobs could be created by exports in this field .
No other industrial sector , apart from telecommunications , has such a high growth rate in employment as , for example , wind energy ; Denmark is an example here .
The proposed export initiative can only have a chance if we in Europe help renewable energies along the road to success , as we create confidence in European technology among our world partners by using it ourselves and by creating a viable domestic market ; we must therefore promote it considerably better than hitherto and in a completely targeted way .
Mr President , this is a very important issue which should be examined particularly from the point of view of how to create a demand for renewable energy sources .
We live in a market economy , and commercial applications for which there is no demand are rarely developed .
However , we in Europe are in a situation where there is natural demand .
We have a situation of natural demand in the Member States of the European Union , but there is still more demand in the applicant countries .
The European Union is to enlarge , and in those countries that are currently applying for membership of the European Union there are very great problems in the energy sector .
They have obsolete industrial plants which are a serious risk to the environment , and outdated nuclear power plants which are also a risk to health and safety .
Nuclear safety must improve in these countries to comply with international regulations , and defective nuclear power stations must be taken out of use .
This has been said many times .
But what should replace them ?
In my opinion it is necessary to switch to renewable energy resources and power stations that exploit the highest possible technology .
This will also be in the interests of the applicant countries in the European Union 's internal market , enabling them , in this very difficult situation , to acquire an immediate competitive edge over the present Member States .
What it will mean for the present Member States is that we will be able to export the know-how .
But the problems themselves will obviously have to be solved in each country individually .
The Kyoto agreement as it is obliges us to find solutions .
When , for example , the international funding institutions of the European Union support energy programmes in the applicant countries , special attention must be paid to making sure the money is spent on the best possible technology as well as renewable energy sources , in order to improve our chances of acting in accordance with international climate agreements .
The rapporteur raised the issue of employment very forcefully ; it is just as important in the applicant countries as it is in the European Union .
From the point of view of the applicant countries , if we underline the importance of decentralised production and renewable energy sources we can also do much to weaken the conflict that exists between environmental demands and questions of employment .
This problem will diminish if new jobs are created from the production of energy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Elchlepp report is unequivocal and contains a number of demands . It is a report which will enable us to become directly involved in the spheres of activity of the European Union and to implement the measures it contains .
I believe that , as Mr Elchlepp has already stated , this can go some considerable way to helping third countries meet the environmental standards that were set jointly in Kyoto .
For us , however , it is an enormous opportunity to progress through positive economic cooperation within the various development scenarios and agreements and , through cooperative partnership , to not only export new technologies but develop them jointly with our partners in the developing countries , within the framework of joint ventures .
First and foremost , these new technologies could help African countries to reduce their very costly consumption of fossil energy sources and to make significant progress , above all in rural development , not only in production of energy for electricity , lighting and hot water , but also for the energy needs of small and medium-sized industries and craft industries .
All in all , therefore , this is an excellent report which calls upon us to take action .
I would also like to mention that the European Union should establish a means of channelling aid , just as the Americans have done .
However , we are not in support of a system of aid which introduces export subsidies , such as those in the agricultural sector , for example , but we are in favour of one which covers quite a broad spectrum , as Mr Elchlepp has already partly indicated .
This should include , first of all , the provision of information .
We need to inform our SMEs , who are leading players in this sector , about opportunities in the third world .
At the same time , however , we need to inform third countries , especially the ACP countries , about these opportunities and , above all , about the opportunities in rural development , where , for example , cooperatives and producer groups could implement these uncomplicated technologies .
Secondly , this should include education and training in respect of the new markets which could arise for our enterprises .
We already have the appropriate provisions and even the new budget items which make this possible .
However , these are far too modest , and every year in the Committee on External Economic Relations we fight to get the Committee on Budgets to see the importance of these opportunities and to translate this importance into a few extra million .
In comparison to the huge budgetary blocks , this is virtually nothing .
Finally , this should include pilot projects to show the SMEs what is possible in the third world in the field of rural development .
I would like to end by saying something more about actual implementation .
I am now talking , in my role as Vice-President of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly , about actual implementation for these countries .
In Africa there is sun in abundance .
We must take advantage of this and give our African friends the chance to use this energy correctly .
Secondly , we must also make the necessary organisational decisions .
I am glad that our rapporteur on the future of the Lomé Convention and chairman of the PPE Group , Wilfried Martens , is still here and is perhaps listening to my contribution .
We first of all have the possibility of setting up an energy chapter within the framework of the new Convention and then , within this new energy chapter , of giving priority to renewable energies .
Thirdly , we must also inform the Centre for Industrial Development , which is provided for in the Lomé Convention , about this report and , in our next meeting with the ACP countries we must point out to this centre that here we have new opportunities for action which can be very quickly implemented .
Fourthly , I would like to say that we must hold this discussion in the ACP-EU Joint Assembly over the coming months in a very intensive , result-oriented and targeted way .
Mr President , the rapporteur , Mr Elchlepp , has produced an excellent and very interesting report on this important issue .
Renewable energy technology and its markets are a global issue , requiring EU resources for development .
As the report points out , the new opportunities can help to solve problems caused by uncontrolled migration in developing countries , in rural areas , and elsewhere .
I see a great opportunity in the development of renewable bio-energy and wood energy technologies , and the logistics know-how associated with this whole sector , in the development strategies for countries like these .
I would also like to emphasise the importance of something close to us in the Nordic countries , which people are not always sufficiently aware of in more southern parts of Europe , which is that the most important aspect of renewable energy is the biomass that comes from the natural forest , such as branches , crowns and small-diameter trees in a thinned-out forest .
There could be a demand in other parts of the world for the export of know-how and logistics associated with gathering these , especially in the EU partnership and applicant countries .
We have already managed to develop the world 's highest levels of know-how in the technology used in small combined heat and power plants .
It has also been adopted on a very large scale , as , according to the latest statistics , bio-fuels are the largest source of energy in Finland .
Renewables can thus be used for combined heat and power production .
Furthermore , in Central Europe the consumption of conventional fuels for fires and boilers could in this way be lessened or altogether replaced with renewable energy sources .
Some of the know-how already exists , as do more efficient boilers .
The common policy of the European Union calls for a particular focus on the most important issues , having , as we do , limited resources at our disposal .
I would like to emphasise in this connection the importance of business in developing and exporting renewables technology .
For that reason , the European Union must , as a priority , strive to support commercial exports , through marketing subsidies and investment aid , for example , in the less developed regions of the European Union .
Furthermore , there should be more opportunities for companies in the partnership countries such as those in the TACIS and PHARE programmes .
Because technology is still searching for new forms , instead of so much planning and guidance , the main focus should be on decentralised methods of progress , where all endeavours are encouraged and these forms of renewable energy become competitively priced compared to other energy sources .
During the first stage , however , we will still need financial incentives .
Mr President , world energy production is predicted to grow at a rate of 1.6 % a year .
That means that by the year 2020 the world 's energy production figure will have increased by 50 % .
The developing world 's share in that figure will be substantial , and it will account for perhaps three-quarters of the increase in oil consumption .
The earth , however , will not tolerate this kind of democratised energy consumption if we go on the way we are .
Democracy of energy consumption demands new thinking and new technology .
It requires us to make room in our developed capitalist countries for energy consumption in other lands .
Market mechanisms hamper the role of democracy in energy consumption .
Prices of conventional forms of energy at the moment are too low compared to those of the new technologies , and for that reason we have to create incentives for their introduction .
We have common resources in the world and the rapporteur , Mr Elchlepp , quite rightly points out that the partnership countries and the developing countries are in an important position from the point of view of the future of energy consumption and its technological development .
It is also very important to stress the importance of solar and biomass energy .
Neither the goal of doubling the consumption of renewable energy by the year 2010 nor the Kyoto agreement will be implemented unless room is made for the new technologies in the production of energy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased with this very detailed and unambiguous report by Mr Elchlepp .
I am also very pleased that it is slowly getting through to this House that renewable energies will be quite crucial in the future . We have neglected this sector for far too long .
For far too long we have relied on energy sources that cost the earth and cannot be disposed of , such as nuclear power , for example .
This report gives us the opportunity to place our future hopes in new energy sources , in tandem with the countries in the south and with the new countries in the east .
This is also a special challenge for the German Presidency , which is held by Joschka Fischer .
We will need money , which we must take away from other energy sources , to effect this volte-face .
Despite the fact that new oil reserves are still being discovered , word should have got around by now that this substance is finite .
That is why we must follow this new path out of our responsibility towards future generations .
Mr President , Europe is currently in an advantageous position in terms of research and development in the field of renewable energies , despite the scant support received by this sector of European industry in comparison with its most direct competitors , the United States and Japan .
In order to maintain this position , it is vital that the European institutions demonstrate their political and financial support for this important industrial sector . It is a sector that is capable of making job creation compatible with the protection of the environment .
A true Community policy for renewable energies and SMEs in this sector , coupled with an increase in the specific budget for such forms of energy and in appropriations for exports would make a valuable contribution to job creation , the European Union 's main preoccupation .
It is estimated that close to one million direct and indirect jobs could be created between now and the year 2010 if the use of renewable energy were to double .
These jobs would also be compatible with the protection of the environment because the use and promotion of these forms of energy avoids the use of fossil fuels , thereby preventing emissions of CO2 into the atmosphere .
This is a particularly interesting point when we take account of the fact that , with this reduction in environmental pollution , we would also be fulfilling the commitments made at the Kyoto Conference on Climate Change .
Moreover , a third of the world 's population , mainly in third world countries , do not have any electricity supply .
The use of renewable energies would therefore offer a rapid and effective way of resolving this problem without harming the environment .
It is for all these reasons that we welcome the idea of creating a regulatory European Export Council for Renewable Energies . It would provide the Union with a coordinating body to work on a true European strategy for the entire export chain .
In this way , it would contribute to job creation , to the protection of the environment and to the development of third world countries .
Madam President , exporting renewable energy is in the interests of a sustainable economy , and there is therefore every reason to encourage it .
I congratulate Mr Elchlepp on the inventive way he has tried to find ways of doing this .
There are still a few hurdles to overcome before exports can really get under way .
According to the rapporteur , the long-term export outlook for renewable energy is good , but as yet there is no prospect of it happening .
Up to now , European firms have been less than eager to export technology .
The market share held by renewable energy also needs to increase dramatically , and European firms must use the lead that they have gained in this field to promote exports .
Renewable energy cuts down pollution and prevents natural resources from being exhausted , so there is every reason to try to promote it .
Our current biased economic system which charges too little for fossil fuel energy is not geared towards this , however .
Money therefore needs to be provided to get exports under way , and the rapporteur has a number of ideas here .
He calls for extra funding for an active European export council for the product , and for renewable energy projects to be included in our development policy .
I think this alternative way of spending development funding is an excellent idea .
I would suggest that the funding should firstly benefit the developing countries , such as by implementing the proposals on ' debt for solar swaps ' .
The developing countries should be rewarded by having their debts reduced if they use sustainable energy .
Madam President , without claiming to be an expert on the subject , I nevertheless wish to stress some of the very positive aspects of the excellent report by Mr Elchlepp , and to add my voice to those of the millions of people who are fighting for the future of our planet , which is threatened by headlong destruction of the environment , by irresponsible use of natural resources and by a widening gap between rich and poor countries .
Faced with the reluctance of world leaders to adopt direct measures , especially the greatest polluter of all - the USA - which emits a quarter of the world 's total pollution , the Union is the only hope and the only possible avenue for effective action .
The White Paper and the positions of the European Parliament , as expressed in this report , provide a very good framework for stepping up efforts for the further development of technology , mainly through assistance for small and medium-sized enterprises and through the transfer of this technical know-how , so that the huge energy requirements can be met by renewable sources .
It is frightening to think that even today there are two billion people on our planet who live without electricity .
Renewable energy is certainly an important future market , because its potential is unlimited compared with the limited and low-entropy energy sources in the earth 's crust .
In any event , the European Union must cooperate closely with developing countries in the context of the new Lomé Convention , to promote viable forms of development and to settle their debts - as proposed in the report - in exchange for coverage of their energy needs from renewable sources .
It must be clearly understood that mineral energy reserves are becoming exhausted , while solar and wind energy ensure a continuous and unlimited flow and their use involves no pollution at all .
In my own country , Greece , we have both those types of energy in abundance .
In Buenos Aires , the world 's powers assured us that they will be adopting measures in the coming century to implement the Kyoto decisions , but in the few months before the end of the millennium , ecosystems - which cannot of course await the outcome of negotiations - will have sustained further serious damage .
That is why the Union must act at once and incorporate fully into its trade policy , external economic relations and the framework for enlargement the promotion of renewable energy sources as a principal means of securing viable development , protection of the environment and enhancement of the Union 's competitiveness and the creation of new jobs .
Madam President , I would like first and foremost to congratulate Mr Elchlepp .
I have been in Parliament for 20 years now and rarely has there been such a good report as the one he has written .
Many thanks .
Applause
However , I would like to broaden the subject somewhat to include an area which lies particularly close to my heart .
We have a massive market for renewable energies on our very doorstep , that is , in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
I should like to cite as examples the countries which I frequently visit : Hungary , Croatia , the Czech Republic and Lithuania .
In all these regions there is still a tremendous amount of work to be done .
In this regard , Mr Elchlepp , I should like to add one point to your excellent report .
The people in these countries do not yet know enough about renewable energies .
They must be informed and the governments must be informed , because we are dealing here in with certain large commercial concerns which have no interest whatsoever in the use of renewable energies and will therefore do everything they possibly can to stifle it .
I should therefore like to ask you to ensure that both the people of these countries , and their governments , who also do not know enough , are informed .
In this context , two points are of particular relevance .
It must not be forgotten that under the Russian regime many dreadful sins were committed against the environment , but now in these countries the environment is being severely damaged by lignite .
The massive utilisation of lignite , which I see especially in Hungary , for example , in the region of Obosar , must be replaced by energy sources which have no such harmful impact on the environment .
This is a task which it behoves us to carry out because we can achieve so much in this field .
We can and should give these countries a great deal , because in these countries we can start from scratch and carve out the correct path .
Applause
Madam President , Mr Elchlepp 's report is an excellent one , and I would like to express my sincerest thanks to him .
In Finland we use renewables mainly in the form of wood , in its various forms , and peat , which has a substantial share of the market .
The volume of peat that grows in marshlands is approximately equal to the volume of wood that grows in the forests .
When they form , wood and peat absorb carbon dioxide , so burning them does not upset the earth 's carbon dioxide balance as with fossil fuel .
Harvesting and preparing the wood and the peat requires work .
Peat and wood consumption , therefore , at the same time promotes employment .
Promoting the consumption of wood and peat is also sensible because energy can be produced as a cottage industry using very simple methods .
On the other hand , mass production requires highly developed technology .
The EU and our country too leads the world in the large-scale exploitation of renewables , and this will also mean great opportunities for exporters .
Madam President , our group fully supports the factual , in-depth report by Mr Elchlepp .
Not only is it important because there exists a huge future export market for renewable energies , but it is also necessary to reduce the dependence of many developing countries on imports in this sector .
As a result of the improvement of social and environmental living conditions , especially in third world countries and in Eastern Europe , and the finite nature of fossil resources , together with the lessons learned from the dangers inherent in atomic energy , it is necessary to take urgent support and cooperation measures in the renewable energy sector .
That is why we recognise that an important basis has been established in this report .
We have put in place five new budget items for third world countries .
This report could be the starting point for us to move forward in this area .
Expansion of production capacity in third world countries must be supported , for example by means of the European Development Fund .
Just as important are education and training , support for small and medium-sized enterprises , the one million solar roofs programme , ' debt for solar swaps ' and also what was said by Mr von Habsburg .
I believe that the PHARE programme offers an important basis , not for supporting nuclear power plants in the East , but for supporting the renewable energy sector .
Within the framework of the Lomé Convention , we need not only an energy chapter but , as Mr Schwaiger said , determined action on the part of the Commission to implement the necessary measures .
In my opinion the Commission must set up a special unit to promote marketing and cooperation here , to support the NGO projects in third world countries and , through the PHARE , TACIS and MEDA programmes , to support projects in the Mediterranean region and in Eastern Europe .
As we do not have responsibility for the budget in the European Development Fund , demands must be made of governments and so the impetus must come from the Commission .
They must make use of our joint potential with these countries to help the people and to maintain the basis for our lives and our existence .
Otherwise we would not be able to survive because we would not have the energy sources .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it gives me great pleasure to be able to address Parliament on the issues raised in this very timely report and to respond to the proposal for a resolution .
For a few moments at least , this will be an opportunity for me to return to a former role I had several years ago as Commissioner for energy .
The report and its explanatory statement are a valuable contribution to the current work on promoting renewable energy and will help us to understand better what opportunities such energy forms offer .
In a very clear and detailed manner , the report sets out the possible different courses of action that must be considered if our ambitious goals are to become an achievable reality .
Therefore , I should like to begin by expressing my sincerest thanks to Mr Elchlepp for this report .
The Union 's strategy , contained in the November 1997 White Paper on renewable energy sources , has already received the support of both Parliament and the Council . Its main objective is to increase renewable energy sources in the Union and thereby enable us to create the internal base and platform needed to increase exports to the rest of the world .
In the work leading up to the adoption of the White Paper at the end of 1997 , the Commission tried to take Parliament 's contribution into account , as expressed in its resolutions on the White Paper itself and on access for renewable energy to the electricity market as well as the Altener II programme , which was adopted in 1998 .
The White Paper reflects the views expressed by Parliament in 1997 on the main renewable energy issues that would be useful when drawing up a Community policy in this field . It also reflects the wide range of reactions and requests of industry , specialists , interest groups and the people in general throughout the Union who would be affected by such a policy .
One essential aspect of our common priorities is , of course , the export market for renewable energies .
Moving on from this , I will briefly tell you about the progress made in the first year since the White Paper was adopted .
Work on the necessary advance studies of the current programmes and efforts being made concerning renewable energies has almost been completed in the Member States and in the Community .
I should like to pass on the Commission 's satisfaction with the progress made . It is pleased with the diversity of action plans and national programmes on developing renewable energies that have been drawn up since the adoption of the White Paper .
It is clear that much of the work we are asking Member States to complete over the next decade has already been planned , or at least initiated .
Of course , there is still a great deal to be done and there is no reason for us to be complacent , especially if we take into account the commitments made in Kyoto , as the report rightly points out .
I am pleased , however , that the majority of Member States have already announced policies and national plans which , generally speaking , have a similar scope and objective to the proposals for Community strategies and action plans . This will make applying these strategies and action plans much simpler .
The public debate that took place at the Energy Council of November 1998 confirmed their importance . The Commission will draw up a detailed study as soon as possible that will serve as a starting point for subsequent planning and coordination .
The key action plans must be applied within the Union but it is clear that the actual experience of promoting exports is valuable . We will also increase our credibility through successful marketing in third countries .
The amount of effort all this will require in terms of planning and presentation is also clear and the Commission fully shares Parliament 's desire for close cooperation between the industry and the public sector , both at Union level and within each of the Member States .
In accordance with Parliament 's wishes , renewable energies are , and increasingly will be , promoted in European assistance programmes such as PHARE , TACIS , MEDA , the European Development Fund and other Lomé Convention instruments .
All the relevant cooperation agreements will therefore be revised , as will other agreements with both industrialised and developing third countries . This will encourage our partners to follow this same line , yet without forgetting each of their priorities and specific restrictions .
As the proposal for a resolution suggests , a pro-active approach for exports and cooperation in the field of renewable energies will be promoted , particularly through EU programmes related to energy , such as the SYNERGY programme .
We will also encourage the elements of the fifth framework programme on research relating to scientific and technological cooperation .
Many activities have been set in motion under the Thermie programme .
In the five years that this programme has been running , more than 190 programmes have been set up by the European industry . These have been cofinanced by the Community with more than EUR 20 million .
There have also been measures aimed at countries outside the European Union . These include projects aimed at determining and assessing export markets for EU technologies and at designing and applying the best strategies to encourage the use of new technologies in the markets selected in this way .
Aid for exporters of renewable energy sources from the EU will continue to be seen as a priority , particularly in terms of credit guarantees , insurance , organising the necessary contracts , disseminating information and setting up networks .
Another priority is cooperation on energy planning and integrated resource planning , particularly with emerging economies on energy policy . The reasons for this are highlighted in the resolution .
An additional aspect that the Commission believes to be extremely important is that of access to innovative financial instruments that are specifically adapted to the needs of the renewable energies market .
The Commission will continue to cooperate with financial institutions such as the World Bank , the European Investment Bank and the Global Environment Fund .
I could give a number of examples of such cooperation , which currently extends beyond the European Union , such as the World Solar Programme 1996-2005 , which aims to carry out high priority regional and national projects worldwide , particularly in developing countries .
And in relation to this , I should like to point out that the White Paper stressed the need to make special efforts regarding the African , Caribbean and Pacific countries .
Initiatives for promoting solar electricity and for encouraging diversification to alternative renewable energy sources have been implemented .
As regards the associated countries , one of our priorities is to encourage them to bring their legislation on renewable energies into line with European legislation .
Other priorities are to extend EU programmes such as Altener to include these countries , and to involve them in activities under the fifth framework programme on research .
Some of this morning 's speakers asked if any organisation had been established at European level with similar responsibilities to the United States Export Council on Renewable Energies , which receives federal funding .
On these lines , I should like to inform you that back in 1996 , Commissioner Papoutsis opened the European Export Council on Renewable Energies in Brussels in the presence of various senior officials from the Commission and other organisations . The Council is currently composed of five European associations for renewable energy .
Finally , Madam President , I have briefly tried to explain what we are doing , and what we have in the pipeline in relation to the content of the report and resolution in question .
The European Parliament has once again shown itself to be most constructive in its initiatives for promoting renewable energies .
I can assure you that the European Commission also believes that the export market for renewable energy sources constitutes one of our main priorities for the immediate future .
I should like to finish my speech by once again thanking the rapporteur , Mr Elchlepp , and all the Members who participated in this debate .
Thank you , Mr Oreja .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Parliament adopted the resolution
There is no doubt that the technologies that use environmentally compatible renewable energy provide a cheap , decentralised energy supply .
Intensive use of these new technologies would therefore give the developing countries a more realistic chance of reducing their energy bills while increasing the amount of energy supplied to their populations , particularly in the countryside .
The increased use of these cheap and clean technologies also provides an opportunity for industrialised countries in that it may lead to the creation of new jobs in high value added sectors together with access to new and immense markets in the southern hemisphere .
As an aside , I must point out , as the rapporteur did , that greater use of these technologies within the EU would allow us to achieve our self-imposed objectives on climate protection . It would also increase our independence in the energy sector and have a positive influence on our energy balance .
In general , I support the proposal to set up a European Export Council for Renewable Energies whose responsibilities would include encouraging and structuring the activities of SMEs in this area .
I agree with the rapporteur that the European approach must be transverse and that , within the context of international cooperation and our partnership agreements , we must encourage our representatives to give strategic priority to renewable energy when planning their energy , environmental and development policies .
This must occur in such a way so as to ensure that their natural interest in guaranteeing development at the lowest possible cost matches our search for external markets .
This excellent report on new prospects for exporting technology for renewable sources of energy , which I have voted for , would gain in credibility if the EU 's domestic energy policy had the same priorities .
Subsidies for nuclear power would then have to cease , and nuclear power would have to be phased out .
Oil and gas dependency would also have to be reduced , and the use of renewable energy sources would have to increase .
Impact of financial crisis on European industry
The next item is the joint debate on the oral questions ( B4-1162 / 98 , B4-1163 / 98 , B4-1164 / 98 , B4-0005 / 99 , B4-0008 / 99 and B4-0010 / 99 ) on the world financial crisis and European industry .
Madam President , this debate could not have been more topical or relevant .
One month ago we were wondering what impact the economic instability resulting from the crises in the Asian and Latin American markets would have .
And now this week , still without having had an approximate assessment of the impact of the crisis that flared up in August , a new episode in the saga has developed with the devaluation of the Brazilian currency . This may drag down other Mercosur currencies or force them to make adjustments .
Although this situation could temporarily benefit the Brazilian economy , it has already caused a truly spectacular stampede of capital .
And we are facing this fresh crisis with our new currency , the euro , which was indeed greeted with loud applause from the Japanese market .
However , we do not know how the economy will behave . Nor do we know how , in the medium term , it will withstand the consequences of a possible deterioration of the crisis , an increase in imports or unfair practices against our industry and exports .
As we all know , unfair practices and increased imports are already damaging two industrial sectors that are particularly sensitive : iron and steel , and shipbuilding .
Over the past 20 years , these two sectors have suffered losses and staffing levels have been drastically reduced .
If such reductions continue , these sectors will disappear . We will have gone from considering strategic aspects to industrial ruin in a period of 40 years .
We wonder what will happen to employment and that is the million dollar question .
Japanese and Korean practices aimed at cornering markets , their State aid and , in short , their unfair practices and disregard for standards that attempt to regulate the sector at a global level should all make us think carefully .
If these attitudes persist , the OECD or even the World Trade Organisation will find their regulatory role and their prestige severely affected .
The shipbuilding sector , for example , cannot make any more sacrifices .
If State aid disappears before the year 2000 and current practices continue - namely Asian dumping - the majority of shipyards will be forced to close and all the work on modernising and adapting them , financed with European citizens ' money , will have been in vain .
If steel imports continue to be subsidised in the country of origin , I do not know how our businesses will be able to survive when left at such an unacceptable disadvantage .
For this reason , I should like to remind the Commission that the proposal for a resolution on shipbuilding included an amendment that called for a study on how to address the problems described .
Could the Commission inform us of the results of this study and the corresponding proposals , as well as giving us its opinion on the extension of State aid until the year 2000 ?
And as regards steel and industry , what proposals could the Commission put forward to support the affected sectors and when could it present them ?
What trade policy measures could it muster up to combat the growing number of cases of unfair practice ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are only just beginning to feel the knock-on effects of the financial crisis which has created such a stir over the last few months .
As we predicted , the crisis in South-East Asia has had global repercussions .
The collapse of the financial system in the Far East has led to weaker market demand there .
The question that has been raised today in the House can only be the beginning of a very fundamental debate on this problem .
The European economy , in so far as it has been adversely affected by the crisis , is legitimately entitled to financial support in the sectors affected .
This is the background to our question .
So far the EU has in large part been able to cushion the changing trade conditions which have arisen as a result of the crisis and has also borne the corresponding financial burdens .
No other market , not even the American market , has had to cope with such a substantial rise in imports both in terms of absolute figures and percentages .
The European market is now being swamped with goods which would normally be exported to markets in the Far East .
Not only does this development look set to continue , but it will accelerate .
The damage inflicted on the European steel market , for example , will be further exacerbated by the dishonest trade practices implemented in certain countries .
In this connection , the intention of the American steel industry to solve the problem through draconian trade-policy measures , or protectionist measures , constitutes a serious threat to the EU market .
I call upon the Commission to see to it that the United States Administration is left in no doubt that , if it does not demonstrate solidarity in such matters but , on the contrary , resorts to dishonest measures , it will have to reckon with severe countermeasures on the part of the European Union .
If the EU does not adopt a clear and unambiguous position , the USA will make further attempts to push forward its own world trade policy .
In view of the fact that European industry is clearly in no way to blame for the present critical situation in the US market , in which it has operated extremely well over a long period of time , the United States must be called upon , at the highest political level , to ensure that there is a fairer trade policy .
The USA and Europe play a leading role in the WTO .
Conduct that is less than exemplary would be disadvantageous for both sides .
Madam President , the previous resolutions of 17 September and 3 December 1998 on the global financial crisis do not make today 's oral questions and motions for resolutions redundant or merely repetitive .
That is because , in this first part-session of 1999 , this subject is still current , and because the economic situation is unlikely to stabilise .
Another recent resolution , this time on asymmetric shocks , which was also adopted in December , was particularly relevant in the context of the financial crisis and its consequences on the national economies . It further strengthens the belief that this is the right time to discuss and determine solutions to prevent this situation from having economic and social effects on European industry and international financial development .
The situation is changing and developing , at times at a dizzying speed , and the signs are not reassuring .
If it was considered that the events in Brazil in October were the worst point of the crisis and that efforts had been made and financial resources mobilised to prevent this turning into a disaster , then the news of the last few days must be worrying .
This is why we are supporting the joint motion for a resolution , although we believe that it fails to attribute the basic responsibility for the crisis , which lies with the priority given to the financial and nominal situation over the real economy . We also feel it is right that concern is growing and that the requests are becoming urgent .
The inclusion of references to shipbuilding and iron and steel , which is the aim of Amendment No 2 , is very relevant . However , it justifies an extension to other sectors , particularly the textile sector , which was included with these other sectors in a recital of our motion for a resolution and which was sacrificed to the benefit of the joint motion .
We therefore believe that , in order for the amendment to be approved , it should include the textile sector .
We are talking here about currency problems , stock market collapses and financial crises .
Those are the subjects of these oral questions and motions for resolutions . However , the crux of the matter is that it is becoming clear that this is increasingly a question of the currency , stock market and financial aspects of a latent economic crisis that is about to explode .
Brazil had better watch out . Indeed , this crisis is due to the fact that the financial and speculative instruments and mechanisms are out of synch with the structure and operation of the real economy .
Madam President , with three major economic upheavals within a few years in Asia , Russia and now Latin America , there should perhaps be some lessons for us in this experience and we should learn from our mistakes .
There seems to be a remarkable similarity between the build-up to the Asia crisis and that more recently in Brazil with , in both cases , massive lending power being given on the basis of over-optimistic projections of growth and industrialisation .
Investors , of course , can leave as quickly as they arrive , taking their money with them .
And when the bottom falls out of an economy there can be enormous knock-on effects .
In Scotland , as elsewhere , we are still suffering from the effects of the Asia crisis , with promised investments failing to materialise and with delays in lowering interest rates and the strong exchange rate of sterling continuing to hit our industries and our exports hard .
While the crisis in Brazil may not be quite so serious it can still have repercussions .
Greater economic stability in Europe should increase our ability to safeguard the well-being of those of our citizens most directly affected .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , given that there are a number of questions on the impact of the financial crisis on European industry , I will , if there are no objections , answer them in one fell swoop . I will begin with the questions on the general impact of the crisis and then move on to answer those that refer specifically to the steel sector .
Last year 's downturn in the world economic climate undoubtedly had a negative impact on the European Union .
However , in 1998 , good internal conditions more than compensated for negative external effects .
The growth of the 15 Member States in 1998 was 0.1 % higher than predicted in March 1998 . The economic crisis will mean losses for the European Union 's economy in 1999 .
However , its effects should , in principle , be limited thanks to the introduction of the euro , as Mrs Miranda just mentioned , and by maintaining healthy economic conditions .
The Commission trusts that Europe 's economy will recover in the year 2000 , a year in which it is hoped growth will reach 2.8 % .
In that general context , some sectors of European industry are faced with fierce competition from imports .
There has been an increase in imports from South-East Asia and other regions . But exports have also increased in all sectors , despite the drop in exports to South-East Asia .
In the year leading up to September 1998 , the European Union registered a trade surplus of ECU 22 billion for industrial products , that is , ECU 16 billion less than the surplus for the same period in 1997 .
The significant devaluations of South-East Asian currencies have damaged the competitiveness of short-term European prices . However , this has been partially compensated for by the high national inflation rates in those countries .
It is difficult to predict what the final impact of the crisis in South-East Asia will be in terms of the EU 's relative competitive position .
It is particularly difficult due to the fact that the fluctuations in South-East Asian exchange rates can have repercussions on the countries ' commercial output and competitiveness . As a result , it is difficult to give a prognosis at this stage .
Clearly , the Commission is concerned about the implications of an increase in competitive pressure on European industry .
This heavy pressure will probably continue in 1999 , although perhaps not at such high levels as in 1998 .
The European Union 's trade balance for industrial products should improve in relation to 1998 .
Although we do not yet have data for the 1998 period , the Commission calculates that the direct repercussions are marginal in terms of total industrial output for that year , but that they could be more significant in 1999 .
When the Commission made its autumn forecast , it pointed out that it expected growth in employment to reach 1.2 % in 1998 , a more rapid rate of growth than the 0.8 % rate recorded in spring .
However , the slower growth of gross domestic product in 1999 will also be accompanied by a drop in the employment growth rate to 0.9 % .
Nonetheless , it is hoped that unemployment will continue to decrease . It should have dropped to 10 % in 1998 and should then drop to 9.5 % in 1999 , from a maximum of 11.2 % recorded in 1994 .
As regards the increase in competitive pressure on European industry , this does not necessarily mean that the Union 's trading partners are using unfair trade practices .
The Commission is prepared to apply the instruments of the Union 's commercial policy where conditions dictate and in accordance with the relevant WTO agreements . To illustrate this point , only last week the Commission initiated two proceedings , based on two complaints submitted by the European Union 's steel industry .
The first relates to dumping concerning hot-rolled strips from Bulgaria , Iran , Yugoslavia , India , Taiwan and South Africa . The second is a complaint against subsidies for the same products from India , Taiwan and South Africa .
None of the countries mentioned in the anti-dumping or anti-subsidy cases are South-East Asian countries implementing IMF stabilisation programmes .
The Commission is not aware of unfair trade practices relating to imports of steel products into the Community , except for the cases it is already dealing with .
During 1998 , until the month of September , imports of finished or semi-finished steel products rose to 18.5 million tonnes , 6.6 million tonnes more than for the corresponding period in 1997 .
At the same time , exports dropped by 2.7 million tonnes to 18.3 million tonnes .
As a result , the European Union showed a trade deficit of 0.2 million tonnes compared with a surplus of 9.2 million tonnes for the previous year .
The unexpected increase in imports of steel products into the European Union caused prices to collapse in the second half of 1998 .
Demand for steel from the manufacturing industry is expected to fall in the first half of 1999 , but is later expected to improve , leading to total annual results similar to those of previous years .
In 1999 , the level of imports is expected to remain high .
It is difficult for the Commission to estimate to what extent the South-East Asian steel industry will contribute to economic recovery in the region , given that it varies from country to country .
Nonetheless , it is clear that several countries in the region significantly increased their revenue from steel products in 1998 .
This was the case for South Korea , Taiwan , Japan , China and Indonesia , amongst other countries .
During the United States-European Union Summit , held in Washington on 18 December 1998 , debates were held on a wide variety of issues and one of these related to imports of steel products .
The Commission highlighted the need to keep markets open and to avoid delaying the recovery of those countries hit by the crisis that were carrying out IMF stabilisation programmes .
It is essential that all parties involved act in a responsible manner and in accordance with international standards in order to safeguard the advantages of trade liberalisation and avoid further trade disputes .
The United States administration , for its part , is aware that imposing trade barriers would harm countries that have been seriously affected by economic problems . But it is also facing strong internal pressure to react to the recent fluctuations in steel imports .
There is a possibility that the United States may adopt commercial measures on steel imports in the coming months .
The Commission will follow any developments closely to ensure that the United States acts in accordance with international trade standards .
I would now briefly like to refer to two questions that have been raised .
The first is from Mrs Miranda de Lage on the impact of the Asian crisis on the shipbuilding industry .
Following the devaluation of various currencies in South-East Asia , the Koreans , in particular , have enjoyed higher sales in this sector .
However , the Community industry managed to maintain a strong position in the world market in 1998 : it obtained 29 % of new orders between January and September 1998 , as opposed to 22 % for Korea .
As I said earlier , the Commission is watching closely to ensure that the countries involved in the crisis respect the conditions laid down by the International Monetary Fund and , more specifically , the conditions relating to structural reforms and the relations between industry and the Korean Government .
I should now like to say a few words on the impact of recent events in Brazil on European industry .
I believe that , at this stage , it is still difficult to give a correct diagnosis , and would , in fact , be rather hasty .
A great deal will depend on how the financial markets react to the events in Brazil .
Here we have - as you will also have - the latest news to reach us on how the markets reacted and on the packet of urgent measures put forward by the Brazilian Congress . These were part of the fiscal reforms demanded by the International Monetary Fund , in exchange for aid amounting to USD 42 billion .
These measures form part of the restructuring plan being pursued by President Fernando Cardoso .
The Managing Director of the IMF , Michel Camdessus , yesterday stated that he was satisfied with Brazil 's commitment to apply the budgetary consolidation programme agreed with the IMF .
At the same time , the Brazilian President has continued to send out messages of confidence to investors .
In any event , the European Union and Brazil have important trade links and European businesses have invested quite substantially in industrial development in Brazil , in the automobile sector for example .
The European Union imports a large quantity of raw materials from Brazil and the devaluation of the real could obviously force down the prices of these products , with some positive implications for European industry .
However , the devaluation might increase the competitiveness of Brazilian exports to the European Union and reduce the competitiveness of the European industry 's exports to Brazil .
These are just a few comments I wanted to make on the situation currently unfolding . There is still a need for caution in a situation such as this as we do not know how the financial markets will behave over the days and weeks to come .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , of course the successful introduction of the single currency justifies greater confidence on the part of the Union , and nobody wants to be a herald of pessimism at a time like this .
I also believe , however , that we all know the success of Europe 's economy will be judged not so much in monetary terms but in relation to the real economy , and there the situation is not at all encouraging .
Unemployment , the supposedly number one economic problem , which I fear we are making zero effort to address , has stabilised despite all your forecasts - for what you told us , Commissioner , amounts to no more than forecasts - at around 10.5 % , and even if it falls by 0.5 % that is not very much .
We have long forgotten the optimistic words spoken by Mr Delors in this Chamber at the beginning of our parliamentary term , about the creation of 15 million new jobs which would reduce unemployment to 6 or 7 % .
The prospective growth rate of Europe 's economy in 1999 has fallen to just 1.4 % .
The money market crisis in the third world , which has of course become a crisis of the real economy there , has brought about huge job losses , reductions in real incomes and a fall of our own exports .
It is a fact that any development comes from the services sector in our own area and in the United States , while in contrast , in the manufacturing industry , there are already clear signs of surplus production capacity .
In the face of such a situation , it is not surprising that voices have been raised in favour of protectionism .
And what you told us about the steel industry verges on a brief protectionist declaration , not by yourself , but one that is increasingly to be heard in major parliaments , in Congress and in other decision-making centres in the world .
This is a very dangerous development , because there is nothing more dangerous than a return to the restrictions on world trade , which would of course affect the weakest economies worst .
Without oversimplifying matters , common sense shows that we must not make such a difficult situation even more difficult by suppressing demand in our own economy by the restrictions we have imposed on financial policy , in other words the celebrated 3 % deficit limit of the Stability Pact .
Besides , it is forecast that in 1999 , in the present economic situation , the 3 % limit will not easily be held to by Germany , Italy and France , in other words the big European countries .
Will unemployment have to increase to 25 % before we begin reviewing a restrictive policy which , though it may have reduced inflation to zero , is now moving towards the achievement of zero employment as well ?
Commissioner , the question you are being asked deserves relatively general answers that can be found , together with your comments , by reading our daily papers .
I would first of all point out how unwise we were to condemn the instruments that gave us the ECSC Treaty .
At that time , I asked for more care to be taken .
We knew that the crises in the iron and steel industry would reoccur fairly frequently and we now find ourselves very poorly equipped .
It is a little too late for you to tell us that the Commission is going to determine whether or not the United States contravenes the international conventions or international WTO commitments .
As Mr Katiforis has just pointed out , measures have already been taken by the United States , which do not seem , at least at first sight , to comply to any great extent with WTO commitments .
In other words , the Commission seems to be equally at a loss when it tells us that caution is necessary and that the situation is difficult : that is just about all it can tell us .
We should be able to say to the WTO that changes in the exchange rate are in some respects similar to duties or customs duties .
What difference is there between imposing a customs duty on imports and devaluing the currency in a competitive manner ?
There is something amiss there . Rather , the emphasis should be placed more on the stabilisation of exchange rates and we should positively adopt the approaches that Japan and some of our countries have already taken .
In my opinion , we should either improve the stability of exchange rates or at least ensure that we still have the resources to protect ourselves like other countries .
Madam President , three large volcanoes have just erupted : one in Asia , one in Russia , and one in Latin America .
The next volcano is already showing signs of erupting .
That is China .
The problem is that capitalism , with its capital markets , creates instability and imbalance in the world .
Today 's capital markets are hyperinflated .
Any concept of inflation worth its salt must take account of the fact that capital markets mean the unrestricted rise in value of capital goods .
International institutions issue erroneous advice when this situation occurs .
They give the same kind of advice to all countries , which are all different , and generally that advice is deflation , or , in the case of industrialised countries , cuts in social welfare .
These institutions , under the leadership of the IMF , do not prevent the forest fires from starting : they only light other fires to counter the problem , but that is not enough .
We should be preventing the fire , or , in this case , the volcanic eruptions , from starting at all .
In this situation the left has a real opportunity .
Real capitalism causes problems , so let us make a joint assessment of the situation and work according to that .
The third way is the outside lane .
We must now together find the second way for the left and the Greens .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we must not keep on protesting that things are not really all that bad , as is always the case in short-time crisis management . Instead , we need to develop strategies , at the core of which must be , not moralistic advice , but well-understood self-interest .
The very real danger of a deflationary process which can no longer be controlled is moving ever closer .
Assurances that there is really no problem ring ever more hollow .
We must realise that long-term stabilisation of the global financial architecture is impossible without the stabilisation of the economy in global terms , and that this will not come about without the stabilisation of the global social order . In other words , the question is not : how do we arrive at an alternative global economic and social order ?
This would be illusory . Instead , the old Keynesian questions - not his answers - are becoming once again very pressing .
How do we achieve a global payment system that functions well and remains stable in the face of short-term irritations and volatility ?
How do we achieve a global monetary policy ?
How do we construct an international trade organisation that is in a position to stabilise commodity prices ?
How do we achieve aid programmes with low-cost loans and subsidies to assist developing countries ? And now that we are faced with globalisation it is no longer just a question of developing countries but also sectors , projects and industries .
The present discussion is too narrowly focused on the imposition of antidumping and antisubsidising measures , which in effect means denying certain countries the opportunity to develop .
The question must be posed differently : how is it in fact possible to solve the problem of actual demand , which is currently not being met , in terms of the value of money ?
As an example , let us take global shipping .
We have a shipping fleet which is completely outdated , environmentally unsound and unsafe , the renovation of which would bring lasting employment and progress in resource efficiency .
So , instead of continually asking the wrong question about the world economy locomotive , we should be asking ourselves about a joint global investment train ; as Europeans , we can make a contribution here and we have a responsibility to do so , a responsibility which we are currently not fulfilling .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , today we have a delegation from the US Congress here in the House .
It is apparent to all that our debate is highly topical and that global problems need to be tackled at a global level .
Although the European Parliament can be criticised for perhaps proceeding with considerable caution and deliberation in certain matters , I nevertheless believe that the fundamental criterion for the European Parliament is to produce results and to benefit those who need it .
In this House we have already dealt on a number of occasions with turbulences in the world of international finance .
In Europe we now have the euro , which has brought with it a new stability , at least in the euro zone of the eleven and thus in the European Union as a whole .
Through the single market we have made progress in respect of border tariff problems , and we are also moving in the right direction in the area of subsidies .
That is why I am very grateful to my colleagues in the House for providing the opportunity for us to devote our attention once again to this issue , in particular to the repercussions in Europe .
Entire sectors of industry , such as the pharmaceutical industry , ship building and , above all , the steel industry , are facing new challenges .
Our opportunities for export in these areas have shrunk dramatically .
Exports to Asia , for example , have fallen by 56 % .
By contrast , imports into the single market from this region have risen sharply .
Import escalation rates of up to 700 % are currently being quoted .
For the first time the European Union has become a net importer of steel .
We must work together to reverse this trend , in the interests of those industries affected and of their employees .
In the light of these developments , I am delighted that we can today welcome to Strasbourg a delegation from the United States Congress .
The USA is facing similar , if not quite so far-reaching , challenges .
We can only get to grips with these developments through cooperation , joint strategies and a joint problem-solving approach .
In this way each country will take on its share of the responsibility , but always in relation to the actual burdens and opportunities .
In this context , free access to markets has a crucial role to play .
Trade-policy instruments naturally include antidumping measures and WTO procedures in places where state interference is pushing down the price of exports .
But such measures can only be regarded as a last resort .
In the long term we need constructive transatlantic dialogue because only if we preserve free trade in goods and observe the rules of fair competition on both sides of the Atlantic , will we be able to guarantee a stable global environment .
Madam President , I should firstly like to thank the Commissioner for the information he gave us which , to a certain extent , was rather optimistic . However , it also demonstrates the same concern we have when asking questions .
And those of us who live in regions such as Asturias are concerned .
Asturias has already lost more than 6 000 direct jobs in the steel industry , not to mention the indirect job losses that can also be added to this figure .
It is very important to us to prevent further job losses .
This is the Union 's main concern at the moment .
Not only must we create employment , but we must also ensure that existing jobs are not lost .
If we do not do so , the employment plans drawn up in all the Member States will be of little use .
In the resolution we have signed there is the suggestion - and I know it is not a very popular one - that we should once again discuss a tax on financial capital transfers in the economies of such countries .
We do not know what might happen in Brazil .
You said so yourself .
We have received this news but we do not know what impact it will have on the European Union 's economy .
Nor do we know whether the European Union , in spite of the euro umbrella sheltering us , will be able to weather the storm of serious problems that will affect such extremely important sectors in the future , that is , the steel , shipbuilding and textiles sectors .
This last sector is not included in an amendment by Mr Kittelmann , but we suggest that it be included because it is also extremely important .
Madam President , I will only speak for a minute and I would like to thank everyone who has spoken this morning .
I will very briefly say to Mr Katiforis - whom I cannot see here at the moment - that I in fact believe that it would be a serious mistake at this time of international economic fragility for the European Union to lift protectionist barriers . This could provoke similar responses all over the world and lead us into a global recession that could last for a long time .

I should like to say to Mr Herman - whom I cannot see here either - that the Commission does not believe that the American plan for the steel industry is its last word on the policy it is going to adopt in order to address pressures facing the steel trade . Instead , we believe it is the beginning of a negotiating process with Congress and the steel industry that could lead to specific measures within a few months .
I should also like to say to Mr Herman that the ECSC Treaty still applies .
Our steel industry is bearing up well .
The measures that the United States is currently adopting are the same as those being adopted by the European Community , in other words , provisions for applying the instruments of the commercial policy .
In response to some speeches , specifically that by Mr Wolf , I should also like to say that our concern at the current moment is that the countries in crisis come out of it as quickly as possible .
This would not only benefit them but would also put them in a position to import European products . Consequently , I believe that , on the one hand , we must see how well we can survive this situation , and on the other hand , we must help these countries to recover as we will then be able to export to them .
It is well known that the World Trade Organisation does not accept measures against currency devaluations and , until now , the United States and the European Union have not applied any measures in this respect .
Finally , I should like to say to Mr Rübig that we must use the instruments of our commercial policy against unfair practices in imports , that is , the instruments I referred to earlier : the anti-dumping and anti-subsidy instruments .
In any event , I should like to say that I have fully noted all this morning 's speeches and I will pass them on to my colleagues in the Commission .
Thank you , Mr Oreja .
The debate is closed .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Joint motion for a resolution on the economic and social impact of the global financial crisis on European industry
Before the vote on Amendment No 2
Madam President , in the original resolutions the three sectors of most concern are mentioned : steel , shipbuilding and textiles .
These three sectors are not covered in the joint resolution and I think this is due to a transcription error .
However , there is an amendment by Mr Kittelmann that includes the steel and shipbuilding industries .
We have talked to him and with other colleagues about adding the textiles industry , which is important for our country and for others .
If there are no objections , we will approve this amendment by Mr Kittelmann if it includes the textiles sector .
I believe that everyone agrees with what we are saying .
Parliament adopted the resolution
The Commission has just presented us with a cautiously optimistic theory on the economic and social consequences for Europe of the global financial crisis .
Leaving aside Europe as a whole , and concentrating instead on France , I would actually be even more cautious .
Even a moderate slowing down in growth can have very negative consequences if it occurs in a country that has no room for manoeuvre .
This is the case with France .
It already has record compulsory levies , it no longer has any monetary autonomy following the introduction of the euro , and it cannot , in any case , allow itself the luxury of increasing its budget deficit , which is already the highest in the European Union in terms of percentage of GDP .
These constraints will be added to further by a series of additional costs caused by socialist policies , from the cost of the 35-hour week to that of the massive programme to regulate the situation of illegal immigrants .
This does not even include the costs of the euro resulting from the establishment of the European public authority needed for its operation .
Without returning to the issue of the single currency , on which my feelings are well known , I must stress that the European Union can be useful to us in a crisis if it conducts a vigorous common trade policy to combat dumping , for example in the iron and steel industry or shipbuilding , and to ensure compliance with the Community preference , for example in agriculture .
The EU must also help us to conduct international negotiations aimed at a relative stabilisation of exchange rates , an action that goes hand in hand with a common trade policy .
However , we must not delude ourselves : Europe can only provide us with supplementary aid .
The essence of the solution is in the hands of the French themselves .
They must choose between the current negligence which , if it continues , will one day mean that we are controlled by Europe , or an effort of self-discipline which alone will be able to preserve our sovereignty .
Common fisheries policy action plan
The next item is the report ( A4-0462 / 98 ) by Mr Novo , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the Commission working document ' Improving the implementation of the common fisheries policy : An action plan ( SEC ( 98 ) 0949 - C4-0378 / 98 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in addition to dealing with the specific proposals of the Commission 's action plan , I intended in this report to consider , and often to confirm , political issues involving the whole common fisheries policy .
In fact , it is my understanding that controls cannot or must not be regarded as an isolated political priority . Rather , they must be looked at as one aspect of a set of broader policies that ensure the social and economic sustainability of the sector and of the fishing communities reliant on this sector .
Monitoring is clearly decisive in ensuring the success of the fisheries policy in a situation of declining resources that is affecting a growing number of species .
However , in order for controls to be accepted and effective , it is essential that they be applied correctly , universally , transparently and fairly . This requires , from the start , a simplification of rules and the broad and effective participation of all the social partners , at both state and Community level , in the process of defining these rules .
Furthermore , the need to adjust the fishing effort has to be based on multilateral and systematic scientific research , using adequate financial and human resources , which can identify the true state of the resources . They must also be able to assess independently and reliably the consequences of the various sources of pollution on the state of the oceans .
We must promote stability in the sector , particularly with regard to access to resources . The central issues must therefore be to guarantee the continuation of the exclusive national use of the territorial waters within the twelve-mile limit , and even to consider whether it needs to be extended and to guarantee the continuation of the international fisheries agreements .
The social development of the sector also requires policies establishing general levels of social benefits and welfare entitlements that are identical for all Community fishermen and that guarantee them the foundations for a common legal statute in line with higher standards of living .
The widespread introduction of new technologies is certainly positive , not only in terms of improving the reliability and transparency of the controls , but also in terms of allowing an overall modernisation of infrastructures , thus improving health and safety conditions at work and guaranteeing a higher quality of fisheries products .
However , the effects on increased productivity must be assessed . We must prevent over-fishing as well as the creation of conditions leading to large monopoly enterprise groups that are totally alien to the economic realities of the sector .
For these policies to be implemented in a global and integrated manner and for the controls to therefore be successful , it is essential that , at both state and Community level , fisheries policy has adequate financial support , thereby putting an end to its position as the poor relation of the Community budget .
In this context , the way in which the sector is dealt with in Agenda 2000 does not augur well and this situation must be radically altered .
As for the proposals of the action plan , in essence , responsibility for monitoring naturally lies and will continue to lie with the Member States .
This does not mean that efforts may not be made towards real cooperation in terms of information , without breaking any confidentiality rules . We can also aim to achieve effective equivalence and reliability of the assessment procedures , which are increasingly computerised , and ensure an agreed definition of the basic rules and offences and of the equivalent sanctions .
Inspection procedures must also be established by consensus , with a code of conduct being proposed . In addition , cooperation between administrations must be increased while equivalent vocational training must also be encouraged and the human resources allocated to the controls increased at all levels .
Similarly , it is vital to conclude the procedures allowing proper comparison of fleets and respective productivity by implementing the commitments made by some countries under the multiannual guidance programmes .
At the same time , we must accept that the reduction in the fishing effort cannot be implemented on the sole basis of reducing the number of vessels , but must also involve the voluntary reduction of operation time . These measures should , in any case , be permanently accompanied by adequate and general compensation and by training programmes and aid for retraining .
The report argues in favour of tighter controls on third-country vessels and on the so-called flags of convenience , as regards both access to resources and landing .
In this respect , it calls for compulsory satellite control of these vessels in Community waters and the correction of the imbalance between the controls carried out in Community waters and those carried out in international waters .
Finally , the recourse to greater certification of products landed and marketed in the EU is decisive .
Tighter controls on their origin are necessary and we must take into account the social and environmental conditions of their production methods , the minimum size requirements for the species and the health and hygiene standards required in the EU . Tighter controls on transport from landing to the final point of sale are also required in order to make it possible to reliably ascertain the origin and legal situation of products on the market .
The rapporteur and Parliament now hope that the Commission and the Council will take due note of all the policy guidelines approved today . If followed , these may contribute positively to improving the implementation of the common fisheries policy .
I must thank all my colleagues for their contributions to the drafting of this report and I must particularly thank all the secretariat of the Committee on Fisheries for its diligence in preparing this report .
Madam President , Mr Novo has produced a very interesting report .
It is apposite in a week when we have been talking about control of the finances and the activities of the European Union , that here at the tail end of the session we should be discussing control of one of the most important policies and one of the few common policies we have , namely the common fisheries policy .
The Commission has produced a five-year plan for the common fisheries policy over the next five years .
When my party formed the presidency of the Council last year under the chairmanship of Jack Cunningham and Elliot Morley control and supervision of control was made a high priority .
It is very important because nothing brings the Union into greater disrepute - and we have seen that this week - than to have disputes and allegations of bribery and cheating .
Fishing is an area where a great deal of this goes on .
Indeed , in my constituency only last year a Spanish trawler was arrested and impounded in Greenock for illegal fishing off the coast of Ireland .
No doubt Scottish and Irish vessels have been impounded elsewhere .
All fishermen , irrespective of nationality , are very adept at bending rules to their own advantage and blaming it on the foreigner , blaming it on the Irishman or the Dane or the Spaniard .
This happens throughout the Union and it is important that the Commission and the Member States get together and establish some common rules and some common responsibilities .
Member States must face up to their responsibilities and we in Parliament must play our part by ensuring that sufficient resources are voted into inspection and surveillance .
It is apposite too that Mr Novo is the rapporteur because Portugal has a second-to-none scheme of satellite surveillance which our Committee on Fisheries visited only last year .
I was very impressed when I saw how they carry out surveillance by satellite and then send spotter planes out .
They can take photographs of ships and if they are in the wrong area they can be taken to task and the fishermen can be fined in the courts .
It is a very successful method .
My own government has introduced a designated port scheme which will stop the landing of illegal fish .
This has been a serious problem in the United Kingdom .
The Fish Merchants Association in Aberdeen has lobbied me about this .
It is worried about the impact of illegal fish on price in the North of Scotland .
These are some of the areas which are mentioned in the report .
It is a very good report .
The Commission has a produced a reasonable working document and hopefully together , Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries , the Commission and the Council - who must face up to their responsibilities in this - will bring about proper control of the common fisheries policy .
Madam President , the success of the common fisheries policy depends on effective monitoring and strict enforcement .
This applies both to non-EU vessels and to the fleets of Member States .
Some fisheries resources have been badly depleted by over-fishing which threatens the current livelihood of fishermen and of fishing communities , which are often in the poorest peripheral regions of the EU .
Equally important , it threatens their long-term future .
I welcome this report .
I believe the rapporteur is correct to criticise certain Member States for failing to supply adequate data .
It is totally unacceptable that vessels in the Mediterranean are exempt from the obligation to keep logs and declarations of catch in contrast to the requirements placed on vessels in other EU waters .
It is supposed to be a common fisheries policy , therefore common rules and obligations should apply to all equally .
We must improve the methods of monitoring and impose stronger penalties for breaches .
Further cooperation between the Commission and the Member States is needed to achieve an effective implementation of the control of EU fisheries policy , even if the responsibility for the control is on Member States .
This cooperation will not be complete if we exclude the main actors affected by the fisheries policy , namely fishermen , producers ' organisations and vessel owners .
Since control measures might harm the industry , we also must support the rapporteur 's plea for the issuing of new compensatory training and reconversion measures .
It is also vitally important that Member States should allow access for Community inspectors to their waters , allowing for a complete and more effective cooperation between national and European authorities .
Furthermore , an effective control of the CFP would also be incomplete if no measures are taken in the marketing of sea products .
Size control should also be a ' must ' when we consider the design of an effective control policy .
Finally , I should like to make a point in relation to my own country .
The Irish navy has the responsibility of policing some 20 % of EU coastal waters .
Despite the meagre resources at its disposal it does an exceptionally excellent job .
While the EU has been helpful in providing additional resources , more is always necessary .
The reason I underline this point is that the role of the Irish navy is not an Irish one ; it is undertaking a European task .
The Commission should provide much more resources because the task that they are doing will certainly improve the lot of fishermen throughout the EU .
Madam President , the Commission action plan on monitoring , if its aims come to fruition , is a positive move towards improving implementation of the common fisheries policy .
I suspect , however , that the enforcement of the CFP , despite repeated efforts , remains ineffective .
I am sure we could all quote examples of that .
It is thus important to stress the need for monitoring to be effective throughout the Community and not just in certain Member States .
Uniform application of monitoring methods and standards of implementation must persist throughout the European Community and the disparities that exist should be brought to an end .
To this end I welcome the recent adoption of a regulation seeking to establish a control system applicable to the CFP emphasising the use of Community inspectors in addition to national inspectors .
The use of new technologies in improving implementation is a step forward but clearly such methods should be financed properly and equally across Member States .
It is little wonder , for instance , that Scottish fishermen get annoyed when they are prevented from accessing support available to fishermen of other Member States .
In my view such inequalities undermine the objectives of the CFP .
I agree strongly with the report where it states that standard penalties for the same offences should be the norm throughout the Community .
The fair and consistent application of controls is important but , again agreeing with the report , the system of controls must be an integral part of all the measures implementing the CFP .
There must be a wider approach to fisheries which includes transparency , cooperation and harmonisation of data and administrative documents .
A fundamental prerequisite for successful implementation is the greater involvement of the fishing industry in the entire process from decision-making to implementation .
This is something we must strive to achieve .
The UK 's designated port scheme may have been well-intentioned but it has not been helpful to those ports which have not been designated but which do , in fact , have fish processing activity , which is important to these communities .
Madam President , I am speaking on behalf of and according to the instructions of Mr Souchet , the vice-chairman of the Committee on Fisheries .
The deliberations by Mr Novo and the Committee on Fisheries on the need to improve the implementation of the common fisheries policy have highlighted four main proposals that we fully support .
The first proposal relates to the issue of controls .
These must be fair and new technologies must therefore be used .
However , this issue cannot be considered in isolation or without extensively involving the industry .
The second proposal involves the need for very vigorous international action so that the measures allowing responsible fishing are applied to both third country fishermen and to Community fishermen , so that our fishermen are not penalised .
The third proposal refers to the priority to be given to research , which will prevent dubious decisions being taken that are devoid of scientific basis , such as happened recently with the decisions on drift gillnets .
Finally , the fourth proposal requires a strong political will to ensure that the fisheries sector is no longer the poor relation of the Community budget and that it is finally recognised as a specific asset of the EU countries .
In our opinion , these proposals are therefore excellent and we will vote in favour of this report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank you on behalf of the Commission for this report which shows a significant level of agreement between the Commission and Parliament .
Concentrating on the two specific issues in this report , the Commission agrees with Parliament 's idea of the need for overall consistency in the common fisheries policy .
Efforts should be made to control all activities in the fisheries sector and this should be done fairly .
The Commission also agrees with Parliament on the importance of transparency and cooperation , both among Member States and with the Commission .
In addition , this is reflected both in the plan itself as well as in our proposal to amend the control regulation .
Other elements in the report have already been covered in the amendments to the control regulation adopted by the Council in December .
We were able to discuss this in relation to Mr Teverson 's report , which you have approved .
It is a matter of strengthening post-landing controls , strengthening cooperation between Member States and the Commission , tightening controls on third country vessels and even using new technology such as satellite controls . Lastly , there is also the matter of harmonising the concepts of infringements and penalties .
This was also debated at that time but at the moment is rather far removed .
Some of the issues addressed in the report are linked to decisions to be made in a different context , as they relate to monitoring fisheries .
I am referring to matters such as European Social Fund allocations for training in the fisheries sector , or controls in international waters , which are , in principle , dealt with by the competent regional fisheries authorities .
The same can be said of the Community financial contribution towards expenditure incurred by the Member States in implementing control systems , as governed by Decision 95 / 527 .
Your report also mentions controls to be carried out before fisheries controls relating to scientific research into the state of resources .
We support this idea and agree with your opinion , although we will address this issue in a different manner .
As for the rest , ladies and gentlemen , we believe it is especially important that the fisheries sector participate in these initiatives in order to increase its level of cooperation and to promote better information .
We have laid the foundations for adopting common parameters which will be useful for measuring the capacity and the size of the Community 's fleets . We were also involved in a debate with the Member States and made commitments on a number of questions that centred on a common definition of inspection .
The Commission notes Parliament 's comments regarding the content of the list of pilot schemes , which it believes to be biased as it centres too much on certain areas . We will closely examine the possibility of improving the Mediterranean 's situation and we will keep an open mind .
Thank you , Mr Oreja .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Parliament adopted the resolution
Fish discards
The next item is the report ( A4-0403 / 98 ) by Mrs Hardstaff , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the problem of fish discards .
Madam President , before I start I should like to request that the vote be taken at the beginning of the next part-session in Brussels .
We are down to 38 Members present , and I am sure that some of those Members will have to leave within the next half hour , during the course of this debate .
I should like to feel that a reasonable number of Members have had the opportunity to vote .
Mrs Hardstaff is requesting that the vote be postponed to the next part-session in Brussels .
Parliament agreed to the request
Thank you very much , Madam President .
Fish is the only major food in the European diet which is still hunted rather than farmed .
Our century has seen major technological developments in hunting methods which have led to a massive increase in catches , resulting in a corresponding serious decline in global fish stocks .
Many measures have been introduced worldwide , particularly by the European common fisheries policy , to try to stem and reverse this decline .
Unfortunately , the introduction of quotas and total allowable catches to deal with this problem has brought about a further problem : discarding of over-quota and non-quota fish , which itself kills huge numbers of fish .
Many of these fish are discarded because they are of the wrong species , below the legal size and / or immature and are therefore killed before they have spawned .
It is estimated that between 20 and 40 % of all catches are discarded .
Not all discards damage the ecosystem : some are of species which are not under stress or they provide food for other species .
Nevertheless , there is no doubt that discarding , particularly of immature fish and species already under pressure , is a significant contribution to the depletion of fish stocks .
The fishermen themselves deeply resent having to throw back parts of their catch , which could be sold if the rules did not exist .
We cannot avoid the need to continue to reduce overall fishing effort in the short term .
Technical measures can achieve a great deal but they have to be within the context of a strictly controlled total effort .
Larger mesh sizes and wider introduction of the square mesh cod end and other selected gears which allow undersized fish and non-target species to escape , clearly have a key role to play .
However , careful monitoring of fish-spawning grounds is also necessary and should lead to short-term closures of certain areas .
If a catch includes over 15 % of immature fish , boats should be legally obliged to leave that area .
Further research is required in Europe to identify species most at risk from discarding in our waters ; also research into fish behaviour to develop the most appropriate and effective selective gears .
In particular , my report calls for a pilot project and associated research to investigate whether the Norwegian system of banning all discards could assist in preserving stocks of one or more particularly at-risk species .
Such a pilot scheme should involve some flexibility to enable up to 10 % of over-quota good-quality fish to be sold on the market and taken off the following year 's quota .
Obviously there should be no deliberate over-fishing but this would encourage fishermen to observe the no-discard rule .
Targe