Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 9 October 1998 .
Statement by the President
It gives me enormous pleasure to be able to share with you all today my joy at the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to John Hume and David Trimble .
Over the years the European Parliament has been constant in its support for the peace process in Northern Ireland .
The road to peace is not assured .
Just as the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to John Hume and David Trimble must fortify the people of Northern Ireland in their quest for peace , so must the award reinforce our own solidarity and that of the international community as a whole in the peace process .
Here in the European Parliament we are proud to salute our colleague John Hume .
( Applause )
Mr President , I appreciate and thank you for your kind words .
I am sure all our colleagues will share our great joy and pride in this unique honour paid to John Hume and to David Trimble .
After all the anguish and despair of the last 30 years this is a wonderful tribute to the consistent belief on John Hume 's part that the non-violent path to peace in Northern Ireland was the only way .
I would like to thank you and join with all our colleagues in expressing our great joy and support for John Hume and David Trimble in the work they are doing in Northern Ireland .
Mr President , perhaps it would be a good idea to wait a moment until Mr Hume arrives so that we can say this on our groups ' behalf whilst he is actually present .
Mr President , I think we should congratulate not only Mr Hume himself , but the whole Irish people too on the fact that the Good Friday agreement has created fresh opportunities for peace .
I think it would be appropriate if Mr Martens , our group chairman , conveys his good wishes to him again in the House tomorrow , and through him our good wishes to all those who now have a chance to make peace a reality .
Thank you , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
I chose to make this statement at the beginning of the sitting because I was not sure if Mr Hume would arrive within the next half hour , and I felt that the opening of the sitting was the most formal moment to make this statement before the honorable Members .
That does not mean that we cannot repeat our congratulations to Mr Hume when he is with us .
Mr President , on behalf of my Group , I would also like to congratulate our fellow Member , Mr Hume , since we have all seen how hard he has worked to achieve peace in Northern Ireland over the years .
I am going to take this opportunity , on behalf of the European Parliament - which has drafted numerous resolutions on the subject - , to welcome the fact that the bloody dictator Augusto Pinochet is today awaiting trial in London and that we will have the opportunity to hold him accountable for having violated human rights , for having submerged Chilean democracy in blood and for having caused the death of President Allende .
I believe that all democrats in Europe and throughout the world today hope that impunity will cease .
We hope that all judicial and government institutions will prove themselves equal to the task and fulfil the hope that these crimes will not remain unpunished .
We hope that some day the International Criminal Court will be able to fully exercise its jurisdiction over those who commit crimes against humanity and crimes of genocide and who violate human rights .
Mr President , thank you for giving me the opportunity of congratulating John Hume who was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize on Friday last .
Coming from the border counties and representing part of that historic province of Ulster , I was overwhelmed , as were all the people of Ireland , when John Hume was so rightly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize .
In all his press conferences and all his interviews on Friday and Saturday last John Hume was magnanimous .
He said this was for the people of Ulster .
It was for all those who helped to pursue the peace process culminating in the peace agreement of Good Friday .
I sincerely hope - as do all in this House - that this will further the peace process and bring us to the day when in the North of Ireland we will have peace with justice .
John Hume has spent 30 years of his life on this , ably assisted and with the strong support of his wife Pat - and I would pay tribute to her also .
John Hume was always a righteous man but not necessarily a self-righteous one .
Deánaim comhghairdeas ó mo chroí le John Hume as ucth na dúise Nobel a bhuachan .
Bí se tuillte go maith aige tar éis 30 bliain ag obair thar ceann na síochána .
Mr President , I would also like , on behalf of my group , to congratulate the Nobel Committee in Oslo on such a splendid and well-balanced choice .
My group unanimously nominated both men for the Nobel Prize , and I am glad that it was awarded as a double prize , so that the idea highlighted would be that of peace and not the cause of one side or the other .
We know John Hume here in Parliament as a man who has consistently worked for peace - certainly during the 19 years I have known him here .
When he comes tomorrow we can pay tribute to him .
My group has also had the opportunity to meet David Trimble on a few occasions and have only words of praise for the Protestant side in the peace settlement .
He showed very great personal courage when he had six members of his group against him in Westminster and only three with him in his bid for peace .
I do not know how many group chairmen in this House would put forward proposals if they were part of such an obvious minority in their groups .
I think that Mr Trimble has made a very impressive contribution to the peace process . I therefore feel that the Nobel Prize Committee is fully justified in awarding the prize equally to both sides in the conflict .
My group was the first in Parliament to hold study days in Belfast .
I urge all the other groups to hold study days in Belfast , to get to know that beautiful area and see how , together , we can lend a hand in the peace process in Belfast , for they deserve it after so many years of war .
Mr President , on behalf of the ELDR Group , I wish warmly to congratulate our colleague John Hume on the recognition which has been given to him for his courage , consistency of analysis and on the way he has persevered politically and personally over many , long , trying years in Northern Ireland .
For my Group , I could agree entirely with the words of Senator George Mitchell of the United States , who for almost three years also made a significant personal contribution to the search for peace in Northern Ireland .
He said that without John Hume there would truly have been no peace process , and of David Trimble he remarked that without David Trimble there would have been no peace agreement .
They have each in their own way showed enormous courage .
We congratulate them .
Mr President , I wish to express my great disappointment that we have moved to this event before John Hume has arrived .
We notified your Office that we would make sure that Mr Hume would be here in about 20 minutes .
It seems a travesty that all these words are being said and tributes paid in his absence .
I bitterly regret that .
It is a great shame and we would have done Parliament a service and paid one of our Members a great tribute had we been able to say these things to his face , in his presence and give him the recognition and tribute he deserves .
I do not intend to pay tribute to Mr Hume in his absence .
I will either do it here , if you will allow , when he arrives or we will do it in our Group .
He is a member of our Group and we will congratulate him , personally , in his presence , having nominated him for this Nobel Peace Prize .
Mr President , I hope you will do the same when he arrives very shortly .
Mrs Green , had you arrived a few minutes earlier , you would have heard that I contacted Mr Hume 's office in an attempt to find out whether or not he would arrive in time to hear these statements .
But , just a moment ago , before I came in , Mr Hume 's own office was unable to tell me what time he would arrive .
That is why I took this decision , and I informed the House of it just before you came into the Hemicycle .
) Mr President , I prefer not to wait but to echo all those who have spoken before me and say on behalf of my group how happy we are to see Mr Hume given this honour , which he fully deserves .
We are very pleased for him .
And we shall make sure that this evening 's meeting of the Socialist Group receives a letter from our group , to be given to him personally .
I also wished to take up the second point which Mr Puerta mentioned , namely the fact that the European Union currently has something of a political hot potato on its plate in the British Government 's decision to arrest the former dictator , General Pinochet .
This is an extremely important political issue which Parliament addressed or kept returning to many years ago .
It is of course particularly unfortunate that this week is one in which we do not normally have a topical and urgent debate where this matter might be discussed .
My group 's question is whether , given the close involvement here of two European countries , the United Kingdom and Spain , we ought not to make sure that the European Parliament gives a clear statement of its position .
We are asking the Bureau to make sure that provision is made for this matter to be addressed .
And , on behalf of all members of my group , I congratulate the British Government for its courage in detaining Pinochet , because it restores our faith that people with serious crimes on their consciences can ultimately be brought to book , even if they have held the very highest political office .
( Applause )

Mr President , in addition to congratulating Mr Hume on winning the Nobel Peace Prize jointly with Mr Trimble , I would like to join other speakers in drawing attention to the fact that this weekend an important event took place when the British authorities carried out a request by the Spanish judicial authorities to arrest General Pinochet .
That decision on the part of the British authorities is in line with this Parliament 's repeated requests that crimes committed under the Chilean dictatorship should be prosecuted , both in that country and outside it , and it implies a strengthening of the European judicial area .
Specifically , I would like to state that in Chile only one case has been prosecuted , involving a North American citizen , in connection with the assassination attempt against General Letelier . Although more than 40 European citizens were assassinated by the Chilean dictatorship , no legal proceedings have so far been instituted against it .
Consequently , if the Chilean Government fails to punish criminals , it is only logical that the European authorities should do so .
And I urge the Spanish Government to immediately submit a request for the extradition of General Pinochet so that he can stand trial in Spain for the numerous cases that have been filed against him .
Mr President , some time ago Mr Jarzembowski put a question to the Commission concerning the appropriateness of the American secret services ' practice of tapping telephone conversations held in the European Parliament and the Commission and of intercepting emails .
The Commission confirmed this information at the time .
Mr President , I should now like to ask what measures you have taken to put a stop to such practices .
After all , even nations with which we are on friendly terms , but with which we are in economic competition , should not be able to hear all our conversations and read our emails .
Nor should nations with which we are not on friendly terms , needless to say !
I would therefore like to know what technical measures have been taken in the new buildings in Brussels and Strasbourg .
Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , may I draw your attention to the fact that the House has already debated this matter and decided not to adopt any resolution on the subject .
( Protests from Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz ) No , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz .
I repeat that this House has already had a debate on this matter and did not adopt a resolution on the subject , and it is therefore difficult for me to ensure compliance with resolutions that have not been adopted .
In the new building , all possible guarantees will naturally exist to ensure that interference , of this or of any other kind , does not occur .
This is stipulated in the specifications and will obviously be stuck to as far as technically possible .
Approval of the Minutes

Mr President , I too , would like to add my congratulations to Mr Hume and Mr Trimble on the award of the peace prize and express the hope that it is not a premature award .
I rise on the minutes of last Friday in which I am referred to as having spoken on the subject of membership of the British Conservative Party .
While I am always happy to speak on that subject , the main reason that I spoke was to comment on the success of a Labour MEP in having his remarks about having to ring No 10 Downing Street to find out which way to vote expunged from the record .
I asked a question at that time : is this facility open to other members ?
I wish to put that on the record in the minutes .
We will check on the content of your statement and include it in the Minutes .
Mr President , I merely wanted to state that I was present at the sitting of Tuesday , 6 October ; I was also allocated speaking time and I participated in the vote .
However , my name was not on the attendance register .
I would ask that this be corrected .
Mr President , I would like to share the sentiments expressed by Mr Puerta and Mr Medina in welcoming the arrest of Augusto Pinochet Ugarte in London , although I would like to emphasise two aspects that I consider important .
First , the governments of the Member States have an obligation to collaborate unconditionally with the justice system and , consequently , it goes without saying that when the Spanish judiciary requests the extradition of this man , we all hope that the Spanish Government will subsequently take appropriate action .
However , in all sincerity , Mr President , and following on from what Mr Aelvoet said , I am not content with this agenda .
I would like to make an appeal , if I may , that a proposal be made in the relevant bodies that the chairmen of our groups should consider the possibility of including a specific point whereby this Parliament may express its opinion in the form of a resolution on the arrest of the dictator General Pinochet , and on the need for Member States and their governments to collaborate with the justice system .
I think we should go a little further than what we are doing at present , and I believe that this is possible ; budgets should leave room for politics and , in this case , for solidarity .
Therefore , I would like us to consider the possibility of introducing a specific point to this effect in the agenda at the appropriate time .
( The Minutes were approved )
Welcome
I have great pleasure in welcoming Mr Raymond Langendries , Speaker of the Belgian House of Representatives , who has taken his seat in the official gallery .
Mr Langendries attended a meeting we held this morning with other speakers , Mr Violante , Mr Fabius and Mr Fischer , in preparation for the meeting of speakers from European parliaments in Vienna at the beginning of December , for which he will prepare the keynote speech .
Membership of Political Groups
Mr Moorhouse has informed me that he has joined the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
Mr President , I merely wish to observe that Mr Moorhouse is far too left wing to have a place in the modern Labour Party .
Mr President , I should like to inform the Labour Party , having made that comment , that Mr Moorhouse has obviously found the real third way , which is liberal democracy .
We shall welcome him here tomorrow .
Agenda
The next item is the order of business .
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents pursuant to Rule 95 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed , to which no changes have been proposed .
( The order of business was adopted )
Mr President , I asked you a quarter of an hour ago if a proposal could not be made regarding the week 's agenda to allow us to discuss the detention of the dictator General Pinochet .
I have not had an answer , and now you say that there are no questions in connection with the agenda .
I asked a question , and a very specific one at that .
Mrs Aelvoet , as you well know , under the Rules of Procedure , I cannot make this proposal at the present time .
I will be able to do so once the chairmen of the political groups have been consulted .
Later on , after consulting them , if the majority is in favour of the subject , I will propose it , and the House can amend the agenda at that time .
I cannot do so at present because the request has not been made in time and the group chairmen have not as yet expressed a view on the subject .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has the floor .
Mr President , if a number of groups have not asked for this , it is because we do not need to deal with it this week .
According to the Rules of Procedure , Mr President , we would have had to submit the proposal to you one hour before the start of the sitting .
That did not happen .
Consequently , we do not have to discuss it .
As a result , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , what I intend to do , once this initial part of the sitting has finished , is to consult the chairmen of the political groups in order to see what they think and to establish whether or there is a majority regarding this proposal .
Mrs Green , do you wish to take the floor ?
Mr President , as the leader of my group I can tell you now that it is our view that , having raised this issue , it would be more appropriate to have a proper discussion about it in the next plenary .
Mr Carnero , who has already put forward his proposal , wishes to speak .
And I believe that he is not speaking on behalf of his group .
Therefore , Mrs Lulling has the floor .
Mr President , Mr Giansily 's report on the expiry of the ECSC Treaty will feature on the agenda tomorrow .
The secretariat of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and I myself at the beginning of last week drew the attention of the sessional services to the fact that my opinion had been wrongly reproduced in this document .
I did ask for this document to be reprinted .
However , I see that the text available in distribution is still the incorrect version of my opinion .
I ask you to rectify this immediately .
Mrs Lulling , our services have told me that a corrigendum is being prepared .
I hope it will be available as soon as possible .
Mr President , the fact is that on the loudspeakers I heard that ' since Mr Carnero is - apparently - not speaking on behalf of his group , I will not give him the floor ' .
I do not consider this to be correct .
I have a mandate as a Member here and it seems to me that I can express the opinions and put forward the proposals that I consider to be appropriate . In this case , moreover , I believe that my group and the majority of this House are calling for a resolution welcoming Pinochet 's arrest and also urging the governments to do their duty .
Mr Carnero , we have already listened to your opinion , just as we have listened to the opinion of other Members .
I will use my powers at the appropriate time and will put the proposal to the House after holding the relevant consultations .
This is the established procedure in such cases and , as always , we will adhere to it .
Mr Puerta , do you wish to take the floor or do you think it is not necessary ?
Mr President , I simply wish to make it plain and clear that , as group chairman , I have expressed the hope that the judicial and government institutions will take full advantage of this opportunity to put an end to General Pinochet 's impunity and I think that all the political groups should support a serious and comprehensive debate . In this respect , and in principle , subject to the agreement of my group at a meeting of the entire group , I support Mrs Green 's proposal for a proper debate during the next part-session .
Mr President , I should like to reassure Mrs Lulling that the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on my report was adopted unanimously and in full by the Committee on Budgets , without the slightest alteration .
It can therefore easily be included in the final vote .
Transport of dangerous goods : safety advisers
The next item is the report ( A4-0351 / 98 ) by Mr Koch , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Directive on the harmonisation of examination requirements for safety advisers for the transport of dangerous goods by road , rail or inland waterways ( COM ( 98 ) 0174 - C4-0242 / 98-98 / 0106 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission proposal concerning harmonisation of the Member States ' examination requirements for safety advisers is directly connected to the regulatory content of Directive 96 / 35 / EC .
This Directive requires the Member States to take the necessary measures , including training and examination , to ensure that by 31 December 1999 all companies whose activities include the transport of dangerous goods by road , rail or inland waterways , or the loading and unloading connected with such transport , are able to appoint safety advisers .
By guaranteeing a consistent and high level of training of safety advisers , Community legislation will help , firstly , to improve transport safety - which is also a priority of this Parliament - and , secondly , to dismantle distortions of competition and to harmonise competitive opportunities between companies from the various Member States .
I welcome the fact that the proposed Directive is concerned not with formally obtaining a vocational certificate but with a certificate that guarantees that each safety adviser has a high level of knowledge , ability and skill in preparing , implementing and analysing the transport of dangerous goods correctly and expertly , and the ability to deal with dangerous situations which may arise suddenly .
I expect , therefore , that persons being examined will not only be required to sit a written examination involving a minimum number of questions from a range of clearly-defined subject areas , and therefore from different fields , but will also have to prepare a case study .
In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , the Member States may include more than the minimum number of questions and may also provide for supplementary oral questions .
At the same time they guarantee mutual recognition of vocational certificates that are obtained at national level , but with strict application of the present Directive .
In order to maintain a correspondingly high level of examination , I expect the Member States to assist one another by constantly exchanging information , particularly concerning the list of questions and the form which the examinations are to take in terms of test methods , the duration of the written examination , and the documents permitted .
In order to keep administration and loss of information to a minimum , information should not be exchanged directly by the Member States , but through the European Commission .
For safety advisers who are concerned only with specific dangerous goods , for example only with explosives , gases or radioactive materials , an examination limited to their specific activity is to be permitted , provided of course that this is clearly indicated on the training certificate issued .
This type of training certificate then has only limited validity , with the result that the holder may only work in his particular specialised field .
To enable safety advisers to be employed with effect from 1 January 2000 in all European companies involved in the transport or loading of dangerous goods , the current Directive needs to be transposed into national law by the end of 1999 .
I therefore recommend the report , which was adopted unanimously in committee , to the House , inclusive of all amendments .
Mr President , the proposal for a Directive that we are about to discuss follows on naturally from Council Directive 96 / 35 / EC on the harmonisation of examination requirements for the training of safety advisers in the field of transport of dangerous goods .
The Directive to be transposed could even be considered to be innovative in that it is the first text , in terms of derived Community law on transport , that deals both with safety and with the three terrestrial means of transport : road , rail and inland waterway .
Given the purpose of the Directive , it can be included in the series of measures aimed at preventing the risks inherent in the transport of dangerous goods . This is because it stipulates that the companies concerned must appoint safety advisers with adequate professional qualifications in order to reduce the risk of accidents by promoting all action that will help to ensure compliance with regulations relating to the transport of dangerous goods and to establish optimal safety conditions .
The Socialist Group supports the final aim of the Directive in this instance , even though a number of issues need to be clarified .
For example , in certain countries , the majority of professional drivers have taken an examination and refresher courses to obtain an ADR vocational training certificate and as a result receive quite substantial increases in salary .
Could they use these qualifications to gain employment as a security adviser ?
The Annexes clearly outline the tasks to be carried out by the security adviser , whose certificate of training is valid for five years .
Given that the transport of dangerous goods , and consequently the risk of accidents , is increasing significantly , we wonder whether the introduction of annual refresher courses might be considered to enable security advisers to update their knowledge of safety procedures .
Another issue which needs to be addressed relates to the obligation faced by companies to appoint one or more safety advisers .
This would not pose a problem for bigger companies .
But where would it leave smaller companies that have few employees ?
A safety adviser could be appointed from among the company 's staff or could take on this role as an independent expert .
But where the company director takes on the role of safety adviser we must ensure that he / she has obtained the required professional qualification .
Whatever the case , the Commission 's assertion that the Directive will not lead to extra work or higher costs must be carefully examined .
Even if Member States can no longer notify the Commission of their penalty provisions before the deadline stipulated , it would have been interesting to hear what type of penalties the Commission has in mind .
For example , the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg provides for prison sentences of between eight days and five years for breaches of the Directive and fines of between 10 000 and 1 million francs , or either one of these penalties .
This is a warning to all amateurs , and may subsidiarity continue to prevail !
Mr President , from time to time - but far more often than is desirable - the world is shocked by news of accidents occurring during the transport or handling of dangerous goods .
Whether they involve explosives , gases , radioactive materials , mineral oils or other liquid or solid substances , road , rail and waterway accidents are regular occurrences leading to loss of life and ecological damage .
As was expected , the entry into force of the European Economic Area has increased trade volumes among the signatory states with the result that thousands and thousands of lorries , tankers , containers and wagons now circulate loaded with dangerous goods .
The risks can be reduced if stringent controls and safety and technical standards are imposed on firms in this sector .
Since firms have until 31 December 1999 to appoint one or more safety advisers , it made sense for the standards and content of the vocational training courses and exams for the safety advisers to be harmonised .
That would avoid any unfair competition while guaranteeing a high level of preparation for the advisers , so that they can deal with dangerous situations and materials .
That is why we congratulate Mr Koch on his report and support the ten amendments that have been tabled .
We regret the fact , however , that the Council did not receive the European Parliament 's proposal in time . We proposed that whenever accidents take place it should be compulsory for the adviser of the firm involved to draw up a report within six months , and the Member States should be required to present the Commission with an annual report on all accidents taking place on their territory .
Mr President , this report deals with the qualifications and criteria for granting a safety advisor 's permit for the transport of dangerous goods .
Of course , we will be voting for the report even though , as a group , we think it is a timid one .
The main blame for that , however , may not lie with our colleague Mr Koch , but with the Commission and the Council .
The scientific qualifications of the safety advisors are not described in detail , and in particular , nothing is said about their personality , trustworthiness , and especially about any relations they may have with any economic or industrial lobbies .
You all know exactly what I am implying , and I believe we ought to attach particular importance to it .
Taking advantage of the presence of our esteemed Commissioner Mr Kinnock , I must say that there is something else that should have been in this report , and Mr Koch again cannot be blamed because it is not in the Commission 's proposal .
Commissioner , it is not just safety conditions during transport that matter .
It also matters where the dangerous goods are going , especially radioactive materials , where they are buried , where they are stored , and under what conditions .
I imagine , Commissioner , that you will be aware , since an official announcement to that effect was made by the Bulgarian Government , that radioactive mushrooms have been picked in Bulgaria and they are now looking to see whether it was because nuclear waste was not buried properly or because of a leak from the nuclear plant at Koslodui which is still in operation .
Should such matters too not be mentioned in this report ?
I wonder !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Kinnock , I will be brief in what I have to say on this excellent report , on this excellent initiative .
All our safety measures in the Union have been well received among the European public .
Standards and rules are quickly taken up , whether they relate to motor vehicles , boats , trains or aeroplanes .
Our everyday existence is marred by too many accidents , so improvements are welcome .
Point 9 of the report describes the cooperation between the Member States and the Commission .
It is my firm conviction that , despite the fact that it is the Member States ' responsibility to ensure implementation , we need to have a form of annual reporting , an annual discussion on how things are progressing .
We need to have an overview so that we can ascertain whether what we have agreed is being implemented .
There is nothing more annoying than to see a neighbour or competitor cheat .
Education and examinations are one thing ; how safety is assured in everyday practice is another matter .
I am sure that the Commission wants to get the Member States ' cooperation in such a scheme on a voluntary basis .
I will say to Mr Kaklamanis that , if only we can get this report by Mr Koch adopted and implemented , then we shall have achieved a great deal .
I do not think that we should concern ourselves with what is lacking at this stage .
We must do that another time .
It is my view that the Member States are perhaps slower to implement common rules of this kind than we realise .
But I wish the Commission every success , and of course we support the proposal .
Mr President , may I first of all thank the rapporteur , Mr Koch , for an excellent text .
I feel that he has improved the original proposal in a number of respects .
As everyone involved in transport policy knows , facilitating free movement within the Union is one of the main challenges facing us today .
Freight transport in particular needs to move freely - which is why so much effort is going into the TENs project and expanding transport infrastructure on the other side of the old Iron Curtain .
Once the links are in place , greater quantities of hazardous goods will inevitably cross the borders .
We need assurances that those handling such consignments have the necessary knowledge and skills .
Legislation varies from country to country , and any harmonisation must be based on the highest possible safety standards .
This is especially important when large volumes of all kinds of dangerous goods are constantly moving across borders everywhere .
A body of Community legislation has been built up over time to ensure that all Member States treat dangerous goods in the same way - whether they are being transported by road , rail or water .
Corresponding standards need to be maintained at the external borders of the Union .
This is an important point , and I should like to ask the Commissioner one or two questions regarding our external frontiers .
Will provisions introduced in the EU Member States also be binding on the EEA countries ?
And what sort of rules will apply to dangerous goods coming into EU Member States from candidate countries in Central and Eastern Europe ?
Some clarification here would be most welcome .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Koch on his excellent work in drafting this report on the harmonisation of examination requirements for safety advisors for the transport of dangerous goods by road , rail or inland waterways .
I think it is of the utmost interest to have specialised , well-trained people to plan the transport of dangerous goods because many accidents have been caused by inexperience and a lack of preparation when handling dangerous goods during transport .
Frequently , we consider it sufficient that vehicles transporting dangerous goods do not come within a given distance from population centres , but I believe that safety should be based not so much on where the vehicle goes , but rather on the technical specifications of the vehicle and on the transportation technique employed .
I witnessed at first hand an accident of this type that occurred years ago in the Spanish province of Tarragona , and it was truly horrifying .
When the vehicle exploded , a huge tongue of fire leapt an immense distance at high speed , burning everything in its path , including people , animals , plants , buildings , etcetera .
Hence , it is necessary to genuinely seek to ensure the safety of the means of transport and the logistics of that transport . This should make it very difficult , or practically impossible , for an accident to happen because , if it does , it is often not possible to calculate the effects or repercussions it will have , in terms of either harm to people or to the environment .
For this reason , I welcome this proposal , which I consider to be very important and which will ensure greater safety in transport .
Mr President , could I first of all thank the Committee on Transport and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Koch , for his very useful contribution to the improvement of the Commission proposal on the safety adviser examination .
As the House will know , the 1996 directive relating to safety advisers already ensures that all companies whose activities include the transport of dangerous goods by road , rail or inland waterway are obliged to appoint at least one safety adviser whose professional competence is to be achieved by special training , subjected to examination and proved by certification .
However , the minimum requirements for this examination have not yet been agreed , and the present proposal addresses that important issue .
I am glad to note the support for the Commission 's proposal which was generally voiced again in today 's debate and indeed was set out in the Koch report .
I am also pleased to say , therefore , that the Commission can accept Amendment No 1 , both parts ( one and two ) , Amendment Nos 2 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 9 and 10 since they are consistent with the aims of the proposal .
The remaining amendments must be rejected , but only for the simple and uncontroversial reason that they are unnecessary because they are already covered either in the 1996 directive , as in the case of Amendment No 1 , part three , and Amendment No 6 , or are already envisaged elsewhere in the current proposal , as in the case of Amendment Nos 3 and 8 .


I listened intently to all the speakers in the debate and I would just like to tell Mr Sindal that I agree with everything he said and to say to Mr Kaklamanis not only what Mr Sindal said about progressing with the certainty of this proposed legislation , but also that many of the issues quite properly raised by the honourable Member would be more appropriately addressed to my colleague , Ritt Bjerregaard , the Environment Commissioner , and of course to DG XI .
I am sure they would be glad to hear from the honourable Member and happy to try to provide him with a constructive response .
So far as Mr Stenmarck 's questions are concerned , I can offer him what I think will be good news : the Central and Eastern European countries , including obviously all those which have applied to become members of the Union , are already covered by the relevant ADR agreement , the agreement on the transportation of dangerous goods by road , and in addition Community legislation including this proposal will be proposed for inclusion in the ADR .
That is what you could call a ' belt and braces approach ' , and I know it is consistent with the desires expressed by Mr Stenmarck .
The large measure of agreement between the House and the Commission is further evidence of the fruitful collaboration between the Transport Committee and my colleagues in DG VII .
I am grateful for that and I am happy to recommend Mr Koch 's report to the House .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Inland waterway vessels
The next item is the report ( A4-0352 / 98 ) by Mr Konrad , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 82 / 714 / EEC of 4 October 1982 laying down technical requirements for inland waterway vessels ( COM ( 97 ) 0644 - C4-0066 / 98-97 / 0335 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if we want to promote the creation of a single market , particularly as we prepare for the enlargement of the European Union towards the east , we must ensure that we do not have different safety , environmental and social standards on our waterways ; nor must the authorisation procedures and documents which are of importance in inland waterways shipping be different .
The current directive aims to help to achieve standardisation .
Inland waterways shipping in Europe is and remains an extremely environmentally-friendly mode of transport with a promising future .
We are told that there is still reserve capacity available and that we should use it .
It is important to discuss inland waterways shipping because it no longer transports only bulk goods ; it is now also possible to transport high-technology , high-quality goods , which means that new cars can be transported , hundreds at a time .
Of course , it is said - and in my opinion this is correct - that the opening-up of the markets will now lead to increased capacity in Eastern Europe also .
This is precisely the point that we must discuss .
We need to make arrangements to ensure that all those involved are able to move into line with the new conditions as the situation changes .
In agreement with the Central Commission for Navigation on the Rhine and the UN EconomicCommission for Europe , this Directive can contribute to achieving uniform technical standards for inland waterway vessels throughout Europe , and thus to harmonisation .
It was important to Parliament - and this is , incidentally , a very old requirement - that this directive should include provisions not only for freight goods transport but also for passenger vessels .
In future , therefore , this directive will also apply to passenger vessels carrying more than 12 passengers .
I consider this to be a proper and important measure .
We want a modern , competitive fleet on our inland waterways in Europe , with maximum safety for the vessels and their crews . We also want to achieve clear , agreed environmental standards in Europe , and we want all of this in the context of market liberalisation .
I must state expressly that for the PPE Group as well as for myself , as rapporteur , it is absolutely essential that markets are opened up and that we achieve liberalisation in this area too .
Liberalisation is particularly needed in the tariff system if the market is to be expanded .
I think it is very important , in the arrangements we make , that we do not aim for standards that are too high and that cannot be achieved in this form by the applicant countries , at least not in the next few years or decades .
An important point for me - and this is why I am addressing this topic - was that in the hearing that we had in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , we were able actually to talk about the issue of enlargement towards the east with the applicant countries , as the eastern Europeans were also present - the Rhine-Main-Danube canal being the keyword here - and discussed matters with us .
Their fear was that the introduction of over-strict standards would create the impression that the old EU Member States were to a certain extent trying to erect protectionist barriers .
This cannot and should not be allowed .
I believe that the current directive and the report speak a different language .
We are open to competition , the markets are open , Eastern Europe is welcome , and inland waterways transport will prove itself in competition .
Mr President , my credentials for speaking about canals are based simply on the fact that the Forth and Clyde canal starts in my constituency at Bowling , near Clydebank and goes right across to Grangemouth .
The Commissioner comes from a country where they have a very important canal , the Llangollen canal , which is very much used by tourists .
It is important that we bear in mind that inland waterways represent a very viable means of transport .
Perhaps in the UK they have not been used to the extent that they could have been - a situation we should really think about changing .
As far as the Forth and Clyde canal is concerned , we are now going to use Millennium funding and structural fund money to modernise and try to regenerate it .
To turn to the issue of the Konrad report , it is a very good report , actually .
The Socialist Group would like to congratulate Mr Konrad on this report which was unanimously adopted by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
It is specifically a technical report that aims is to update the technical requirements for carrying dangerous goods on inland waterways .
Both the proposal and the committee report deal with these technicalities but the rapporteur , in my opinion , has successfully explained the complexities of the three different regimes in Europe for carrying dangerous goods on inland waterways .
The rapporteur very eloquently explains the operation of these three different regimes .
One is the Central Commission of the Rhine , the first transnational body , the first genuine European body established after the Congress of Vienna and confirmed with the Mannheim Convention in 1836 .
Having worked on my own report , which is a similar report to Mr Konrad 's , I have been very impressed with the way that the Rhine Commission has gone about its work and managed to get agreement in a transnational area and even has its own police force monitoring compliance with the rules for shipping and cargoes on the Rhine .
The alignment of technical and safety standards to the highest possible level is extremely important .
The developments we have had in Eastern Europe , particularly the linking of the Danube and the Rhine by a canal in 1992 , have led to a second body , the Danube Commission .
Coupled with enlargement , it is important that we get agreement , harmonisation and standardisation of best practice and conditions .
It is still more important , as Mr Konrad states in his report , that inland waterways will be a way of opening up Eastern and Central Europe in the future .
This is something we should consider in the context of enlargement .
The Rhine rules are very efficient .
We had a hearing on this issue with the representatives from the Rhine and the Danube who came before the committee .
The clear message was that we have good working rules here and we want the best practice adopted for the rest of Europe .
At the moment the Commission is involved .
I do not know if Commissioner Kinnock is involved personally , but the Commission is involved in discussions in Geneva on this issue , working out what will precede harmonisation to establish standardised procedures for inland waterway vessels .
This is of crucial importance .
The Konrad report is important in these discussions .
Its adoption will assist in updating technical requirements and achieving a uniform system .
The other issue which will not be so easy is achieving mutual recognition of boat master certificates etc .
Mr Konrad highlights this in his report .
This is an issue to which we will have to return in the future .
Like the speakers before me , Mr President , I must refer back to the hearing we held in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , because that hearing confirmed the importance of inland waterways and outlined their essential structure .

We support the reports of Mr Konrad and Mr McMahon , but they are only part of the important place we need to attribute to inland waterways .
We can lay down the technical rules , Commissioner , yes , but there is more to it than that : vessels which carry passengers and freight are involved , as the recent accident at sea off Catalonia again reminded us .
Anyway , I agree with the rapporteur .
But , Commissioner , in addition to technical rules we need a decent policy for modernising the fleet .
That means permanent compensation for breaking up vessels and , secondly , better infrastructure .
There is none of that at present , Commissioner .
Mr McMahon said as much already .
We need better infrastructure for our inland waterways to improve our links with Eastern Europe , and there is not a single inland waterways project in the TENs , nor is there a single project under our programmes of aid to Eastern Europe .
That needs to change , and fast .
Mr President , as the honourable Members will know , the aim of the Commission proposal is to update Directive 82 / 714 / EEC in line with the technical progress made since 1982 .
The proposal is based on the latest technical standards in operation on the Rhine ; it will create a single set of rules for all inland waterway vessels operating on the Community network and it will provide certainty for the participants in the inland waterways sector , including the shipbuilding industry operating in a single and liberalised market .
At present , as the House will know and as we have already heard in the debate , there are two sets of rules for inland waterway vessels in the European Union : those applicable on the Rhine and those applicable on the other inland waterways .
Whilst the Rhine certificate gives vessels access to the Community waterways , the Community certificate does not give access to the Rhine .
Given that operations on the Rhine represent more than half of the inland waterway transport in Europe and the applicable technical standards are among the highest in the world , the Commission believes that the uniform set of rules that is now proposed for the whole Union will be in the interests of the whole industry .
This development means upgrading to Rhine standards ; it means automatic recognition between the Community certificate and the Rhine certificate for inland waterway vessels ; and the clarity and uniformity which will result will , of course , also facilitate the negotiations with the candidate countries in Central and Eastern Europe , whose technical standards will , obviously , have to be adapted before future accession to the Union - a point raised by several honourable Members in the course of the debate .
The proposal allows the Commission to update regularly the annexes of the directive , with the assistance of a committee consisting of representatives of the Member States .
That mechanism will ensure that the rules applicable in the Union take full account of the latest technical standards , in particular those developed in the context of the Rhine .
Against that background , the Commission welcomes the report of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , prepared very ably , as we have already heard , by Mr Konrad , and the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , drafted by Mr Miller , is also welcome .
The reaction of those committees demonstrates the high level of awareness among honourable Members about the potential of inland waterway transport in Europe , as Mr McMahon has just said .
They also present a very clear picture of the necessity for the modernisation and harmonisation of technical standards in the interests of the inland waterway industry .
The amendments tabled support and reinforce the Commission proposal .
I am glad to say , therefore , that six amendments can be accepted with some minor redrafting changes where appropriate .
Amendment No 4 , however , which asks the Commission to report to the European Parliament at regular intervals on substantial changes made to the annexes in the directive , cannot be accepted because the present rules on comitology , which are to be revised , do not provide for regular notification of Parliament on the work of committees created on the basis of the cooperation procedure .
The Commission is , of course , willing to inform Parliament at any time , but it cannot make a formal commitment in the articles of this directive simply because of that procedural reason .
The current initiative could assist in the efficient high-quality functioning of the inland waterway transport mode and that , of course , is highly desirable for the economic competitiveness and sustainability .

I , therefore , thank Mr Konrad and Mr Miller for their work and this Parliament for its continual understanding and support .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Protection of water against pollution
The next item is the report ( A4-0284 / 98 ) by Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the Commission reports on the implementation of Council Directive 91 / 676 / EEC concerning the protection of waters against pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources and on measures taken pursuant to Council Directive 91 / 676 / EEC concerning the protection of waters against pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources ( COM ( 97 ) 0473 - COM ( 98 ) 0016 - C4-0040 / 98 ) .
Mr President , despite the existence of the 1991 Nitrate Directive which was supposed to reduce the nitrate in water from agricultural sources , very little progress has actually been made .
In fact , despite a requirement that all Member States should present action plans by the end of 1995 , by spring 1998 , nine Member States including my own country of Ireland has not done so .
This irresponsible attitude shown by Member State governments towards protection of the environment should not be tolerated .
The Commission is being far too lenient towards Member State governments that are totally disregarding EU directives on protection of the environment in some cases .
These governments must be forced to implement fully and as quickly as possible the 1991 directive .
I cannot understand why infringement proceedings have not already been taken against Member States that have not implemented , or have incorrectly implemented , this directive .
Serious health problems are caused by nitrates .
Nitrates in drinking water are considered a health problem for human beings because nitrate rapidly reduces to nitrite in the body .
This results in the inability to transport oxygen to the tissues .
The reduced capacity to transport oxygen manifests itself particularly in young babies up to six months old and causes a condition which is commonly known as ' blue baby syndrome ' .
There is also a serious problem with nitrite when it reacts with compounds in the stomach to form products which have been found to be carcinogenic in many animals .
In the EU the concentration of nitrate in water has been regulated by two directives : the 1975 Surface Water for Abstraction of Drinking Water Directive and the 1980 Drinking Water Directive .
Both establish a maximum admissible concentration of 50 mg / l .
Although this level is now widely accepted for human health , Greenpeace is campaigning for an even stricter limit value of 10 mg / l , especially in order to take account of the health impact on babies .
Also the UN organisations - the WHO and FAO - advocate the same limit value because this is the level at which drinking water is safe for bottle-fed babies .
Apart from the health problems , we have to take into account the problems of eutrophication .
This is the enrichment of water by nitrogen and phosphorous compounds which causes the accelerated growth of algae , bloom and other plant life which results in an imbalance of organisms present on surface water .
This has a knock-on effect not just on biodiversity of the seas and the waters but also on tourism because of the serious problems of poisonous algae and fish kills etc .
So even if the present trend towards intensive animal husbandry is stopped and reversed now , it will take some 20 to 30 years before the surface and ground waters of Europe are healthy again .
In some areas it may take 40 or 50 years before an ecologically sound situation is restored .
Despite the fact that action programmes should have been presented by all Member States by 28 December 1995 at the very latest , by spring 1998 only six Member States , namely Austria , Denmark , Germany , Luxembourg , the Netherlands and Sweden had done so .
My own country , Ireland , maintains that there is no problem as regards nitrates but the most recent coast watch survey published in December last year displayed some quite alarming findings .
The most alarming was the high incidence of nitrate pollution with 40 % of the 242 inflows tested showing levels of 25 % mg / l or more and in 15 cases over 100 mg / l .
This is way above EU limits .
The most recent Eurostat report shows two Member States where levels of nitrates have risen even though this is in breach of the directives .
These countries are Ireland and Germany .
When it comes to implementing the Nitrate Directive the regions which show the least willingness to deal with the problem - despite the fact that they have the greatest problem - are the Netherlands and Flanders .
They show total disregard for the problems , and it is clear that the kind of farming methods used have to be examined and the number of animals per hectare reduced , because of the problem of animal manure .
I would draw your attention to Amendment No 13 tabled by the Socialist Group .
This amendment is looking for money to deal with large-scale installations which handle animal waste .
It is seeking a 25 % Community subsidy .
In the Netherlands this was tried but failed .
I would like to know the Commission 's opinion .
The farmers are again looking for more money to deal with problems they have themselves created .
This is not acceptable to the European taxpayers .
I should like to begin by expressing my thanks to the rapporteur from the Environment Committee .
We in the Agriculture Committee take this matter very seriously .
It is not often that a Community regulation seems to be totally ignored by the Member States , but to a large extent that is very true in this case because most Member States have moved very slowly on this issue .
We find it extraordinary , therefore , that , in its report , the Commission has not really delved into the background to see why the Member States have not been implementing this properly .
The Commission has failed to try and assist , and in the future we hope that they will be less authoritarian but perhaps try to get more cooperation and persuade the Member States to encourage the farming industry to do something about it .
Agriculturalists and the farmers themselves fail to recognise the problem .
I know very well that there are many who feel that eutrophication , for instance , is a problem not necessarily created by agricultural industry .
I have seen with my own eyes lochs in the hills of Scotland around which there is no agriculture other than the grazing of sheep on a very light basis , and yet there is eutrophication in the lochs .
It is a complex issue that no-one really understands : increased hours of sunlight is very often an argument that is put forward .
The Agriculture Committee feels that the Commission could have done more to guide the Member States to try and make this directive more effective in the future .
It has to be more effective and we recognise that shortcoming .
Substantial improvements are needed in the directive itself because of the lack of progress that has been made , and the Agriculture Committee feels that there must be a better understanding of the total problem so that the agriculture industry can react as part of the reform of agricultural policy as a whole .
Mr President , the biggest problem with the nitrates directive is - as Mrs McKenna has said - not the directive itself , but the lack of action to implement it in the Member States .
Many countries are still not properly implementing national legislation to ensure cleaner groundwater .
It cannot be the intention that tough environmental rules which are adopted in the EU should be simply shelved in the Member States .
It is damaging to mutual trust among Member States when individual countries cock a snook at the common policy .
It creates problems for farmers if only some farmers are obliged to pay to reduce nitrate run-off .
It cannot be right that some farmers who apply more environmentally friendly production methods should end up in a more disadvantageous competitive situation .
It is vitally necessary that pressure be put on all Member States to implement the nitrates directive , so that the burden is evenly distributed .
Countries which have not implemented the nitrates directive on time should not be rewarded by higher support from the EU than those countries which have already implemented the directive .
Besides , it would mean that the EU is throwing money away .
When the environmental policy is not adhered to , cross-compliance should be introduced as proposed in Agenda 2000 .
The last point I wish to mention is the deplorable situation with regard to reporting to the Commission .
We in Parliament must support the Commission in its efforts to put pressure on the Member States .
The Member States must be made to report correct figures to the Commission , so that it can prepare overviews of how the nitrates directive is working in practice .
Furthermore , the figures reported will be an effective tool in the fight to get the nitrates directive properly implemented in all the countries .
After all , that is unfortunately the main reason why the reporting does not take place .
The Commission can hardly charge a Member State with circumventing the directive if there are no data at all .
It is necessary to put pressure on the Member States to ensure proper implementation and better reporting , if the nitrates directive is to have any relevance at all .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report deals with the Commission reports on the implementation of the Nitrate Directive , which , amazingly enough , has been in existence since 1991 .
The problems connected with nitrate are not new , nor are the solutions proposed here .
We should not be intimidated by this .
We should concentrate on continuing the work which has already been begun , while at the same time avoiding trying to take on too much .
We all agree in principle .
We now need to implement the directive in the Member States and ensure that it is transposed and applied consistently .
We do not need to change it .
The European Parliament should encourage the Commission to take stricter action against the Member States which have not yet fulfilled their obligations arising from the directive .
Sometimes we get tired of playing this game .
On the one hand , we have constant demands from some quarters for greater subsidiarity , and on the other hand the Member States are not willing or able to play their part in areas in which there is no question that Community cooperation is needed , such as here on environmental policy .
The amendments tabled by my group aim to emphasise the demand for consistent implementation and application of the directive .
There is little point in overloading Parliament 's resolution .
For example , we cannot make it compulsory to comply with the code of good agricultural practice if it has not even been defined at European level .
Furthermore , the requested limitation of the number of animals per hectare will not be necessary if the Member States apply the directive in the first place .
In addition , we reject absolutely the inclusion of Agenda 2000 criteria in this report .
The Agenda , as we know , is currently only under discussion , and demands of this kind tend to dilute Parliament 's actual intentions and are only grist to the mill of those who advocate subsidiarity , and who would accuse Brussels of stipulating the number of cows in the fields ! We should concentrate our efforts and insist that whatever is necessary be done , and what needs to be done is already stated clearly in the Nitrate Directive .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Liberal Group will be supporting Mrs McKenna 's report .
Her analysis of the situation in the Member States is critical but fair , given that no fewer than eleven Member States are disregarding a 1991 directive , either totally or in part .
This is the case at least in Flanders , where the position is serious .
I cannot contradict the rapporteur when she speaks of a lack of political will in Flanders .
The problem will not be solved just by ignoring the European standard .
This is what has been done so far in Flanders where , for example , the fertiliser action plan for 1998 sets standards for the use of fertilisers on pasture land which are twice as liberal as the European standard .
How should we address the problem ?
The European standards have to be enforced .
Starting from the principle that ' the polluter pays ' , we should target and tax fertiliser surpluses rather than fertiliser production .
Let the sector itself decide initially how it will resolve the problem .
If it does not succeed , we may have to think about the compulsory reduction of livestock headage .
But let us try other ways first .
Mrs McKenna , your report has stirred things up a bit in Flanders and has caused the talks on a new fertiliser decree to move up a gear .
I am most grateful to you for that .
Mr President , environmental protection is now a priority for most Member States , and European citizens are increasingly aware of its social and economic potential .
Farmers who are , in the main , the custodians and managers of the landscape are responding in a positive manner by conforming with changing environmental guidelines , many of which have a cost factor for which they deserve to be compensated .
Nowhere is there the same positive commitment to environmental management as in my own country .
Ireland as an agricultural country has a greater dependence than any other EU Member State on agricultural exports .
Our quality food products are closely linked to our grass-based natural environment .
Our tourism , and in particular our agri-tourism , are closely linked to the countryside .
Employment in both the food and tourism sector is dependent on our quality image .
It is wrong and harmful to suggest that the government and farmers are indifferent to environmental protection .
The government has responded positively to Commission comments with regard to nitrates in groundwater and has in fact established that phosphorous represents a greater threat .
In both cases the government , farming organisations and farmers are committed to eliminating any possible threat to the environment and in particular the quality of groundwater .
One only has to look at Ireland 's interest in the rural environmental protection scheme and the number of farmers participating in that scheme to see how positively we in Ireland are committed to a natural environment .
A final comment : without farmers there would be no environment .
There would be no custodians of the rural environment , and I would caution people to take that particular matter into consideration .
Mr President , as the rapporteur has said , this is a matter of public health and of systematic non-compliance with Community law .
It is a matter of public health because , as far back as 1975 , directives relating to the quality of water established that the level of nitrates should not exceed 50 milligrams / litre , but some countries such as Belgium and the Netherlands exceeded that by 100 milligrams / litre .
And it is a public health matter , too , because the World Health Organisation and the FAO say that it is necessary to remain below 50 milligrams / litre and that , for the safety of nursing infants , the level should not exceed 10 milligrams / litre .
And it is a matter of systematic non-compliance with Community law because the directive not only suggests that a selection should be made of vulnerable areas for the application of good agricultural practices , but it also provides for two action plans , the first to end next year and the other in 2003 .
Despite this , in 1998 , only six Member States submitted anything resembling an action plan in this respect .
This is therefore a clear case of non-compliance with Community law .
I understand the concern of the rapporteur for the Committee on Agriculture , as well as the concern of some members of the Committee on Agriculture who tabled amendments , where they state that there should be more information for farmers , that aid should be forthcoming , and that perhaps the European Commission should take a less authoritarian position .
Nonetheless , we feel that the European Commission has done the right thing in initiating infringement procedures because it is the only way to persuade the governments to take measures relating to the nitrates in drinking water .
It is up to us to defend public health , as the Treaty very rightly states and as we take great pains to emphasise , and compliance with Community law offers a guarantee not only for consumers but also for the future of Europe itself .
Therefore , we consider that infringement proceedings should be initiated and that , in any case , farmers and Member States should be helped to implement this and other directives with a bearing on public health .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it will be clear that for a variety of reasons , no one in the Netherlands is happy with the conclusions which Mrs McKenna has very clearly and properly outlined : the environmentalists are not happy , the farmers are not happy and the government is not happy .
If nothing is done , if drastic action is not taken , the Netherlands will not even come close to meeting the requirements set out in the nitrates directive by the year 2002 .
The Dutch Government has said as much itself .
Rarely has a report delivered so clear a message .
So we say to the Dutch Government , to Minister Pronk , do something !
If you do not , the Netherlands is heading for disaster .
Nitrate levels in the environment are far too high , and it will take tens of millions of guilders to clean up our drinking water .
More certain still is that by the year 2002 the Netherlands may face a fine of 500 000 guilders a day .
This summer , the Dutch Government took refuge in the fact that it was a caretaker government .
This allowed it to escape being hauled before the courts by the European Commission .
That will probably happen now at the end of the year .
A failure on the part of the Netherlands , how else can one put it ?
It is scant comfort to know that the polluter will pay in the end .
Mr President , I come from a region , Flanders , where there is not a single well yielding water that you can drink .
To paraphrase what our previous speaker said here about agriculture , I put it to you that without clean drinking water you cannot have a stock breeding industry , nor can you have public health .
So I welcome Mrs McKenna 's report , and I hope that Flanders will cease to be one of Europe 's slowest pupils as regards learning to combat the pollution of our drinking water by nitrates .
At present , the nitrate levels in our drinking water are four times the levels permitted or envisaged .
To save time , Mr President , I refer the House to what Mrs Kestelijn said on the subject .
But even though the Commission has twice , in 1995 and 1997 , found Flanders to be in breach of the rules , things have still not improved .
When I compare Flanders with Denmark , where things were bad to start with too , I feel ashamed , although I have to say it is not my fault .
It is not the majority of the population that wants this - the majority currently in power in Flanders has given in to the farm lobby , which has secured a fertiliser action plan for 1995 that in no way meets the targets set in the directive , neither as regards standards nor as regards a code of good farm practice .
No vulnerable zones are named , but I can understand that , Mr President , because the whole of Flanders is a vulnerable zone , one big vulnerable zone .
So the action programme is nowhere near adequate .
I would like to ask the Commission how things stand as regards following up these letters and these infringements ?
Are we really going to rely on the goodwill of the sector , because I no longer have much faith in that goodwill .
I see that the sector is in crisis and that we have nevertheless failed to take obvious steps such as cutting pig production , for example .
Mr President , cuts will not be enough and I am convinced that less intensive and more environmentally and animal-friendly farming is ultimately the best thing for human beings .
Mr President , first may I compliment Mrs Maes most warmly on her maiden speech .
I heartily agree with what she says .
The point of adding fertiliser is to make the soil more fruitful ; implicit in this is that one must not add more fertiliser than the crops can absorb .
So it is most important to stop nitrate from leaching into groundwater and surface water .
The implementation of Directive 91 / 676 / EEC is very relevant here , but the picture as regards its implementation is a sorry one .
Years ago , all the Member States agreed on a standard of 50 mg of nitrate per litre of groundwater , but most Member States have not got anywhere near that .
Some Member States have not even made plans , so that the European Court was forced to intervene .
It is now time for all the Member States to be serious about implementing the directive - including the Netherlands , which is not in this instance the good little boy it so often claims to be .
However , responsibility for the current problem rests not only with the farmers , but also with consumers , who eat a great deal of meat relatively cheaply .
In the past , that was often encouraged by government .
These intensive farming methods naturally create a number of problems .
Indeed , even if we were to stop using fertiliser now , nitrate would still be leaching into the groundwater 20 years from now .
In short , real solutions require a long-term view , and it is this which we must now work hard for .
Mr President , the issue of nitrates in water does indeed pose a problem , but it is one which forms part of a wider and more global problem that I shall endeavour to outline here .
For fifty years , our countryside and natural resources have been systematically destroyed by intensive and polluting agricultural practices .
It has taken five thousand years to shape our countryside and only fifty years to spoil its greatest gifts .
For fifty years we have emptied the land of its farmers , torn out hedges , filled in ponds and poisoned our soils .
We have squeezed the earth , prevented it from breathing and have even prevented rainwater from reaching groundwater supplies ; instead of penetrating the earth , the water flows along the surface and carries the humus to the closest river .
In some areas of Normandy , where I live , soil erosion sweeps away up to twenty tonnes of humus per hectare per year .
Such irresponsible practices have a great many consequences , but some are more serious than others .
Intensive methods of production have caused a large number of farmers to leave the land , which has contributed greatly to overcrowding in urban areas .
This therefore creates a genuine problem in terms of land-use planning .
Pesticides , herbicides , fungicides and other chemicals also act as spermicides .
In fact , since their widespread use , these poisons have halved the level of human fertility in western countries .
There is now a medically proven cause-effect relationship between the two , so this constitutes a major public health problem .
Whether or not it rains , groundwater supplies have difficulty maintaining their levels and replenishing supplies .
Due to these low levels , pollutants such as nitrates tend to become concentrated .
The reduction in water resources and the reduced level of potability gives particular cause for concern , especially as we are all well aware that this water will become one of the major strategic issues of the next century .
It is therefore also a considerable geopolitical problem .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are no longer living in the world of fifty years ago , at the end of a war , at a time when the many shortages justified the need to produce large quantities .
This is no longer the case today .
We should have redirected our efforts a long time ago and focused not on quantity but on quality .
Since the 1950s , however , we have been caught in an unstoppable spiral , fed by agro-chemical multinationals and banks .
No , the farmers are not to blame for this situation , though many have been the first victims of it , strangled simultaneously by the problem of debt and the race for subsidies .
Those who have struggled hardest to respect the environment have been wiped out , both literally and figuratively speaking ; here one has only to look at the suicide rates among agricultural populations .
We must recognise that the European Union is jointly responsible for this situation .
In fact , it is not in the best position to give lessons on the environment to Member States since , for a long time , it has systematically favoured intensive farming practices by means of subsidies .
To conclude , anything aimed at raising awareness should always be welcomed and Ms McKenna 's work is indeed praiseworthy , but I am convinced that the solution to all of these problems lies essentially in the banking and industrial sectors which , ladies and gentlemen , are unfortunately far more influential than we are .
Mr President , it has been a real problem for the EU that implementation procedures for directives on the environment have gone so slowly , and , as we have heard repeated here so often , this Nitrate Directive has been especially slow to be implemented .
Current farming practice , as has also been stated here , has been responsible for most of the effluent in our waterways and the reason for their eutrophication .
Eutrophication and other problems really get noticed when they show up in the places where we swim locally , and the places where we moor our boats .
That is what has happened in the Baltic Sea , for example .
Now people are demanding that the pollution and eutrophication of the Baltic should be kept in check .
We cannot put the blame for the eutrophication of the Baltic solely on the Baltic States and Poland , as we normally do , since statistics show that it is Member States of the EU that are at fault .
That is why this matter requires special attention and action .
I especially wish to point out that Finland has not put together any kind of plan itself , but , at least , it has promised to lower its nitrate emissions by fifty per cent .
This is very important , because we not only have a coastline but we also have an inland waterway system .
At present I can say I still drink the water from the lake by my summer cottage .
The agricultural policy which is part of Agenda 2000 is an important instrument for controlling agricultural emissions .
No direct aid will be forthcoming unless we observe the regulations that are in place .
We should allocate special aid for the rural environment to those places where real action is being taken and the state of the environment is being improved .
Mr President , in principle we can fully support the motion for a resolution in Ms McKenna 's report .
However , during our considerations , we should perhaps engage in a little self-criticism regarding the manner in which we draw up our reports .
Perhaps we ourselves fail in our reports to respect the greater transparency demanded of the Commission and thus , when we say that a certain number of Member States comply and that others fail to comply , perhaps we should specifically name those Member States that fail to comply and those that comply in certain circumstances .
Therefore , in the section to which we are referring , I would have thought that the three countries that meet the general requirements for ground water - Sweden , Austria and Finland - should have been named .
And it should also have been emphasised that only four Member States have transposed the directive , namely , Denmark , Spain , France and Luxembourg .
In my view , in these sittings , relating to the monitoring of Member States , we must be specific and proceed in a transparent manner .
I also feel that we should not personify our resolutions .
We should not talk about a Parliament being shocked ; we as individuals might be shocked , but perhaps we should use other types of expressions for institutions .
We should therefore analyse our own resolution , and this is not a specific criticism of a draft , but perhaps rather of the work that we do .
And this brings us to a point on which I agree fully with all the Members who have taken the floor , that is , the discretion of the Commission in initiating proceedings , since its action in this regard perhaps leaves much to be desired . This House should certainly express its concern that the Commission is not more effective in fulfilling this obligation to ensure that Member States comply with Community legislation .
Its discretion in this matter is excessive .
I think that the cornerstone might be to ensure compliance with codes of good agricultural practice .
As regards the final paragraph of Ms McKenna 's report , which advocates that ' energy production at small-scale ... plants should be promoted ' , it might carry more weight if mention were made of encouraging and offering incentives to achieve such objectives .
Mr President , I entirely agree with Mrs McKenna 's conclusions , despite coming from a country whose record on this is very poor .
Her report contains one or two errors concerning the situation in the Netherlands , but that in no way invalidates the truth of the charges she makes against the country .
As a Liberal , I am no great lover of official do 's and don 'ts , but in the Netherlands we have found that the fertiliser problem cannot be resolved without recourse to instruments of this kind .
The Netherlands has done everything possible to resolve the problem , short of cutting back on livestock production .
Levies on fertiliser surpluses was one method tried , but it did not work to good effect for us .
We are stuck with 14 million kilos of fertiliser which we cannot get rid of .
I should like to think that this will be a lesson to other countries facing the same serious problems .
I appreciate that each country must be free to seek the solutions which suit it best , but there is one thing we have to admit : quite simply , we produce too much in the European Union .
We have far too many animals and so it is vital to restructure the stock breeding industry .
There is no more time to lose .
Mr President , it is obvious that Commission directives are often based on studies that do not reflect the agricultural situation as a whole or the environment Europe-wide .
I come from an area in southern Portugal with barely one head of cattle per hectare - if that .
In other areas in Portugal there can be as many as five head per hectare .
In other words , even in a country as small as ours there is a difference between small-scale agriculture in the north , and larger-scale agriculture in the south .
It is obvious that , in a country like mine , with large climatic differences between the dry season , which we are in now , and very wet seasons , i.e. the winter , the only time of year when the weather is settled is , in fact , the summer .
And in order to produce crops in the summer you have to irrigate .
And if you irrigate you must also fertilise because unless you do you will have no harvest .
However , the problem in Portugal is not the same as that facing Sweden or the Netherlands .
The problem is a completely different one in that , when we spread nitrates on the soil , we do so in the summer when there is a smaller chance of polluting the groundwater .
Nonetheless , good farming practice is needed .
But how can you find a good farming practice that enables country-dwellers to survive ?
Do we want to keep the European farming model or apply with quasi-inquisitorial rigour the notion of pure European breeds ?
How can the two be made compatible ?
We must find a solution to this problem , through education first of all .
We must educate people visiting the countryside to stop them from polluting it .
Secondly , pollutant industries , including intensive farming or wineries , need to be curbed .
Thirdly , we need to give attention to the issue of biogas , one way of practising and developing agriculture while making use of something that pollutes our countryside .
That is an issue waiting to be tackled .
Mr President , I am glad that we are getting another opportunity to debate this important subject .
The extent of the nitrate problem is alarming .
Leaching from 22 % of agricultural land in Europe exceeds 50 mg per litre , which is the generally accepted health limit .
The figure should in reality - as the rapporteur also pointed out - be down to 10 mg per litre , as recommended by the WHO , FAO and Greenpeace , since at this concentration drinking water would become safe for children .
We must not forget that the nitrate issue is a serious health problem and , in the light of the very serious environmental and health-related nature of the nitrate problem , the calls made in the report with a view to bringing about a solution are too vague .
The fact that the Member States have not implemented the legislation adopted in the field is clearly irresponsible .
I of course , along with everyone else , wholeheartedly support the call for the Commission to expedite the infringement procedures .
However , that is not enough .
The Commission must also be called on here to bring about a radical change in the EU 's agricultural policy , so that it becomes attractive to farmers to minimise water pollution caused by nitrates .
To begin with , this must involve a massive increase in the use of resources under the common agricultural policy for conversion to organic farming , so that it becomes attractive to conventional farmers .
A comprehensive switch to organic farming in the EU in this way would also bring with it innumerable other environmental and health-related gains .
Moreover , it is important to note that the nitrates directive is not sufficient in itself to ensure clean water in the EU .
I therefore call on the Commission to take the initiative to introduce common nitrogen levies in the EU , with the explicit proviso that the proceeds of such levies be passed back to the Member States .
Such levies may provide a means of furthering the aims of the nitrates directive .
With these comments in mind , I hope that the European Parliament will give its support to the report , since its demands constitute an important step in the right direction .
Mr President , there is no doubt that nitrate pollution is mainly caused by the excessive use of fertilisers on crops and by intensive livestock breeding .
And of course , since the amounts of nitrates involved are excessive , the plants cannot use them all , they pass into the soil , pollute groundwaters , and the results are twofold .
On the one hand , eutrophism in rivers , coastal areas and seawater , with all its consequences , and on the other hand a danger to public health through drinking water , because as we all know , nitrates are reduced in our organism to nitrites and nitrites transform haemoglobin to methaemoglobin .
The result is that oxygen is less efficiently transported from the lungs to the tissues , which can be particularly dangerous for infants .
There is no doubt that the aims of the directive , namely to reduce and prevent nitrate pollution , were correct .
Unfortunately , Member States did not respond as well as they should have , and I particularly regret the fact that my own country too has failed in this respect , because although four vulnerable areas have been identified , no decision has yet been taken on how to protect them , nor have any related action programmes been submitted .
I believe that the European Commission should monitor the implementation of the various directives more decisively , because it is not right that we should enjoy a good standard of living but not care about protecting the environment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , fighting the pollution of groundwater calls for an integrated strategy to fight the various causes of that pollution , be they agricultural , industrial ( of whatever kind ) or even domestic .
We welcome the reference in the report to the need to carry out research to compare the importance of the various sources of groundwater pollution .
As far as the pollution of groundwater by nitrates is concerned , Community legislation must urgently be transposed into national law , which should already have been done .
Nonetheless , the rules should be implemented in each country on a consensus-basis in such a way as to cater for national characteristics and regional differences , as we tried to introduce into the report in our amendments .
We tried , for example , to insist that special attention be paid to some easily identifiable and well-known agricultural areas of certain countries - some of them have already been referred to - where the situation is serious and levels of pollution already far exceed tolerance thresholds as a result of intensive farming practices which , in the short term at least , make farms more competitive either because productivity is increased or because they more easily attract Community support .
In some cases , these are particularly vulnerable areas . This is undoubtedly a situation that needs tackling as a priority .
Generally speaking , we think that if we are to deal with widely different situations , we need comprehensive knowledge both of the different crops and production systems and the practical situations in the different Member States and their regions , if we are to prevent artificial discrepancies , by-the-back-door privileges or greater injustices .
Special attention must also be paid to the number of head of cattle per hectare . All decisions must bear in mind both absolute and relative figures together with regional differences in farming structures .
However , on the same subject - leaving aside the proposal to create biogas production plants , which we agree with - we feel that appropriate aids and incentives are needed so that properly supervised manure collection and processing plants can be set up on all cattle farms . This idea is not explicitly tackled in the report but is one that , we hope , will be introduced through an amendment that we have tabled .
Mr President , I wish to begin by referring very briefly to two women .
Firstly , my colleague Ritt Bjerregaard who , unfortunately , suffered a rather nasty accident at her home a couple of weeks ago and is quite seriously injured .
The good news is that she is making an excellent recovery and should be back with us very shortly .
The difficulty she is experiencing in part accounts for my presence here tonight at this fascinating debate .
Secondly , I wish to congratulate Mrs Maes on her maiden speech .
This is her first day in this Parliament .
She managed to speak within about two hours of becoming a Member .
She managed to speak for three minutes when she was down for two minutes , so her constituents can be very satisfied at the fact that instead of one Member they have got one and half Members and that , I am sure , bodes well for the future .
I wish her well in her career in this Parliament .
I thank the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and , in particular , the rapporteur , Ms McKenna , for this very welcome own-initiative report that focuses attention on the critical need to ensure implementation of the 1991 nitrates directive .
They say that the wheels of God grind exceeding slow .
The transposition and implementation procedures of Member States make the wheels of God look positively rocket-propelled by comparison .
The report rightly highlights the slow pace of implementation of this directive .
As Ritt Bjerregaard made clear before , the present situation is indefensible and completely unacceptable to the Commission .
The resolution before the House calls on us to speed up our infringement proceedings , and what I will try to do this evening is to explain in some detail exactly what progress has been made since the implementation report .
It appears that Member States are beginning to take their obligations seriously but it is still a case of too little too late .
Three out of the five non-transpositions have been rectified ; two out of three missing codes of good agricultural practice are now in place ; and all three of the missing reports have been produced .
But only two out of seven Member States with no vulnerable zones have now made their designations and only two out of ten in breach of the action programmes - the critical application - have established them .
It is clear that the progress that has been made is solely the result of stringent enforcement and it is also clear that the present situation is grossly inadequate .
The Commission will therefore intensify pressure .
Thirty-two cases have been opened against 13 Member States - all except Finland and Sweden - of which 9 have been closed because of the progress that has been made .
In the case of the action programmes , the reasoned opinion issued at the time of the implementation report has now gone to the Court .
In addition , seven more reasoned opinions and three letters of formal notice have been issued and many of those will end up going to court this year if no effective action is taken .
The Commission will also follow rapidly with proposals for penalty payments .
I realise that even these efforts , strenuous though they are , will not produce total satisfaction amongst some honourable Members .
Indeed , the Commissioner herself is not totally satisfied with it , as Members of the House who know her can well imagine .
But we have to strive to secure implementation of a Council directive by the Member States which actually voted to make the directive law .
If they are slow or reluctant , then all we can do is undertake our best efforts , as everyone in this House , will know .
Some commentators have said that to get proper implementation we need , as a Community , to support farmers with additional funding .
Frankly , the Commission is not convinced by that argument : it runs completely counter to the polluter-pays principle .
While we provide funding for pilot projects for reducing nitrate pollution , we do not provide any funding for compliance with mandatory requirements .
The agri-environment measures , for instance , support a number of nitrate schemes , but only where they produce an environmental benefit over and above the requirements of the directive .
Meanwhile , the request in Ms McKenna 's report for the Commission to produce an annual report is supported .
That is essential in order to publicly identify those Member States that fail to make progress .
It will also enable this Parliament to follow developments in infringement proceedings .
However , we believe that a communication on promising an effective solution - it could have a happier title - to the nitrates problem suggested by the report might provide a further excuse for delay in implementation .
Since we consider that all attention should be squarely focused on ensuring that the directive itself is properly implemented , we would be reluctant to provide that facility for what could be another excuse for delay .
I hope that the honourable Member understands our motivation in that .
Integration is another basic concern , and reference to it is timely in view of the recent commitment to integration made by the Heads of Government at the Cardiff Council .
Considerable progress has been made on environmental integration into the structural funds where Commissioner Wulf-Mathies has collaborated closely , as the proposal for increasing the environment share of the European Regional Development Fund already shows .
On the common agricultural policy , the agri-environment measures are obviously evidence of progress .
Since the present Commission came into office , intense efforts have been made to develop and establish these measures which include support for organic farming .
They are testimony to Ritt Bjerregaard 's work and they will be further reinforced in Agenda 2000 , which also continues the decoupling of aid from production and proposes new instruments of potential environmental interest .
The integration strategy , obviously , also involves Member States and this Parliament , as well as the Commission .
I welcome the report as further evidence of Parliament 's close interest in a policy to secure healthy and potable water .
One of Commissioner Bjerregaard 's main priorities is clearly to make sure that existing legislation , and the new water policy which follows it , are properly implemented .
The strong position that Parliament has taken and continues to take on this issue , as is evidenced by this report again , will greatly assist that effort by the Commission , and both my colleagues and I express our gratitude for this .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Endocrine-disrupting chemicals
The next item is the report ( A4-0281 / 98 ) by Mrs Kirsten Jensen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on endocrine-disrupting chemicals .
Mr President , we all recognise that chemicals can cause acute poisoning , and they can cause allergies , cancer and brain damage .
But in recent years it has emerged that chemicals can affect our health and our reproductive ability in an insidious manner , which is why we must question both the maximum values and the sectoral approach by which we have regulated chemicals in the EU .
Some may have thought that , with the biocides directive , the EU had finished regulating chemicals , but that is by no means the case !
Hence this own-initiative report from the Environment Committee .
We have rules for chemicals in agriculture and for chemicals in the workplace .
But there is no sense in regulating these areas - which are relatively easy to police - in isolation , when chemicals also produce their effects in leisure activities , in kindergartens and in other situations which are not covered by any rules .
The widespread use of synthetic chemicals is a post-war phenomenon .
I cannot forget how , in the mid-1970s , the first pale green blouse mass-produced from man-made fibres was celebrated at an exhibition at the Museum of Contemporary History in East Berlin .
During the years I have worked on European chemicals legislation , I have tried to get male decision-makers to listen , asking them whether they knew that there was something here that could affect their ability to reproduce .
It proved to be an argument that opened their eyes .
In my report , I first list the possible effects on men and then move on to women and children .
Ability to reproduce is not the only thing that is threatened .
Scientists talk of weakened immune systems .
Sperm counts are falling , while rates of testicular cancer and breast cancer are rising .
People are getting totally incapacitating forms of allergy , and children are developing behavioural problems which may be attributable to man-made chemicals in the environment .
We know from serious cases of medication wrongly prescribed by doctors that foetuses have been damaged in the mother 's womb , in some cases involving damage that only manifested itself when the young person reached the age of reproduction .
Other instances of morbidity are occurring ; cases of feminisation have been observed in the animal world , for example both individuals in a pair of gulls around a nest full of sterile eggs being hens ; and animal experiments show that quite small doses at a precise point during pregnancy can be fatal , which raises the question of whether it is the dose or the point in time that is dangerous .
Recently the Commission came out with some vague pronouncements on the subject of phthalates in babies ' teething rings .
Here the precautionary principle gave rise to national bans , but there was no EU regulation .
The maximum limits are fully utilised , even though so much controversy surrounds them in these cases , and there are precious few instances of the Commission adhering to the precautionary principle , as required by the Treaty .
In the past month , the Commission has admitted that the risk assessment process is not working , and one has to agree with that when only a tiny fraction of the 100 000 chemicals already on the market have been subjected to a health or environmental assessment .
The system is not working , and that is why the report from the Environment Committee draws attention to group classification .
Moreover , we ask whether it would not be appropriate to reverse the burden of proof , so that anyone who wants to market a substance must show that it is harmless .
This would give industry a much more powerful incentive to provide information on and to investigate its own products .
The provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty on sustainability and its emphasis on the precautionary principle make it possible to intervene in the interests of health and the environment , so that these principles take precedence in the approval of individual chemicals or product types .
We therefore propose that the Commission should put forward a list of substances which can have an endocrine-disrupting effect .
The Commission must screen all EU legislation to see whether we have sufficient resources to intervene on endocrine-disrupting substances .
It must also get a serious grip on its system of risk assessment and systematically apply group classification .
The Commission must present proposals to reverse the burden of proof .
It must also support research in priority areas , such as long-range studies of sperm quality , and must support research on the causes of the increase in rates of breast cancer and testicular cancer .
The EU must apply the precautionary principle in concrete instances and hence consider phasing out substances which are simultaneously carcinogenic , allergenic and bronchially irritant .
When this report was being discussed in the Environment Committee , we were given some very unsatisfactory answers by the Commission 's officials , so I hope that the answers we receive this evening will be clearer .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , endocrine disruptors are substances that act chiefly by mimicking the action of natural hormones or by interfering with their metabolism .
This is particularly the case for pesticides and certain medicines .
For my part , I am reluctant to give my full support to the rapporteur , even though his dossier is a particularly difficult one .
Why ?
Because the scientific data available to date is full of contradictions and requires an in-depth analysis and an experimental approach that is both rigorous and independent .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , I would like to draw your attention to the absence of a scientifically-proven direct relationship between exposure to endocrine disruptors and effects on health .
Hence the need for in-depth epidemiological studies on exposed populations in order to ascertain the possible risk of cancer , endocrine disruptions in women , the influence on fertility levels among men , which are measured not on the basis of sperm counts as all current studies are - these being subject to individual or seasonal variations - but rather on the quality of the sperm .
This is why experimental studies carried out under laboratory conditions are needed to examine the synergistic effects of several substances , with a view to ascertaining a dose / effect relationship , which is the only way to demonstrate whether there actually is a direct relationship between endocrine disruptors and their effects on health .
In this instance , recourse to the precautionary principle should be linked to empirical data and should lead to the implementation of a monitoring system .
It is with this in mind that I have tabled several amendments aimed at guaranteeing better coordination of national initiatives in the area of research , implementing a research network in conjunction with the JRC , and improving the compatibility of research findings thanks to a classification system that will afford the necessary prevention for the various classes of exposure .
Aside from the linguistic amendments to Recommendations Nos 7 , 29 and 31 by the rapporteur , I am tabling an oral amendment to Recommendation No 28 by the rapporteur , which is aimed at establishing the existence of a dose / effect relationship . This is essential to guard against making simple assumptions and also to take the necessary measures based on objective , independent and experimental arguments .
Mr President , in its opinion on this highly sensitive issue , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has intentionally dealt only with pollutants of agricultural origin , namely pesticides , which have often created a stir because of other harmful effects on human health and the environment .
In its report , the Committee lists 25 pesticides which are permitted in the Union but are suspected of having a harmful effect on human and animal hormone systems .
Four further substances , including Atrazine and Diuron , have already been clearly proved to have an effect on hormones .
Such substances must be taken off the market immediately .
We must rapidly update the authorisation procedures for pesticides and require environmental impact assessments to be made of their hormonal effects .
Our committee has requested that the authorisation procedures test the hormonal effects not only of the pesticides themselves but also of their waste products and additives , as it is precisely additives such as softeners and emulsifiers which are known in other areas of the chemical industry for their harmful effects on hormone systems .
It is astonishing that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development should make stricter demands in the area of pesticides than the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
I hope that the House will approve the amendments we have retabled so that the wide availability of hormone-mimicking pollutants can be limited following the much-needed tightening of the authorisation procedures .
I would urge the Commission and the Member States to follow the ' better safe than sorry ' principle , if in doubt , and take hormone-mimicking pesticides off the market .
I should also like to raise a point with Mr Pompidou .
Sometimes I get the impression that we have to bury ourselves in research before we can take action .
Yet it is incomprehensible that we react only when the damage has been done .
This is why we propose that research should be a means to achieve approval more quickly .
It is only under these circumstances that I can approve Mrs Jensen 's report .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group I want first of all to endorse the remarks made by the rapporteur .
She has given a very clear assessment of the dangers posed by this new chemical threat .
Again , on behalf of the Socialists , I want to say that we will be voting for this report tomorrow and looking for European Union action on chemicals which mimic hormones and which have been shown to cause all sorts of strange health and reproductive difficulties in fish , birds and other wildlife .
Those chemicals called endocrine disrupters - not endocrine modulators , as some would have them known - are present in many different plastics and many other products including food wrappers , paints and pesticides .
It is certainly feared - and there is sound scientific research to show it - that these chemicals are responsible for the apparent drop in sperm counts amongst men in many Western countries .
Their long-term effects could be even more serious , including hypospadias , undescended testes and a range of reproductive difficulties in both males and females , which we really must take action about now .
Many of the chemicals which may be the source of this problem have quite frankly not been properly tested .
We are uncertain as to their real power or impact .
The prime effects so far appear to be during the period of foetal development , rather than in adults .
The effects we have seen in the natural environment have tended to be water-borne and to affect fish , shellfish , some birds and other animals which feed on marine life .
But that is no excuse for not adopting the precautionary principle and taking action to protect human life now .
For that reason , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I hope the European Commission will pick up the demands in this report , draw up a list of substances which are known to be hormone- mimicking , take action to start to phase out those substances or minimise their use , start to look at legislation on pollution control and water quality legislation to ensure these substances are reduced to a minimum or completely eradicated in the environment , and really put some effort into a research programme which will look into the real mechanisms of endocrine disruption .
Finally , we have to recognise that we are limited and do not have an acceptable internationally-recognised test to identify hormone-mimicking activity by chemicals .
That has to be a key issue for the Commission to work on and bring forward as quickly as possible , along with American and Japanese researchers .
The long-term effects of these chemicals are certainly very serious on the basis of the evidence we have seen .
They are hard to predict , but on the basis of the effects they have on creatures with much shorter life cycles than human beings , it is quite clear we should be seriously disturbed and prepared to take action .
Parliament will continue to demand of the other European institutions that action is taken , that an international effort is made to tackle what is clearly a global problem .
The European Union is in an ideal position to take that action .
We call upon the Commission to act .
Mr President , I think that it is important to reiterate , for the benefit of public opinion , that this report was drawn up on the initiative of Parliament , that this Parliament is a political and not a scientific body , and that what we do is to forward our concern to the European Commission so that it may determine whether this concern of ours is founded or not .
That is the first point that should be clarified .
Second , I agree with the clarifications and remarks by Mr Pompidou to the effect that we cannot inform the general public of our concerns unless there are sufficient scientific grounds .
Nor can we suggest through our debate that all or most of the blame should lie with pesticides , simply because these are topics that are dear to us and that we have discussed on earlier occasions .
However , it is important that we encourage the Commission , and we should do so with some urgency , to put all its mechanisms into operation .
The fifth framework programme should of course include some action in this respect .
I believe that we cannot fail to mention , too , that there are independent research teams in the European Union that have been working on these topics for some years .
I am a lecturer at Granada University and I know that for more than ten years the Granada Faculty of Medicine has had an excellent research team working on these topics and on certain products that are not mentioned in the resolution , products that are to be used in orthodontic treatments .
I do not believe , however , that in a resolution we can make statements of a general nature regarding the negative effects of chemical substances , because all that remains at the end of the day are these general allegations .
We must remember that there are also many chemical substances that are very beneficial .
Nowadays , we need look no further than the Nobel Prizes for Medicine that have been awarded for the discovery of the mechanisms of such a traditional product as nitroglycerine , which had already been in use for a good many years , and which is something you , Mr President , know a great deal about .
The discovery of the mechanisms allowing these products to act in the walls of blood vessels represents one of the major discoveries of recent decades .
Therefore , we must not go too far as regards chemical products in general .
Paragraph 35 of our rapporteur 's resolution is particularly important , where she calls on the European Commission to review the procedures relating to the marketing of chemical products for this purpose .
I believe this to be a very important conclusion .
Mr President , I would like to intervene on a point of order to ensure that the interpretation given is not used by anyone else .
My colleague Mr Valverde López referred to NO , which is in fact nitric oxide .
This was translated by the interpreters - and this was not their fault - as nitroglycerine , which is a dangerous explosive .
So it must be stated clearly that the Nobel Prize was awarded for nitric oxide , and not for nitroglycerine .
Mr Pompidou , Parliament is not a scientific centre , it is a political body .
Mr President , there are more than 100 000 synthetic chemicals in use and only a fraction of these have been tested for endocrine-disrupting affects .
Some which have been tested have been banned in the West but are still in use in developing countries .
Why are they a cause for concern ?
They destroy cells which form natural hormones .
They impair reproductive functions .
They affect body weight and temperature .
Most importantly , we know that they have a trans-generational affect passed from the mother to the offspring .
We find them in industrial discharges , in pesticides , in detergents , in plastics , in canned goods and in personal care products .
We know of their effects on animals .
In the Great Lakes some 16 species have been affected .
In the UK , as Mr Bowe has pointed out fish and snails have been affected .
In the United States alligators have been affected .
There are routes of human exposure to these chemicals .
Through the womb , via breastmilk , drinking contaminated water , absorption via skin from shampoos and so on , and inhalation and ingestion from pesticide sprays .
We have no solid proof that they are yet affecting humans but there are many indicators such as the decline in sperm counts , and the rise in testicular and breast cancer .
In December 1996 the Commission said there was no cause for alarm .
I would question that .
Liberal Democrats in this House are supporting this report and in particular the call for a cautionary approach , the call for more research and its implications for the budget for the Fifth Framework and the need for international cooperation .
We congratulate Mrs Jensen on this initiative .
We believe we have a duty to future generations to act now to make sure these chemicals do not become more widespread .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we also congratulate Mrs Jensen on her report .
It was important for the European Parliament finally to take an initiative , as it seems to me that the Commission buries its head in the sand and merely observes the problems .
What we need is action at European level , particularly as the data are more than alarming .
We constantly hear shocking information , such as that softeners can also find their way into the food chain , as they can be absorbed in fatty foods .
We have heard the alarming news that these endocrine substances are carcinogenic , and we now know that we must finally have a European ban on PVC .
I also think the way in which the Commission is dealing with the data on phthalates in children 's toys is scandalous .
Although it has been known since February that there are at least three highly toxic substances , the Commission has failed to take any steps .
Instead , research results have been manipulated or , more precisely , research methods altered so that the Commission does not need to take action .
This is particularly bad because it is an out-and-out violation of the precautionary principle and because , due to neglect , the health of children is being put at risk .
This is why we have gone further than Mrs Jensen 's report and requested that these highly toxic phthalates be taken off the market immediately .
There are alternatives to them , so we do not need them at all .
I should like to point out to the House at this point that we will ask for a roll-call vote as it is very important that we now increase pressure on the Commission on this issue .
Furthermore , until we have managed to ban PVC - and for us this is crucial - we call for these substances to have to be labelled , so that the consumer can at least be aware of the dangers and so that we can increase pressure on the industry to begin a genuine search for alternatives .
Mr President , during my childhood in Austria under the occupation of the Four Powers , when we had to travel from one sector to another we not only showed ID , but also those of us who lived in the American sector were always dusted with DDT on the way back , and this happened to many people several times a day .
At that time we saw only the short-term effect , which was that DDT killed the fleas , lice and other insects that we had in Europe after the war .
What we did not consider , and what we still do not always consider sufficiently today , is that chemicals have not only short-term effects but also long-term consequences .
For this reason I would like to thank Mrs Jensen very warmly for her report because she has drawn the attention of Parliament , the attention of the public and , I hope , Commissioner , the attention of the Commission to the fact that short-term thinking is a mistake where the authorisation of chemicals is concerned , and that it is often only after several years , perhaps even after decades , that we see the changes which are brought about in the environment , in animals and finally also in humans as a result of the use of chemicals .
Some of the chemicals from thirty or forty years ago are now banned , but many others are still around today , and we have neither adequate methods for testing them nor appropriate labelling for many of them , nor - and this is much more important , as many problems are transferred by air or water - the international agreements necessary to ban these chemicals .
Negotiations are currently taking place at international level to draw up a list of chemicals that are particularly hard to break down , and which we must undertake to ban rapidly .
I would ask the Commission to allow this list to remain provisionally open so that substances which we are still testing , and which may be proved to have harmful effects on the endocrine systems of animals and probably of humans , can be added to it .
We have the precautionary principle in the Union , which people often talk about and pay lip-service to .
We must now actually implement this precautionary principle in legislation on safety in the workplace , consumer safety and environmental safety , and above all we must increase the amount of research carried out , as further research will certainly reduce the health effects already visible today to levels compatible with the precautionary principle .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , various studies have revealed that the introduction into the environment of certain chemical substances , among the hundreds of thousands known to us , can have extremely disturbing effects on both animals and human beings , in that they interfere with the functioning of the endocrine system .
These substances , such as pesticides , DDT and their derivatives - industrial products and medicines - and pollutants in general , deemed harmful or suspect under the Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North East Atlantic - the OSPAR Convention - or by the OECD working group , mimic the effect of natural hormones and thus disrupt the natural balance of organisms .
Worrying phenomena have already come to light : fish which change sex during their lifetimes , a steady rise in human male sterility , due to a sharp decline in both the number and the quality of sperm , an unprecedented upsurge in dysfunctions of the thyroid and other glands in large population groups , as well as carcinogenic effects in man : there has been an otherwise inexplicable increase in cancer of the testicles and prostate .
However , experts are not yet in unanimous agreement as to a direct link between exposure to such substances and these phenomena .
It is therefore necessary , taking due account of the international studies already carried out on this topic , to develop a research strategy at European level , geared to a deeper understanding not only of sperm quality but also of the nervous system , the varying effects of these substances on the internal glandular system in man , and the resulting disruptions to the quality and quantity of the hormones produced .
The Commission must therefore ensure that each chemical product is labelled in an easily understandable way to show what level of substances not occurring in the natural environment it contains , making sure that the category of risk is shown .
I would conclude by complimenting the rapporteur , Mrs Jensen , on her excellent work . I hope that the resolution will receive broad-based support .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that Mrs Jensen deserves credit for tackling an important issue and making good proposals to take it forward .
However , dealing with this issue is difficult in that the empirical basis , that is the data , is not just shocking , as Mrs Breyer said , but downright inconsistent and poor .
That is the problem , and it is why research and coordination of research are priority tasks here .
What is most important for the European Union , as Mr Valverde López said , seems to me to be the establishment of appropriate research priorities in the fifth framework programme of research .
As rapporteur for this individual programme I will do my best to promote this , and I hope that the reports we have heard are not correct that the Council has already decided on the individual programmes , even though the framework programme has not yet entered into force .
The Community 's Joint Research Centre could serve as a coordination and control centre for this research and could be responsible for creating a European research network .
Moreover , the Commission , if possible in agreement with the OECD , must urgently provide a provisional definition of endocrine-disrupting chemicals in order to make empirical data substantially more comparable .
The Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy has therefore taken great care in drafting its opinion , and I regret that it was adopted only hesitantly by the committee responsible .
I should like to thank Mr Pompidou in particular for reintroducing a number of what I consider to be very good proposals that we had made .
In our opinion it is high time that we coordinated our research efforts .
In this area , actionism is both economically and environmentally counter-productive , so we should take care not to become actionist , but we should at the same time take action .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , chemical substances which make their way into the environment could be a possible cause of endocrine disruptions .
For this reason it is absolutely essential that we test chemicals for their effects on the endocrine system .
Should they prove to be dangerous , it is imperative that they are banned or substituted .
However , it is important that such precautions or countermeasures are based on a scientific risk assessment , yet there is currently no question of having sure scientific proof of damage to endocrine systems by chemicals .
In the amendments which I tabled in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy and also in the Committee on Women 's Rights , I have tried to draw attention to this .
In my opinion , the Commission should develop a research strategy which helps to clear up uncertainties in the area of endocrine disruption .
Measures based solely on suspected causal connections are , of necessity , of dubious effectiveness .
I would ask , therefore , that we keep a cool head despite our concern .
Our motto should be not to resort to actionism but instead to invest our energies in increasing our knowledge .
We can then use this as a basis for specific health protection measures .
We owe it to the responsible citizens of the European Union to proceed in this manner , as we do not want to frighten them but to inform them , and their health protection must be our main priority .
Mr President , I wish to begin by expressing the Commission 's appreciation for Parliament 's initiative in addressing the topic of endocrine disruption and for the work of the rapporteur , Mrs Jensen .
I would also assure the House that the concerns voiced here throughout the debate and , indeed , in Mrs Jensen 's report , are shared by the Commission .
The suspicions relating to adverse health effects on humans and other creatures arising from exposure to specific chemicals clearly need to be investigated by research scientists to gain additional essential information .
They also need to be assessed by public policy-makers who are committed to the precautionary principle .
The Commission will , therefore , propose a strategy on endocrine disrupters and it can at this stage accept the general lines of this draft resolution which calls for the reinforcement of the research strategy to improve the legislative framework , to provide information to the public and for participation in international efforts to address the problem .
As Mrs Jensen 's report makes clear , it is obvious that research is vital if we are to gain greater insight into the phenomenon of endocrine disruption .
The Commission is already working closely with Member States and the OECD to help to develop a harmonised approach to the screening and testing of endocrine-disrupting chemicals .
In addition , projects are already being funded under the fourth framework programme on R & D , as has already been pointed out in the debate , and the topic will be reflected in the priorities under the forthcoming fifth framework programme .
The Commission also plays a key role in bringing together researchers from different projects to exchange information and to coordinate activities .
From a regulatory standpoint , it will naturally be necessary to consider basing policy on proper scientific advice and to provide a means of responding quickly and effectively to specific concerns when evidence comes to light at short notice .
The Commission can , therefore , support the calls in the draft resolution to examine the adequacy of existing legislation and , if necessary , to consider adapting it appropriately in order to address endocrine disruption .
Similarly , on the basis of the precautionary principle , we foresee the need to consult the scientific committees of the Commission for independent scientific advice in cases of direct or indirect consumer exposure to potential endocrine-disrupting chemicals .
The role of the scientific committees is , of course , to provide independent scientific advice and not to coordinate regulatory activities in Member States .
Continuing on the theme of improvement of the legislative framework , there are a number of concepts such as those proposed for labelling requirements and for risk assessment which are being actively considered within the overall chemicals policy .
It must also be remembered that agreed test methods are a prerequisite for legislative action , like the proposed amendment to Directive 91 / 414 on plant protection products , and the establishment of a definitive list of endocrine-disrupting substances .
In the international context , there is a clear need for coordination in order to pool resources , to avoid duplication of work and to facilitate harmonisation of any regulatory actions , taking due account of international trade factors .
To this end , in June this year the European Community signed a protocol on persistent organ polluters under the 1979 ECE Convention for long-range transboundary air pollution .
The Community is currently participating in international negotiations for a global instrument on POPs .
The Commission is also playing an active part in several research-related international initiatives , together with organisations , such as the World Health Organisation , UNEP , OECD and with representatives from the United States of America and Japan under the auspices of the intergovernmental forum on chemical safety .
In addition , under the recently signed European Union / United States Science and Technology Coordination Agreement , endocrine disruption has been identified as one of the four priority projects .
As the House would expect , the Commission supports the call made in Mrs Jensen 's report for effective communication to the public .
Not unnaturally , the perception of risks by the public sometimes differs from that of the scientific community and , in the case of endocrine-disrupters , public concern may , to some extent , be due to a lack of clear and comprehensible information about the phenomenon and also about the actions being undertaken in order to address it .
It will , therefore , be necessary to make dependable public information available through appropriate channels in a more efficient and effective form , as indeed the report recommends .
Finally , I wish to assure Parliament that the Commission will be looking at recommendations for short- , medium- and long-term actions which will address the central points raised in the draft resolution .
I repeat my thanks to the House and to Mrs Jensen for providing a good quality report and an opportunity for consideration of an increasingly important issue , not only in this House but , I hope , among the wider general public who are very interested , for obvious reasons , in this theme .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Biodiversity
The next item is the report ( A4-0347 / 98 ) by Mr Sjöstedt , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on a European Community biodiversity strategy ( COM ( 98 ) 0042 - C4-0140 / 98 and SEC ( 98 ) 0348 - C4-0155 / 98 ) .
Mr President , the fact that biodiversity is being impoverished is one of our biggest environmental problems .
This is an issue that has to be addressed .
There are sadly no indications to date that the threat to plant and animal species is lessening .
Extinction is a real possibility in some cases .
Today we face an extremely serious situation .
The UN 's Convention on Biological Diversity has been signed both by the EU and the 15 Member States individually .
All the EU countries are now working on special - albeit different - programmes to enable them to comply with the wide-ranging provisions of the Convention .
We now have before us a proposal from the Commission for a European Community biodiversity strategy capable of bringing us into line with the requirements of the UN Convention .
My report is a response to the Commission communication , which quite rightly concentrates on what the EU as such can do .
Competence in this field is shared between the Member States and the Union .
The key idea running through this whole communication is that a concern for biodiversity must be extended into other policy areas . I wish to stress this point .
Whilst it is important to fulfil the requirements of the habitats directive and so on , we shall not be doing justice to the UN Convention unless we take an all-embracing approach to conservation . Protecting special areas is not enough .
The communication lists five headings under which specific measures should be taken : natural resources , including areas covered by the habitats and birds directives ; agriculture ; fisheries ; regional policy , together with town and country planning ; and development cooperation .
Generally speaking , I am happy with the Commission 's communication .
It is a high-quality document , containing good suggestions as to the policies we should implement .
The overall thrust is right , but there is a tendency to remain at the level of generalities .
It is hard to imagine what will happen in real terms .
In politics , there are two ways of not getting things done .
One can decide to take no action ; or one can agree to a project in theory , but never implement it in practice .
There are some areas of Commission activity where it will not be easy to draw practical consequences from the communication and move from words to deeds .
We really do need to know from the start how issues are to be tackled - and proper provision must be made for follow-up . Realistic planning and a fixed time-frame are of the essence .
Work could be linked to efforts to safeguard particularly endangered species , for example .
Programmes must , however , be comprehensive in their overall design . The Commission apparently sees no need for action on transport and energy .
Reference is simply made to work on climate change and acidification , but that is not good enough .
I as rapporteur have the whole committee behind me in calling for measures in these two fields .
We would also like the Commission to report back to the European Parliament . It is not sufficient simply to be informed of future activities ; we would hope to exercise some influence over forward planning , and we need to be involved in evaluating ongoing work .
The actual drawing-up of measures should be an open process , with input from environmental groups and national experts .
I have two questions to the Commissioner in this context .
The first has to do with reporting back to us .
I wonder how much influence Parliament will be allowed to have over the future shape of proposed measures .
And my second question concerns transport and energy .
Is the Commission willing to come forward with any plans in this area ?
Moving on to the more political dimension , our biggest problem is that much of what the EU does - for example in the agriculture , transport and fisheries sectors - is directly harmful to biological diversity .
Set against the provisions of the UN Convention , much of what we do is downright destructive .
Our main task is to change the thrust of EU policy .
Enlargement places major responsibilities on us .
We know that many areas in Eastern Europe enjoy great biodiversity .
Some of Europe 's greatest riches are to be found in the applicant countries .
Integration is fraught with danger , since higher levels of biological diversity are partly due to lower levels of development - in farming , for example .
The drastic upheavals bound to occur as agricultural policy is reformed could have a devastating impact on biodiversity .
Great care will be needed to pre-empt this .
We would urge a more cautious approach to investment in infrastructure . Close examination of EIB lending policy towards the Member States is called for here .
I do not have time to go through everything in the report , but we trust that due attention will be paid to the various other points which it contains .
Mr President , the astonishing variety of thousands of life forms is the result of the biodiversity created by nature itself as one of its most important expressions .
It is the quintessence of the dynamic equilibrium between the various forms of life and the various ecosystems .
It is also an important source of economic wealth , and is directly related to mankind 's quality of life because it relates to man 's day-to-day environment and man 's recreation , as well as being part of man 's natural heritage .
Unfortunately , the natural rules which created the dynamic equilibrium between life forms on our planet have been violated by human activities , which in recent years have accelerated the reduction of biodiversity .
Yet we can do something to help , though incentives are needed if the stresses on many ecosystems are to be identified and neutralised .
A strategy must be developed for the management of biodiversity both at Community level and worldwide , if harmonious co-existence is to be achieved between economic development and biodiversity .
In any case , that is an essential ingredient of the model of sustainable development which the Community is promoting , but it also emerges from the International Convention on Biodiversity .
It is of primary importance to incorporate that strategy in the various Community policies in the context of the Agenda 2000 programme .
In general terms , policy is being developed along four main thematic lines .
The first is the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity .
It is a sine qua non to conserve ecosystems and populations of species in their natural environment , though of course protection should also be given to unprotected areas through the implementation of measures both in situ and ex situ .
The second is the distribution of benefit from the use of genetic resources .
The creation of a legal framework and , in parallel , protection of the use and development of genetic resources , are powerful incentives towards the distribution of benefit from the use of those resources .
In parallel , we must consider the adoption of positive financial disincentives .
The third line relates to research , monitoring and information exchange , and the fourth to education , training and increased awareness .
In conclusion , the general aim must be to highlight the importance of biodiversity for the future of mankind as a source of economic and ecological wealth , and mainly as a basic factor in the preservation of life on our planet .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the present communication from the Commission on an action plan for biodiversity says too little about the area of fisheries .
For this reason , the Committee on Fisheries presented the following conclusions to the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , the committee responsible , for inclusion in its resolution .
The Committee on Fisheries calls on the Commission to set up a scientific working party to develop an action plan for research into the interaction between fisheries and marine ecosystems .
Here we would stress that a biodiversity plan for fisheries needs to be drawn up in order to counteract sectoral interests and to ensure that environmental aspects are more fully integrated in the fisheries sector .
In addition , we call on the Commission to use the precautionary approach , as defined in the UN Agreement on Highly Migratory Fish Stocks and Straddling Fish Stocks , in its management of fish stocks .
We urge that all regional fisheries management bodies in the EU also adopt this precautionary principle .
We ask that conservation measures be strengthened in the long term in all fisheries agreements to which the EU is signatory .
We call on the Commission to explain how the objectives stipulated in the biodiversity strategy can be implemented , and we wish to be consulted by the Commission on this issue .
In order to secure our fish stocks and the valuable food commodity of fish , we must not delay any longer in drawing up and implementing an appropriate environmentally-friendly , sustainable strategy for which those who work in fisheries will also be responsible .
The research results available so far are , in this area at least , inadequate .
Mr President , if we consider that there are an estimated 20 to 30 million species of living organisms in existence , of which only about 1.4 million species have even been discovered and described by scientists , but that 1.5 million will have become extinct within the next 25 years , we can see the urgency of the situation .
We need to take action .
For this reason we in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development cannot comprehend why the regulation approved by the Commission and Parliament on the placing on the market of plant varieties has still not been adopted by the Council , why the Commission 's support for cooperation between the Member States ' own programmes , the gene banks and the informal sector has only been half-hearted , cumbersome and ineffective , and why even DG VI is toying with the idea of allowing the only integrated programme for the conservation , characterisation , collection and use of genetic diversity in agriculture to expire in 1999 .
In order to preserve biodiversity , we need to promote extensive farming methods and organic farming .
We must also implement Community initiatives and targeted project support , particularly in the context of Agenda 2000 , rather than allowing projects to run out of funding and personnel , which is unfortunately what is happening at the moment .
The degree of biodiversity in the applicant countries is still very high , and we must take action as soon as possible to promote and support this and to extend existing programmes to these countries .
The last two opinions of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development were drafted by my colleague , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , and it has been my honour and pleasure to present them on his behalf .
Mr President , I must repeat a point already made by previous speakers , namely that the most recent studies of the dispersion of different species in our natural environments point to a steady decline in biodiversity in Europe .
The reasons for this decline are well known , and are attributable to highly intensive farming and land use , the break-up of natural habitats through infrastructure - most notably transport and urbanisation - as well as mass tourism and the pollution of water , air and land .
It is therefore most important that , in application of the Convention on Biological Diversity , the issue of biodiversity should be integrated into Community policies thanks to this communication .
However , despite the considerable impact of transport and tourism policies on ecosystems conservation , the communication maintains that there is no need for the implementation of specific action plans on transport and tourism ' as the development and implementation of the Community strategies on climate change and acidification ... together with the implementation of adequate environmental assessment procedures should be adequate to achieve the biodiversity objectives in these policy areas ' .
This decision on the one hand prevents the implementation of adequate control procedures in the areas referred to by the European bodies , and on the other hand limits the scope for the promotion and development of related policies by the Community .
It is for these reasons that the Committee on Transport and Tourism is calling for specific action plans in these areas - transport and tourism - and indeed the Committee on the Environment agrees with us here .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism wishes to highlight the following points in particular : the unlimited growth of transport and tourism ; the problem of transport flows , currently channelled into areas of great biodiversity ; the need for a shift from road to rail , a means of transport with a lower environmental impact , as stated in the international Alps Convention ; the need , identified by the Commission , to internalise external costs ; the fact that the Kyoto Agreement sets out specific aims which necessitate appropriate transport policies ; the impact of transport infrastructures on biodiversity ; and the need for a thorough environmental impact assessment and strategic environment assessment on the trans-European networks .
Our committee demands that there should be no new infrastructure which has an impact on areas protected under the Natura 2000 Network , and that tourism should be sustainable and not of a kind to endanger biodiversity : it is therefore necessary to identify maximum absorption capacity limits in sensitive areas .
For these reasons , we are calling for an eco-label for sustainable tourism . Furthermore , Mr President , looking beyond transport and tourism issues , I think that it is vital to take account of the points made by the Committees on Research and the Environment concerning the potential impact of genetically modified organisms .
Mr President , this is a very important report . At stake is the legacy of bioversity that we pass on to future generations .
The rapporteur 's interesting text has been complemented by many good suggestions and ideas from other committees and individual Members .
I believe there is a broad agreement within Parliament on this issue and will restrict myself to just a few comments .
Biological diversity , upon which we are all so dependent , is heavily influenced by other environmental factors .
Acid rain from the atmosphere , together with sulphur and nitrogen oxides , have destroyed biodiversity in many northern European lakes . This has been the case in Sweden and elsewhere .
Last spring , Parliament aimed high and called for reductions in emissions to a level the environment could absorb . The effects on biological diversity should gradually be felt .
Swedish newspapers reported yesterday on the threat to coral reefs as a result of an above-average increase in sea temperatures .
It is quite obvious that such developments endanger biodiversity .
There could well be a connection between the greenhouse effect - which has often been debated in this House - and the steep rise in water temperature .
We could doubtless support the call for measures in this area with the need to safeguard biological diversity .
I also wish to touch upon the role of private ownership . A broad spread of land ownership can have an impact on biodiversity .
The desire of individuals to tend and protect nature has often led to rich biological variation .
Yet there are circumstances where the burden of caring for unique biotopes is too much for one single owner . It makes sense then for the State to intervene and provide compensation for possible losses .
In the long term , however , respect for private ownership will further biodiversity .
Financial incentives in this area have in the past produced positive results .
In its opinion , the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy referred to biotechnology as an additional means of maintaining , and even re-creating , biological diversity .
That is certainly an interesting perspective and should be borne in mind for the future , despite the fact that the proposal was rejected in committee this time round .
Mr President , I am standing here in my shirt-sleeves because it is so unbearably hot in the Chamber .
It bodes ill for biodiversity that the temperature regulation in our own Chamber should be so bad .
Perhaps you can do something about it ?
In any event , I regard the Commission 's communication on biodiversity as enormously important , because it touches the essence of Europe 's policy on nature and nature conservation .
I am pleased with this communication , but only as a first step .
We know that the Commission draws up all manner of action plans for the conservation of natural resources , agriculture , fisheries , regional policy and economic cooperation .
This list , as the rapporteur rightly points out , is not complete .
Transport and energy are missing .
I find that a pity , since these sectors in particular have major repercussions on biodiversity .
I think that action plans of this kind are needed for transport and energy too .
I shall be very interested to hear Mr Kinnock 's response to our questions about this sector .
Looking at the situation as it is at present , the incorporation of environmental safeguards into other policy areas is still nowhere near good enough .
To give you a recent example : the Union gives subsidies to sheep farmers in Crete , which leads to overgrazing and soil erosion , with terrible consequences for biodiversity .
I believe we must call a halt to projects of that kind which are directly harmful to biodiversity .
As draftsman on the budget for the environment , I have argued for better integration of safeguards for the environment and the natural world into other policy sectors .
My idea is that the Structural Funds could also be used for Natura 2000 and for implementation of the habitats and birds directives .
I hope the House will endorse this idea from the Environment Committee when we vote on the budget on Thursday .
It will be a great step forward for Europe 's protection of nature , and a good way of combining biodiversity with structural policy .
Mr President , I share the rapporteur 's concern regarding the possible effects of intensive agriculture , trans-European networks , the reduction of fisheries stocks and so many other activities connected with Europe 's economy on natural resources and biodiversity .
In line with the agreement the Member States have signed , I wish to join with him in expressing the need for rapid and immediate action plans that Parliament is informed of .
And , since the best way of showing how biodiversity is threatened is to give an example , this weekend , in my country , in the province of León , I visited a forest where 5 000 hectares had burned during military exercises , a wood where plants and animal species disappeared and will probably not reappear for another 50 years .
If we do not promptly draw up action plans , it will be difficult to maintain biodiversity , and to maintain life in the manner we would wish .
Mr President , our biodiversity is exposed to many threats .
The latest issue of the Malaysian-based journal Third World Resurgence reports on how a few large western corporations are effectively destroying biological diversity in the agricultural sector by their abusive exploitation of genetic engineering techniques and patent rights .
This problem was also raised at the fourth meeting of the parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity , held earlier this year in Bratislava .
Many delegates expressed unease over the use of what is known as ' terminator technology ' . Patented techniques are used to manipulate the genetic composition of seed , rendering the resulting plant sterile .
Patent rights and genetic engineering are being wielded by the big corporations in a bid to prevent farmers from reproducing their crops . That was the message emerging from the meeting .
In the light of all this , I particularly support paragraph 43 of the report . It affirms that all states enjoy sovereign rights over their own genetic resources and that this principle shall be paramount whenever the EU enters into agreements with third parties , especially in the field of patents .
Mr President , today , as a European environmentalist , I am embarrassed .
I am not happy that many of the Member States have not yet done their homework .
Not all of us have drawn up a national action programme to meet our commitments under the Convention on Biological Diversity .
We Europeans like to criticise countries elsewhere in the world which continue to destroy their natural forest or to convert them into plantations .
On the other hand our forests were converted centuries ago - some were destroyed and only very few natural forest ecosystems remain in the EU .
Unfortunately we are not very keen when it comes to the reconversion of forests to their natural state .
The implementation of the habitats and birds directives has also been blocked .
The success in establishing the Natura 2000 network has so far been very limited .
Seven countries have not yet drawn up their plans for conservation , amongst them France , Germany and Luxembourg .
That is indeed embarrassing .
I hope that the forest strategy on which the Commission is working so hard now will give us the opportunity to establish protected areas to meet our commitments under the biodiversity convention .
And funds are needed to set aside protected areas .
Let us not repeat the mistake that was made with the announcement of Natura 2000 .
Nobody has yet proposed a serious funding plan for Natura 2000 .
Let us change that .
Mr President , the Commission says in its communication on biodiversity that a Community strategy is needed to turn the tide in Europe .
Measures taken to date are not enough to stop the loss of biodiversity in Europe .
I welcome the Commission 's concern for nature in Europe .
This is an international issue which warrants joint action by the Member States .
But the Commission 's policy on biodiversity has to be consistent .
The Commission is still funding activities which adversely affect biodiversity .
Where these are necessary activities under the CAP or TENs or the regional policy , I think that recompense must be made for the damage , for example by the creation of extra nature conservancy areas .
It is of course highly unsatisfactory to have the Commission undermining its own measures in favour of maintaining biodiversity .
So I would urge the Commission to take due heed of what the resolution says on this subject .
Lastly , I feel I have to point out that one or two things in this resolution are said twice .
Combining one or two paragraphs on fisheries , TENs and the periodic evaluations that are required would have made the resolution neater and more concise .
Mr President , I think we all support this communication from the Commission , which reflects the concern of the Community 's institutions in complying with international agreements and in carrying out another of our obligations , that is , making environmental policy a dimension of all other policies .
We must also send a message to the national governments and regional and local authorities , since policies at those levels must converge and be consistent with those of the European Union .
There are a number of areas in this regard that offer major opportunities and we must highlight this for all our citizens . For , it is not only the responsibility of the authorities but of each and every one of us since , as consumers , we can make a positive choice in this field and also , as actors in local democracy , we can help support those communities that really defend biological diversity .
However , the most important part of the entire communication is the general warning that nobody in a position of political responsibility can consider themselves exempt from this general concern .
And I would also like to very firmly express my support for the rapporteur 's conclusions .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Sjöstedt , and the Committees on the Environment , Transport and Tourism , Fisheries , Agriculture and Rural Development and Research , Technological Development and Energy for their opinions and for the comprehensive report that has been the subject of the House 's consideration this evening .
Clearly this Parliament is actively engaged in promoting the integration of environmental concerns in all areas and the Commission welcomes the support given to the biodiversity communication by the opinions from the committees and , indeed , by this report .
With the presentation of this communication , the Commission has committed itself to the integration of biodiversity concerns into Community policies and instruments .
We are now starting to develop action plans and other measures to implement the biodiversity strategy .
The Sjöstedt report will obviously be useful in this process .
I would only add that action plans , whilst very useful and very welcome , are not prerequisites of effective environmental policy and practice , as I am sure honourable Members will readily understand .
In the transport area , for instance , our commitment is to sustainability .
That means action , as contributors to the debate suggested , along a broad front , whether it is the encouragement of the use of rail passenger and freight transport ; or the securing of an effective agreement with Switzerland ; or the introduction of fair and efficient pricing policies for the use of transport infrastructure ; or emissions reduction ; or a number of other strategies , none of which neatly fall into the definition of action plans for the protection and furtherance of biodiversity but all of which are extremely valuable in securing environmental sustainability by improved transport policies .
I am sure that will be understood .
This report , apart from its generally agreeable nature and effectiveness of the analysis , includes some requests that the Commission will not able to satisfy .
When I provide some detail about our thinking I hope the House will understand why we cannot accept every particular part of the report .
First , in paragraph 14 there is a request for an action plan to be adopted by the European Parliament and the Council - or at least for all the plans to be adopted by the European Parliament and the Council .
However , we consider that such a procedure would unnecessarily slow down the implementation of the strategy .
We had envisaged the adoption of the action plans by the Commission in the form of communications to the Parliament and the Council but not necessarily for adoption by them .
Legislative proposals that may be contained in those action plans must obviously be adopted in accordance with the legislative procedures .
Secondly , in paragraph 16 there is a request for the development of specific action plans for the energy and transport sector to which I have already referred .
In our view many of the biodiversity concerns in these areas are already covered by the climate and acidification strategies that address the relevant emissions which may have an impact on biodiversity and by the existing or envisaged proposals on environmental assessment .
Beyond that the Commission does not consider that substantial new policy actions need to be developed in order to integrate biodiversity into relevant instruments in those areas .
Thirdly , in paragraph 43 there is a request for some principles under the biodiversity convention to take precedence over other international agreements concluded by the Community , for example under the World Trade Organization regime .
The Commission 's position is that environmental agreements are at the same level as trade agreements and should be implemented in a mutually consistent way .
But there is no a priori hierarchy of norms .
Fourthly , Recital J suggests that the European Union should finance the compensation of damage deemed to be caused by TENs , by the common agricultural policy and by regional policy .
The Commission position is that the Community biodiversity strategy should help to prevent the networks policy , the agricultural policy and regional policy from causing damage to biodiversity and that therefore there should be no need for new compensation mechanisms .
Naturally the Commission would be grateful if this House could take these elements into consideration .
On the specific questions raised by the rapporteur : he has asked about the system we have used for reporting to Parliament on the implementation of the strategy .
The Commission will be reporting both to Parliament and to the Council regularly on the implementation of the strategy .
Indeed , in June the Environment Council June requested the first of those reports to be available by June 2000 .
Obviously that report will also be transmitted to Parliament .
Then there is the question Mr Sjöstedt raised about consultation not only with experts from Member States but with NGOs and other relevant interested parties about what he described as national action plans .
We are not talking about national action plans ; these are Community action plans and they have an added value as a consequence of that .
The answer to his question is that the consultation will takes place with the same breadth and same thoroughness as took place in the compilation of the strategy itself .
Everybody would acknowledge that was an extensive operation with networks now very firmly established and they will be exploited fully in ensuring that consultation about the action plans take place systematically and sincerely .
I hope that meets the requirements that Mr Sjöstedt and his colleagues have .
It is clear , as several Members in this and many other debates have said , that biodiversity is essential to life on earth .
It is also evident that it is being eroded more quickly now than at any time in the history of the planet .
The Community has a legal , moral and self-interested obligation to assume its responsibility and to cooperate with third countries in efforts to change that pattern .
Cooperation with Member States and with a wider public in this process is obviously vital in order to ensure that in conjunction with national efforts , the implementation of a Community biodiversity strategy helps to reverse those negative - indeed , ruinous - trends , as biodiversity is reduced , not only in the Community but also more widely in our continent and indeed throughout the world .
I know that this House shares this conviction that the rot has to be stopped and the process reversed .
I express the appreciation of the Commission for the way in which that conviction in this Parliament is continually manifested through useful initiatives like Mr Sjöstedt 's report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.30 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I want to apologise for my absence yesterday .
This was due to Air France notifying my travel agent that my flight from London City was cancelled .
In fact the flight went but by that time I was re-routed to Basle and finally got here at 7.30 p.m. instead of 5 p.m. for the opening of the sitting .
I wonder if your services would drop a note to Air France asking them not to do this again .
However , I have to report that I managed to get here in time for the production of Don Giovanni at the Strasbourg Opera .
I thank the City of Strasbourg for allowing me and several other Members to go - a splendid production .
Madam President , my name is not on the attendance register .
I should like this to be corrected as I was here yesterday .
The same applies to me , Madam President .
I cannot see my name on the attendance register , but my neighbours can confirm that I was here .
Madam President , my name is also not on the attendance register , yet I too was here yesterday .
I would be grateful if my name could be added .
That will be corrected .
( The Minutes were approved )
Statement by the President
I would inform the House that I have received a request from five political groups - the Group of the Party of European Socialists , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , the Green Group in the European Parliament , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left and the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations - asking for a topical and urgent debate under Rule 47 to be held on Thursday from 3 p.m. to 4 p.m. on the arrest of General Pinochet in the United Kingdom .

I should first like to inform you of the implications of this , because we adopted our agenda yesterday .
This is therefore an amendment to the agenda .
If this proposal by the groups is accepted , the whole procedure under Rule 47 will have to be applied .
This means that the Conference of Presidents will have to be convened this morning .
The results of its meeting will have to be announced to Parliament at the beginning of this afternoon 's sitting .
Any objections will have to be tabled by 8 p.m. this evening and put to the vote at the beginning of tomorrow morning 's sitting .
The deadlines would then be as follows : motions for resolutions would have to be tabled by 4 p.m. today , and joint motions and amendments by 4 p.m. tomorrow .
Madam President , there was a preliminary discussion of this yesterday .
After the group chairmen met last night there was agreement among a great many of the groups that we should use the opportunity this week to have some immediate discussion of a political nature in this House .
Clearly an urgency debate is the most relevant , given that this is not an issue on which we need a statement from either the Council or the Commission .
It was the feeling of all of us that this should be put to the House .
I regret that it has to be through such a bureaucratic procedure as you have just described . If that is all that our Rules allow , then so be it .
My group is in favour .
Madam President , I want to speak against this motion , but first I want to explain why to my parliamentary colleagues .
In the last few hours , significant legal decisions have been taken in my country which affect this debate .
For one thing , the examining magistrate has amended the warrant .
For another , the public prosecutor 's office has appealed against the warrant on the grounds that , in its opinion , the judge is not empowered to issue it .
And , finally , the judge has established a period for the parties involved - the accused and the prosecutor - to state their positions on a possible asylum appeal .
So I think we should let the court do its work and only indulge in political interpretations once the court has made its decision .
This makes it inappropriate , in my view , to interfere in the work of the court at this time and I call on my colleagues in this House to make the cries for an independent judiciary compatible with political initiatives that in fact , taken at the wrong time , do nothing but put pressure on the independence of the judiciary .
Madam President , this Parliament has been calling for General Pinochet to be put on trial for a very long time .
This should normally have happened in his own country , Chile , but apparently this has not been possible because the dictatorships have been maintained .
The Community treaties now provide for a European legal area , so what is involved is the application and implementation of that European legal area .
Parliament is not going to interfere in the legal procedures , but it ought to take this opportunity to highlight the unity of all our peoples and all our governments in the fight against the international terrorism represented by the dictatorship , genocide and cruelty that General Pinochet inflicted on his people and on European citizens . According to the most recent estimates , almost 100 European citizens were assassinated by General Pinochet 's government .
Therefore , this Parliament must immediately give its opinion on the issue .
Having heard one speaker for and one against , I now put the request to the vote .
( Parliament approved the request )
Decision on urgent procedure
The next item is the vote on the request for urgent procedure concerning the proposal for a Council Directive amending Council Directive 94 / 4 / EC and the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Council Regulation ( EC ) 355 / 94 and extending the temporary derogation applicable to Germany and Austria .
Madam President , this proposal for a directive relates to Austria and Germany 's derogation from the duty-free arrangements .
There has been a legal vacuum here since 1997 , because the arrangements were in force until December 1997 .
That is why we are rather surprised that the proposal was only forwarded to us in September .
We have hardly had any time to consult on this , and yet we do consider it to be an important matter .
I propose , therefore , that we reject the request for urgent procedure .
We will endeavour to produce a report for the November part-session , but at the latest for the December part-session .
( Parliament rejected the requests for urgent procedure )
1999 Budget - Expiry of ECSC Treaty - 1999 ECSC Budget
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0360 / 98 by Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Communities for the 1999 financial year ( SEC ( 98 ) 0800 - C4-0300 / 98 ) ; -A4-0361 / 98 by Mr Viola , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Communities for the 1999 financial year - Section I , European Parliament - Annex : Ombudsman ; Section II , Council ; Section IV , Court of Justice ; Section V , Court of Auditors ; Section VI , Economic and Social Committee - Committee of the Regions ( C4-0300 / 98 ) ; -A4-0330 / 98 by Mr Giansily , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the communication from the Commission on the expiry of the ECSC Treaty : financial activities ( COM ( 97 ) 0506 - C4-0573 / 97 ) ; -A4-0363 / 98 by Mr Giansily , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft ECSC operating budget for 1999 ( SEC ( 98 ) 0966 - C4-0394 / 98 ) .
Madam President , I pointed out yesterday that my opinion on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy had not been reproduced in full in Mr Giansily 's report .
The President said that a corrigendum would be published .
However , I have just been to get this , and Mr Giansily 's report is available , but without opinions from any of the committees .
How is this possible ? Madam President , I would ask you to ensure that this document is correctly printed !
The matter you have raised is being investigated , Mrs Lulling .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , before getting into this debate on the budget , I would like to thank all the members of the Committee on Budgets ' secretariat , not just for their great professionalism in preparing this budget , but also for their good humour which always kept me going .
I would also like to thank my fellow rapporteurs from the relevant committees for their close collaboration .
The 1999 European Union budget we are debating today , the first in euros , falls within an unusual context compared with previous financial years .
The 1999 budget is the last under the current financial perspective and will therefore mark the end of an era .
But at the same time it should constitute the point of departure for a new interinstitutional agreement and a new financial perspective that must fulfill the provisions of Article F.3 of the Treaty on European Union concerning the availability of means . In addition , it must also provide - and we have all committed ourselves to this - the pre-accession financing to facilitate the future enlargement of the Union towards the east , and it must respond to the challenges of monetary union .
Therefore , in its guidelines for the budgetary procedure , voted on at the beginning of April , Parliament came out in favour of making the 1999 budget a transitional budget , a bridging budget , rather than one representing a fresh start .
At that time , Parliament already wanted to send a clear signal to the Council indicating that the negotiation of the new financial perspective and the 1999 budget are not two separate issues , but are directly linked in time and content , and that if no interinstitutional agreement is reached , the 1999 budget will serve as the basis for the draft budget for 2000 , in accordance with Article 203 .
The budgetary guidelines adopted also set out the conditions that Parliament regards as the sine qua non for reaching agreement and fulfilling the commitment to adopt a budget that is roughly in line with the average increase in payments by the Member States .
In its preliminary draft budget , the Commission notes an increase of 6.4 % in commitment appropriations over 1998 .
So this draft budget broadly balances Parliament 's priorities , Member States ' demands and its own needs , and it must be financed with 1.11 % of the Member States ' GNP .
However , a figure of 1.09 % of GNP is specified to finance the Council 's draft budget - 0.18 % below the ceiling of 1.27 % - yet we must take account of the fact that , in accordance with the Council 's forecasts , compulsory expenditure commitment appropriations have increased by more than 11.5 % .
The Council 's apparent rigour as regards the overall figure is , nonetheless , conditional on compliance with the unilateral decisions of the Edinburgh and Cannes Councils , whose funding is strictly met by the Council with no thought to the effectiveness of the expenditure , while other policies suffer significant and apparently arbitrary cuts .
Let me give one very telling example : in the explanatory statement to its first reading of the budget , the Council recognises the undoubted success of the Leonardo da Vinci programme but it then immediately moves on to cut the programme by the reasonable sum of EUR 100 million .
The infinite consistency of the Council becomes even clearer if we take the trouble to read the Cardiff conclusions of 16 June and contrast them with the Council 's first reading .
Evidently , accountancy is the Council 's only concern : the bottom line is all that matters , regardless of any policy aims .
In this situation , which deep down is no different from previous financial years , Parliament 's task is to form a political budget that is consistent with its priorities as expressed in the guidelines .
Moving on to Category 1 - agriculture - I would point out that , for the first time in a budgetary year , Category 1 and Category 2 expenditure is almost balanced .
This responds on the one hand to the compliance with the last year of the financial perspective and on the other hand , and most important , to the development of the ad hoc procedure that has made it possible to reduce agricultural expenditure over the last few financial years , clearly demonstrating that , in the past , the Commission has overestimated budgetary needs .
Consequently , the agriculture budget is now well below the guideline , which has become a ceiling that is far above real needs and not likely to limit the increase in agricultural expenditure .
In its resolution on the ad hoc procedures provided for in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 29 October 1993 , the European Parliament stresses the importance of a number of longstanding issues that , in its opinion , ought to be included in the procedure .
But , as rapporteur , I really must express my disappointment at the development of the ad hoc procedure for the 1999 budget .
Instead of making progress , we have , I think , taken a step backwards because of the Council 's unwillingness to look at the main elements proposed by Parliament - classification , the creation of a reserve , the legal basis for this process - and hold a serious debate on them before first reading .
The Council is thus postponing crucial parts of the debate until the Commission presents its Letter of Amendment after Parliament 's first reading .
This stance by the Council will not facilitate negotiations ahead of second reading where the agenda is already full .
But it must be clear that Parliament confirms its commitment to the ad hoc procedure - by way of derogation from Article 14 of the Financial Regulation - which should take account of Parliament 's requests , irrespective of the category of the expenditure .
Consequently , Parliament is obliged to reiterate at its first reading the requests presented in the conciliation on the Council 's first reading .
As regards Category 2 - Structural Funds - I also want to mention Parliament 's guidelines first . They include absolute respect for the financial perspective and the Interinstitutional Agreement , but ask for the possibility of extending the programming period to be considered in order to facilitate cofinancing .
That is why at first reading an amendment was tabled to place EUR 1 500 million of commitment appropriations and EUR 250 m of payment appropriations in a special reserve pre-allocated only to Member States that have a lower than average rate of uptake and on condition that these appropriations can be extended , if unused , for the benefit of the same beneficiaries .
The same amendment reduces the payment appropriations for the Funds by EUR 500 m , given that this decision is compatible with the forecast of needs and above all with Letter of Amendment No 2 / 98 to the supplementary and amending budget and the Notenboom procedure which increases the payment appropriations by EUR 871 m .
However , before any Member States rub their hands with glee , it must be quite clear that the amendment sets out some explicit conditions . To make matters even clearer , it would perhaps be appropriate to remember that Category 2 is non -compulsory expenditure .
Within this category , Parliament is committed to financing the PEACE initiative for Ireland , aware that the Stormont Agreement represents a historic step forward .
It accepts the Commission proposal on this , but readjusts it in line with Parliament 's decision on the RECHAR , REGIS and RESIDER initiatives .
In its guidelines , Parliament states that it wants to adopt a budget which takes account of its priorities , and that it must be a budget for the citizens .
The human dimension of the budget is nowhere more tangible than in Category 3 concerning the Union 's internal policies .
However , at its first reading , the Council transforms this category into the ultimate dogsbody , cutting it to levels below the 1998 budget .
The view of the Committee on Budgets is that even in a strict regime , the activities financed should demonstrate to the citizens the importance that Parliament attaches to their priorities : employment and other social actions , education and training , the protection of the environment in accordance with the Kyoto commitment , consumer information and , finally , transport safety .
That is why it wants to increase funding for measures where the European dimension can be clearly seen , as in the creation of pilot projects and preparatory actions in the areas of education , innovation and training leading towards a Europe of Knowledge , actions intended to improve multicultural integration , and actions to combat violence against women .
I do not want my remarks on Category 3 to turn into a long list , so I will just highlight two points .
First , I call on the Council to reach an agreement quickly with Parliament on the financing of the fifth framework programme for research , and to permit an exact allocation of the funding for the programme during the 1999 budgetary procedure .
At first reading , Parliament is opting to allocate the amount proposed by the Commission in its draft budget .
Secondly , with a view to the forthcoming entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , and Article 73k in particular , Parliament is creating a European Refugee Fund under Category 3 , taking account of the common interest to the Member States of a European Union asylum policy .
While Parliament needs to keep an eye on the internal policies of the Union , it is also concerned about its external policies .
Parliament is committing itself to the Cannes agreement - although it never accepted it - provided that it is not implemented at the expense of the Union 's other external obligations .
In its draft , the Council makes large cuts to Category 4 with no credible or realistic explanation .
If I were cynical , I might say that the cuts are simply due to the need to square the accounts now that the PHARE programme has grown by an additional EUR 150 m .
It is somewhat strange that the Council forgets budgetary rigour when increasing a programme that has serious difficulties in terms of absorption capacity , with implementation figures well below the amount allocated .
In total consistency with its guidelines for the 1999 budget , Parliament proposes to distribute EUR 200 m of PHARE funding to all chapters on external actions .
In line with previous financial years , and given the difficulties involved in correctly implementing the external programmes , Parliament is allocating EUR 30 m to the reserve for Item B7-541 - reconstruction of the former Yugoslavia - until the Commission presents a new draft regulation for this action . It is also proposing to allocate a significant share of the funding for the TACIS programme to the reserve while waiting for the Commission to present a global strategy to Parliament for responding to the serious financial crisis in Russia .
And , as I come to the end , I want to focus on two fundamental points relating to Category 5 .
The first point could be called ' the BAT story ' - although it has nothing to do with Batman - as it deals with a subject many chapters have already been written about . It began , in fact , before the steady rise of the so-called mini-budgets , when it was decided to convert these appropriations into staff posts - some 2000 - by transferring expenditure from Part B to Part A of the budget , a change that will be completed in 1998 .
However , it must be noted that the Commission has continued to use external staff through technical assistance offices financed under Part B , that is , from operational expenditure .
In turn , this has meant considerable reductions in the total operational amounts for the programmes .
For example , EUR 14 m of operational expenditure for the Socrates programme has been used as administrative expenditure .
Parliament reaffirms its attachment to compliance with the Financial Regulation , which divides the expenditure between Part B and Part A , and is tabling amendments along these lines . However , at the same time , it is committed to a radical revision of the structure of the budget to focus more on an objective-based budget .
That is why it is asking the Commission to provide the details for the new presentation of the tables annexed to chapters 11 and 70 .
I regard the second item in Category 5 as a source of shame to the Member States , given that it involves the funding of the officials ' pensions .
It turns out that up until 1997 the Member States only partly paid , and indeed before 1982 did not pay at all , the employer 's share of the premium for the staff 's pension scheme , with the result that the intended budget for pensions is still in deficit in 1998 .
And I have to ask : what would happen to a businessman who did not fulfil his social security obligations in any one of the Member States ?
Parliament is therefore proposing the budget structure for an adequate pension fund for the staff of the institutions and bodies of the Union , and is calling on the Commission to present a proposal for a pension fund before 31 March 1999 .
The Commission must present a proposal for the amendments to the regulations applicable to officials and other servants of the European Communities , ' Staff Regulations ' , which might be needed to establish such a fund .
And we should also remember that the British Presidency already recognised , during its first tripartite dialogue with Parliament , the need to find a solution in this respect as soon as possible .
That is why Parliament is asking for this matter to be included in the negotiations on the new Interinstitutional Agreement .
Everything I have said is intended to affirm that Parliament is going to adopt a budget with a new balance , in response to its obligations towards European citizens .
Finally , and this particularly concerns the Council , which has patiently listened to this statement of everything they already know , I have here ' the final outline ' which means going back to the start of my speech , recalling the link between the 1999 ' bridging ' budget , the negotiations on the new financial perspective and the Interinstitutional Agreement .
Parliament realises that is necessary to make the Council aware that time is pressing and that an agreement should be reached before the European elections in June 1999 .
At the same time , it notes that the Council has not demonstrated a great deal of interest in seriously initiating dialogue .
Therefore , Parliament is tabling some amendments to raise the 1999 budget to around 1.17 % of GNP .
It must thus be understood that these amendments to reserves are simply intended to safeguard the rights of Parliament in case there is no agreement on the financial perspective .
But as I used pyrotechnical terms earlier , I must make it very clear that these amendments are not , however , the result of fireworks from Parliament .
The rights that Parliament wants to see safeguarded in the Interinstitutional Agreement , in view of the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , are contained in Parliament 's mandate to Joan Colom , who joins me in signing the amendments on reserves .
As rapporteur for the financial perspective , he will be speaking on that issue .
And now I really am ending , Madam President , but I would like a few more seconds : I want to call on the Council to agree with Parliament 's position .
I would like to carry out a short exercise in accounting with the Council .
The small saving the Council makes in its accounting at its first reading represents roughly 40 000 pesetas a year for the Spanish citizen .
With 40 000 pesetas the Council and I could share about 200 beers , at 200 pesetas a beer , over the next 12 months .
I sincerely believe that this is no way to respond to the challenges facing the Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the total for Category 5 , administrative expenditure , has been set at EUR 4.7 billion , with an increase of 4 % - or EUR 182 million - over 1998 .
Of this sum , EUR 1 579.5 m represents the total budget for the ' other institutions ' , with an increase of just under 1.55 % as compared with 1998 .
This , clearly , is a modest increase , an indication of the rigour shown by all the ' other institutions ' when drawing up their budgets . Rigour has been applied in particular by Parliament itself , which accounts for almost three fifths of this amount .
Despite the option of purchasing IPE IV in Strasbourg , Parliament has curbed its expenditure , registering an increase of just 1.7 % .
I believe that this is worthy of note , as it is indicative of the extreme restraint demonstrated by Parliament 's administration and by the Budgets Committee , a body very well aware of the need for reliability , rigour and austerity .
In the case both of Parliament and of all the ' other institutions ' , this budget is unusual in certain respects : it is the first budget in euros , it is the one which will mark the turn of the millennium , with all the ensuing implications for computers , and it is the one which will see the entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty and the new elections to the European Parliament , with the related expenditure for both Members and the data-processing sector .
Let us now turn to the individual budgets , beginning with our own .
Parliament 's budget is EUR 923 779 000 , with an unused margin of almost 21 million , which confirms that we have always understood this margin not as a target but as an expenditure ceiling .
The most significant decisions have been the introduction of a new chapter and a new Article 390 - to be appropriately named to cover the new arrangements governing parliamentary assistants , which are currently being drawn up by the committee responsible and the Council .
Yesterday , following the meeting of the Bureau , the Budgets Committee took it upon itself to adopt an amendment , in the light of decisions taken by the Conference of Presidents ...
Excuse me , Mr Viola , but I would like to correct that .
It was not the Conference of Presidents , but the Bureau of Parliament .
I am afraid there is still some confusion over that within the House .
You are absolutely right . That was a slip of the tongue ; I meant the Bureau of the European Parliament .
In the light of the decisions taken by the Bureau , our committee took it upon itself to adopt by majority vote an amendment which , on the one hand , recognises that Members ' travelling allowances must be reimbursed on the basis of the real costs , with a detailed breakdown of these costs , and , on the other , links the implementation of this decision to the Statute for Members , to be brought before this House by 15 December .
I believe that the solution adopted in the committee is a well-balanced one overall , and that it tackles the matter head-on : a Statute for Members , the lack of which creates unequal treatment , inequality and injustice .
The crux of the matter is that this fixation with travel expenses is out of all proportion !
That is why we turned our attention to this issue and adopted the amendment , which we hope will serve to ensure that the Council , together with the parliamentary committee responsible , will find a solution as soon as possible , as has long been desired by Parliament and as was asserted at the last summit .
As far as the next elections are concerned , the impact on the budget will be approximately EUR 17 m , fully in line with previous years .
On staffing , we have shown great restraint here too by allocating only ten new temporary posts , only five of them at grade A , to reinforce the parliamentary bodies involved in the enlargement procedure .
Significant progress has been made in the data-processing sector , although some things still remain to be done - especially on e-mail applications within and between the institutions - and the effects of the transition to the year 2000 need further investigation .
For this reason we have decided , through an amendment signed by the chairmen of the two largest groups and by myself , to release EUR 5 m from the reserve . This will be discussed tomorrow .
With regard to buildings policy , it has been decided that the option to purchase the IPE IV building should be exercised with ten-year refinancing , on terms comparable to those applicable for the D3 building in Brussels .
This obviously entails substantial budget expenditure : EUR 10.8 m .
On the other hand , the saving of EUR 8.3 m made by calculating the annual lease payments for the D3 building was more favourable than expected , and is indicative of a policy leading overall to a considerable reduction in expenditure on property .
This has already happened for 1999 , and will undoubtedly continue in future years .
As regards the Ombudsman , his increased workload has been noted and , by agreement with the Council , an increase of six posts , three of them in the reserve , has been granted pending submission by the Ombudsman of a global action plan to restructure his secretariat , whereby many temporary posts may need to become permanent .
I would just point out in this context that , from now on , the budget for the Ombudsman should constitute a section in its own right .
This is provided for in the amended financial regulation discussed in the Budgets Committee , and with some justification , I believe .
With regard to the Court of Justice , which had requested a sizeable increase in posts for the translation directorate , in line with the Council 's wishes we have allocated ten new LA posts for translators and four new B5 proofreader posts .
As for the Court of Auditors , its budget has been increased by 11.69 % in view of the decision to allow an extension to its building , for which such a commitment is necessary , and for which total funding of EUR 25 m over five years is planned .
We have entered the first five million for to 1999 in the reserve , whilst awaiting the conclusion of the new interinstitutional agreement , which - at least in the Commission 's proposal - allowed for this expenditure in the financial perspective , and also whilst awaiting alternative solutions from the Court of Auditors as regards the appropriateness of building a new chamber , given that sufficient chambers already exist in buildings located in Luxembourg .
Moving on to the Committees - the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions - it is worth stressing that the role of the latter is much enhanced under the Amsterdam Treaty , which is why we have seen fit to increase the appropriations for meetings , as emerged from the implementation of the 1998 budget .
As we are all aware , Protocol 16 provides for the abolition of the joint organisational structure.This protocol must be applied as soon as the Treaty enters into force , and we have invited the ESC and the CoR to submit their proposals to this effect .
We hope that all due regard will thereby be paid to the need to avoid dual expenditure and to guarantee a homogenous staff policy for the ESC and the CoR , with a view to long-term interinstitutional cooperation .
Finally , as regards buildings policy , we were pleased to learn that the ESC and CoR have undertaken to occupy the Belliard I and II buildings , as was suggested by Parliament .
These premises are in need of refitting : we have earmarked sums for this refurbishment and hope that it will be undertaken as soon as possible by the two Committees .
We believe that they should begin by occupying these two buildings , and only if - as seems likely - these do not prove adequate , should they then occupy the Atrium building .
These are the most significant aspects of the budgets for the ' other institutions ' .
I believe that we have all done a good job of work , and I should therefore like to thank my colleagues in the Budgets Committee .
I hope that this House will endorse our committee 's decisions .
Thank you , Mr Viola .
I should like to emphasise one other thing at this point , namely that for the first time our budget is being expressed in euros , with the ECU being replaced after 20 years .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , each year I have the honour of presenting to you a report on the ECSC budget . This year it is accompanied by another report , on the Communication from the Commission to the Council on the expiry of the Treaty .
In my opinion , these two reports are linked because they have been affected by various events which I wish to highlight and which , as I see it , are not helping to improve Community policy or increase solidarity between the nations of Europe .
Firstly , we should remember that , last year at the same time , by just a few votes and contrary to the opinion of the rapporteur - namely , myself - this House voted in favour of removing the compulsory levy on the turnover of the coal and steel industries .
In addition to its symbolic nature , in that this eliminated the only real joint financial contribution binding the European coal and steel industries together , this decision conclusively cut off the source of fresh money which formed the bulk of the ECSC budget . The reason given for this was that the restructuring of these industries was virtually complete and that there was enough money to pay for the management fund until 2002 , commitment funds until 2007 , the guarantee fund until 2019 , the special reserve until 2021 and the former pension fund until 2026 .
In fact , the ECSC coffers contain ECU 1.2 billion which will basically be enough to finance the operating budgets until 2002 , when the Treaty expires , and to pay for the last pensioner until 2026 .
Should we take the view that this sector is now positively thriving ?
First of all , we should remember that it is still shedding jobs : about 11 000 jobs will probably be lost between 1998 and 1999 .
It may well be possible , in view of the very high volume of funding , to allocate additional appropriations , in line with the positive opinion of the Committee on Budgets , in order to establish an additional ECU 3 million for redeployment aid which could help , as stipulated in Article 56 of the ECSC Treaty , to create new activities capable of reabsorbing the redundant workers into productive employment .
In the same respect , it may be possible and desirable to carry out the proposal in the Communication of 9 June which would allow ECU 60 million to be transferred from the operating budget of the ECSC to the Union 's general budget in order to reinforce the Rechar II and Resider II Community initiatives .
These two programmes are capable of absorbing the funds in question , between now and the end of 1999 , and are totally consistent with the aim of protecting jobs .
Finally , on the initiative of our colleague , Joan Colom i Naval , paragraph 12 of the motion for a resolution before you calls on the Commission to earmark appropriations from the PHARE programme for activities in conjunction with the coal and steel sectors of the applicant countries .
We only need to think of Poland or Romania to see that there are good grounds for this request .
In fact , by agreeing to the end of this excellent instrument - the ECSC - in 2002 , i.e. just before enlargement , the European Union is preventing the countries of eastern Europe from having access to an instrument on which the Union was founded .
Is this right ?
Whatever , it is now clear from the direction taken in recent months , particularly at Amsterdam , regarding the allocation of the ECSC 's assets after 2002 , that a number of points have now been decided .
The first is that the ECSC will certainly expire on 23 July 2002 and that the ECSC assets and their management will most likely be transferred to the remaining communities in the final days of the ECSC .
The second point relates to economic and industrial policy aspects .
The Committee on Budgets unreservedly supports the Commission 's proposal to allocate all the interest earned on the assets to the promotion of research in the coal and steel sectors .
Finally , the third point , which I must highlight and which is exactly what our committee said it wanted to see , is that , with regard to intellectual property rights , the dissemination of results to SMEs is to be an element of the sector 's research programmes .
To conclude on these two reports , I must acknowledge that they have gained the virtually unanimous support of the members of the Committee on Budgets , unlike last year when the fee problem divided the House .
Both texts concerning the ECSC in 1999 therefore have a broad consensus and their adoption on Thursday should not pose any major problems .
Furthermore , I should like to thank the draftsmen of the opinions of the other committees , Mrs Graenitz , Mr Blak and Mrs Lulling , who have made a significant contribution to the report of the Committee on Budgets .
I would stress to Mrs Lulling that her report does indeed form an integral part of the final report , despite the technical difficulties which seem to have dogged its route to the printers .
I will now , as agreed with the Sessional Services , give the opinion of the UPE Group on the draft budget for 1999 .
The budget on which we are required to deliver an opinion at first reading will be a difficult one : difficult because of the current situation of uncertainty and the need for rigour , and difficult too because , although this is the last budget coming under the financial perspectives and Interinstitutional Agreement of 1994 , our task is to outline the profile of future budgets and to overcome financial constraints , at the risk of surrendering any ambitions we might have .
In preparing the 1999 budget , we must be aware that anything is possible , but nothing is guaranteed .
Will the Interinstitutional Agreement be renewed in 1999 and under what conditions ?
Will the next financial perspectives be sufficient to ensure that spending develops ?
And if the renegotiations fail , will the reversion to Article 203 of the Treaty and the application of the maximum rate of increase be carried out under conditions acceptable to Parliament ?
What is certain , in this case , is that budgetary rigour is required of the legislator .
Besides , the European Parliament committed itself to this by accepting , in its March resolution on the budgetary guidelines for 1999 , a budget whose rate of increase would not be higher than that of the national budgets .
This rigour was both imposed on us and freely accepted by us .
We still have to agree on how to correctly apply this rigour to spending .
The Council 's interpretation , which is just to gamble on the levels of under-spending , particularly on internal policies , is unacceptable .
What the Council actually wants is a general reduction in all expenditure and , in this respect , it has submitted a draft budget in which appearances are deceptive , in that it confirms the agricultural envelope and the Structural Fund appropriations but also blocks , through significant reductions , any progress in Headings 3 and 4 , particularly for research , i.e. internal policies and external measures .
We must not be taken in by this .
Although the draft budget presents an overall increase of 2.8 % in payment appropriations and 6.1 % in commitment appropriations in relation to last year , actually , by keeping the budget at 1.10 % of the GNP ceiling - whereas , strictly , 1.27 % is available - and by limiting expenditure in the headings which are the most decisive for the future development of the European Union to the ceilings fixed by the Interinstitutional Agreement , the Council is ensuring that future budgets will be paralysed .
This planned rigour amounts to sacrificing the future , which is not acceptable .
The rigour required of the budget must be compatible with the development outlook , and the 1999 budget must prepare for the budgets of tomorrow by allowing the Community to meet its commitments , particularly with regard to enlargement .
This is why we support the rapporteur 's approach which aims to establish special reserves as viable calculation bases for forthcoming financial perspectives in the 2000-2006 period , in accordance with the provisions of the Interinstitutional Agreement .
Like the rapporteur , we hope to reach an agreement with the Council on these special reserves because it is the survival of future budgets which is at stake .
If the Interinstitutional Agreement is renewed , it must have adequate bases so that the future financial perspectives ensure the development of Community policies and , should the renegotiation of the Interinstitutional Agreement fail , the re-application of Article 203 of the Treaty should not condemn the European Union to the planned spending paralysis .
The choice is clear and we approve it .
However , we do not want Parliament 's assertion of its prerogatives to cause it to make an unfortunate exception for agriculture expenditure by seeking to limit the appropriations to well below the ceiling of the guideline , in other words to reduce the actual financial requirements of the CAP .
Neither must the aim of the budget be to reform the CAP or limit the growth in agricultural expenditure . The aim should be to ensure the correct financing of this while complying with the provisions of the Interinstitutional Agreement and ad hoc procedures .
I have a further comment about the problem of putting the funds intended for humanitarian aid into reserve .
Here , Parliament must confirm or reject the position of the Committee on Budgets and must indicate whether the letter of 9 October from Mr Jacques Santer to the President of Parliament is sufficient to allow us to forgive the ECHO managers for their despicable actions which led to the UCLAF report that everyone is talking about but the Members have not yet seen .
Just reading the Commission 's answers to Members on subjects relating to the budget sometimes produces a real feeling of revolt .
For the last ten months , for example , Messrs Papoutsis and Liikanen have been refusing to take responsibility for the former 's incapacity to make his departments comply with a legal provision unanimously adopted a year ago by the Committee on Budgets and then by Parliament , for the reason that this is inconvenient to the department 's director who really could not care less about the parliamentary vote .
Answers phrased in hackneyed , Soviet-style language have now taken over from the initially condescending replies .
The scorn displayed by officials towards the Members of this House will only strengthen our resolve .
The ECHO scandal proves one thing : that if some Commission officials are doing what they like , it is because the Members of the Commission are too preoccupied with their own interests - I am thinking of ECHO - to waste time supervising them . And it is also because malpractices and bad habits are now second nature , which has led to the development of a principle of out of sight , out of mind , undermining the Commission 's credibility .
In this Parliament , in our group at least , we are not ready to let the electors believe that we are only interested in retaliation , and we are therefore waiting to find out exactly what happened with ECHO before adopting any position .
More generally , the Council , the Commission and , unfortunately , Parliament too are suffering from Fontainebleau syndrome , each fighting its own corner in pale imitation of Margaret Thatcher , each considering that the State which it represents must reassert its position , regardless of the Community policies founded on solidarity .
We will return to this matter in detail when we discuss the report on own resources .
However , on behalf of my group , I would like to prepare the ground .
Because the common agricultural policy is the cause of certain imbalances , and based on the Fontainebleau agreements among others , the Commission 's proposals include reducing the Community contribution to direct aid to farmers and introducing cofinancing for this direct aid between the national exchequers and the European Union budget .
The rest of the common agricultural policy as we know it would then be reduced to a vague agricultural structural policy .
It is clear that such a proposal , although attractive at first sight , would allow some Member States to reduce their contribution to the European Union to the detriment of the common agricultural policy .
This would mean that agricultural policy would have to be partially renationalised and it would also compromise European solidarity , as happened last year when it was decided , as I mentioned at the beginning of my speech , contrary to my proposal as rapporteur , to remove the ECSC levy for the last five years of the ECSC budget .
In the wake of the abandonment of this unique Community tax , the Commission is now proposing to attack the European Union 's only integrated policy .
Are we mad ?
Is our Europe of shopkeepers turning into a Europe of horse-traders ?
Do we really believe that , after having ruined the IGC and botched Amsterdam and Luxembourg , we should now dismantle this unique Community policy because the socialist governments of the United Kingdom and Germany are implementing ultraliberal tax policies in order to win votes ?
It is time to reflect on this and to seriously ask ourselves what the technocrats , who only have their own interests at heart , are planning for us .
Mr President , as the budget procedure for 1999 progresses it becomes clear that the broad consensus among the institutions of recent years on general budgetary stability for the Union will continue in 1999 .
All the institutions agree that rigour has to be maintained .
At the same time the obligations of the Union in particular with regard to the decisions of the Edinburgh European Council have to be respected .
Discussions continue on some aspects .
As far as compulsory spending is concerned , the Commission has an amending letter on its agenda for 28 October .
It will assess probable additional spending requirements as tightly as possible .
With the amending letter for 1999 and the recently transmitted amending letter to the supplementary and amending budget for 1998 all elements are on the table .
This should permit the budgetary authority to come to an overall agreement for 1998 and 1999 by the time of the Budget Council of 24 November at the latest .
But this budget exercise is not only about numbers .
It also marks further important improvements in the financial management of the Union , and I should like briefly to raise three .
Firstly , the 1999 budget is established on the basis of the new interinstitutional agreement as regards the legal basis .
The budget procedure has already shown that the agreement works .
At the same time new and experimental activities can still attract initial funding from the Community budget .
The Commission and the organisations concerned will benefit from this clarity when it comes to implementing the budget .
These were major successes for Parliament in the budgetary field .
Secondly , significant progress is also being made with regard to the Community subsidies .
There is a Commission communication imposing clear minimum rules on publicity and collective decision-making for all Community subsidies .
It is the result of many parliamentary initiatives .
Both Mr Brinkhorst and Mr Tillich have invested a lot of effort in this field and I note with interest that Barbara Dührkop Dührkop is pursuing these same lines .
The new Commission rules come into effect for the execution of the 1999 budget , and efforts are under way to inform and discuss the matter with actual and potential beneficiaries .
A third issue concerns the possible use of operating resources for administrative purposes .
In particular the Technical Assistance Offices or ' BATs ' as the French abbreviation has it .
I understand that the European Parliament wants to change certain practices immediately to improve transparency and control .
These objectives are shared by the Commission .
I regret it if this has not come out clearly enough in its recent communication on the Technical Assistance Offices , but work needs to continue to make sure that the short-term decisions are also a step towards the medium-term solution .
The Commission has put ideas forward in its communication and in its working paper on renewal of the financial regulation .
Both seek to establish a closer link between the decisions on the financial and the human resources required for each Community action .
Finally , Parliament is preparing to vote to introduce important additional credits into the 1999 budget by means of its bridging amendment .
I understand the role of this in the bargaining process towards the next interinstitutional agreement , but should such an agreement and the cancellation of the bridging credits not occur early enough then the Commission would have , some time in 1999 , to call up more funds than needed from the Member States .
Let me conclude by expressing my sincere respect for the formidable work of the rapporteurs , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop and Mr Viola , as well as the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Samland .
As this is a joint debate with the reports of Mr Giansily on the European Coal and Steel Community , I would like to add some further points on this subject .
With regard to the financial consequences of the expiration of the ECSC Treaty , I note that solutions are emerging which have both the approval of the Council and Parliament in many respects .
The administration of the heritage of the ECSC by the existing Communities and the financing of research activities in the steel and coal sector from the interest generated from this now seems to be established .
Further discusssions are required on ownership of the heritage , on questions related to future enlargement of the Union and on the distribution of research funding between the sectors .
The Commission will submit a further contribution to these discussions before the end of the year .
As far as the 1999 operating budget is concerned , the Commission shares the regrets expressed by Mr Giansily that the Council does not appear to be willing to approve the transfer of funds to the general budget to reinforce the Community initiatives RESIDER and RECHAR .
I note that the draft opinion already foresees an alternative solution based on Article 56 of the ECSC Treaty .
The Commission may indeed have to orient itself in this direction even though the possibilities for absorption need to be carefully examined .
The Commission will have another look , as proposed by Mr Giansily , at the funds for steel and coal research .
These funds should gradually descend to the level which can be sustained in the medium term after the expiraty of the ECSC Treaty .
Let me again thank the rapporteur , Mr Giansily , for his substantial work .
Mr President , two minutes is not very much time in which to explain the significance of the EU 's foreign and security policy for the European Parliament .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy has , nevertheless , identified its priorities for the budget .
Achieving democracy and the protection of human rights and supporting peace processes should be a significant aspect of all programmes , in particular those concerned with the applicant countries , but also the Euro-Mediterranean programme , MEDA , and programmes concerned with Eastern Europe .
The interpretation of the Court judgment on the legal bases of programmes on democracy and human rights caused quite a stir amongst the general public , because it is these programmes which are carried out by numerous NGOs and which are effective at grass roots level .
Fortunately , the conciliation in July between the Council , the Commission and Parliament made it possible to remedy this situation .
Creating a new budget line exclusively for the Royaumont process is intended to serve a similar purpose , namely the building or strengthening of civil society . As part of this process , it is proposed to organise projects in Central and Southern Europe , involving applicant countries , associated countries , Member States and states formerly part of Yugoslavia .
It is for the same reason that we are supporting the Masters degree in human rights , which is intended to provide training and instruction in human rights , and in which numerous universities are already participating .
We have made proposals on stepping up cooperation with Latin America , Asia and South Africa , as have the other committees involved , either directly or through the appropriate institutes .
Events surrounding the arrest of the former President of Chile , General Pinochet , show how fragile democracy still is in Latin America .
We also wish to support the work of the International War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague and Rwanda .
The Analysis and Evaluation Centre has started its work on conflict prevention and laying the foundations for peace .
We wish to support it .
Yesterday , there was a heated debate in the Committee on Budgets about whether this chapter should serve external relations , external experience , or something else .
What we want is for our measures to serve the European Union 's foreign policy and , in doing so , to gain a higher profile .
Mr President , at this stage of the budget negotiations we have to look at more than just non-compulsory expenditure on agriculture .
As draftsman of an opinion on the 1999 farm budget , I think it is my duty to ensure that the efficient procedure set in train by Messrs Tillich and Mulder for the 1998 budget is used for the forthcoming budget too and further clarified if necessary .

So it is not right , for example , to include in our resolution on the 1999 budget pronouncements about lowering or at least stabilising farm spending .
We must consider the Commission 's latest estimate of future spending which it will shortly be putting before the Council and Parliament in its letter of amendment .
It is clear that international markets are currently subject to change , which will undoubtedly affect agricultural spending .
It proves that our new approach to the budget is right .
In setting the budget we must base ourselves on the latest market and currency data .
Last year , one of the main political questions was whether anything should be done about the supposedly excessive compensation paid to British arable farmers , for example .
It is good to see care being taken , by our Committee on Agriculture amongst others , to ensure that our policy is constant and reliable , because the world market has again reached a low point and the fall in value of the pound sterling has hit the British per hectare premiums hard .
A striking feature of this budget is the marked rise in expenditure on accompanying measures - in itself a sound farm policy development , provided spending is appropriate to the end in view .
It is essential for the Commission to submit the agreed evaluation reports on this to the Council and Parliament , because otherwise we shall be groping in the dark as things move on .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the economy is crucial to job creation .
That is why we have lent our full support to the strategic programme on the internal market , and in particular to the ' new approach ' .
This means that where standardisation is concerned , our aim must be to ensure that products sold in Europe , which are licensed for sale in one country , are also automatically licensed in another country .
We need similar work on standards in the telecommunications sector .
It is precisely the telecommunications sector which plays a major role in creating new jobs , and here we wish , above all , to promote electronic commerce .
Because this is also something new in the education sector , it is necessary to improve the applications of these telecommunications networks .
Through the IDA programme , in particular , we are trying to link up schools , administrations , small and medium-sized enterprises and public hospitals , and to disseminate this new knowledge .
Obviously , this can also have harmful consequences .
We are aware that there are many problems associated with the Internet .
That is why the European Parliament is advocating an increase in appropriations here .
A further important point is the construction of trans-European transport networks .
I believe that investment in this sector will not only create new jobs in the short term , when this infrastructure is built , but also , and more significantly , that the knock-on effects will open up entirely new opportunities .
My final , and perhaps most important point concerns training and continuing education .
The Leonardo programme is a vital one , because it gives young trainees the opportunity to go to other countries and work in companies there , and that leads to success .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy has studied the 1999 budget very carefully .
There are two reasons for this .
Firstly , as far as energy is concerned , we need to step up our efforts at European level to promote alternative sources of energy , in order to meet the commitments we entered into in Kyoto .
The second point is research policy .
Here , of course , we are faced with the huge task of implementing the fifth framework programme in the 1999 budget .
On both matters , we received the support of a majority of the Committee on Budgets , and for this I wish to thank the rapporteur in particular , and her colleagues in the Budgets Committee in general .
An increase in appropriations for Altener and SAVE , as has now been decided , was urgently needed and has been achieved .
The situation with the fifth framework programme is more difficult .
We still do not have a decision , which also means that at today 's first reading we have no legal base .
At this stage , I should like to urge the Council to do all it can to make it possible for us to find a solution - a lawful one - at our next meeting on 10 November .
I should also like to state quite clearly , that the guillotine clause is unlawful and incompatible with the Treaty .
We are awaiting sensible proposals from the Council here .
But - and this is the Budgets Committee 's great achievement in the budgetary procedure - enough room for manoeuvre has been secured for it to be possible to implement Parliament 's funding proposals .
I think that this constitutes a great success and strengthens Parliament 's negotiating position in the conciliation .
By the second reading , we will in any case have closed the conciliation procedure , one way or the other , whether we find a solution or not , so the situation will be clear .
One further request : next year I should like us to devote some time quite specifically to the Joint Research Centre .
We discussed this once again yesterday in the Committee on Budgets ; we will be saying something about it in the motion , and Parliament urgently needs to have a clear line on this .
Once again , I should like to thank colleagues for their constructive cooperation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , more than two thirds of the amendments tabled by the Committee on External Economic Relations were accepted either in full or in principle by the Committee on Budgets .
These are directed towards securing the necessary funding for incentives for opening up and penetrating third country markets with European Union products and services - a traditional preoccupation of the REX Committee .
We were also able to win support for our views that , although financial assistance to the Central and Eastern European and Mediterranean countries is necessary and of prime importance , it is only sensible to the extent that these countries are able to use the help to help themselves .
In the future , when it is drawing up the draft budget , the Council should , together with the Commission , give more careful consideration to the capacity of the applicant countries , in particular , to absorb this aid .
In this context , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop 's proposed reserve of around ECU 200 million for external economic activities is a step in the right direction , and will improve the way in which the funds available are distributed .
The amendments now being retabled by the Committee on External Economic Relations have three purposes . Firstly , restoring funding for humanitarian aid in Kosovo to an adequate level , and also making p.m. entries for Turkey , the Socrates , Leonardo and Youth for Europe programmes , and the exceptional financial assistance for Azerbaijan .
Secondly , the necessary extending of trade cooperation with Asia , Latin America and South Africa , as well as cooperation with economic and social groups , chambers of commerce and industry , employers ' organisations , unions , farmers , small and medium-sized enterprises , consumers and environmental organisations .
This is , as it were , multicentric cooperation , involving real people from the economy and society .
Remarks to this effect should also be included .
And lastly , there is market access and budget lines for opening up the Japanese market .
I should like to take this opportunity to thank Mrs Dührkop Dührkop - for being a sympathetic listener , for examining our proposals and for her excellent cooperation - and also the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Samland , for his patience in the face of my obstinacy .
Finally , I am grateful to the advisers to the Committee on External Economic Relations , Christian Augustin and Francisco Gomes Martes , especially for their excellent cooperation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , two central objectives guided the Committee on Regional Policy with regard to the 1999 budget : first and foremost , ensuring that the agreements reached in Edinburgh were respected in full .
Fundamentally , the final proposal meets that objective .
The Committee on Regional Policy also expressed doubts about the level of payments , after having presented proposals aimed at guaranteeing adequate capital flows .
The proposal does achieve that , albeit by different means .
Let us hope that it will work in practice .
Our second main objective was to restore appropriations for Community initiatives .
Our committee still questions whether the Council should be allowed to cut back amounts earmarked for Community initiatives , using delays in their execution as the pretext , even though those delays have never been specified or explained .
In the committee 's view , given this vagueness , Community initiatives should have their initially earmarked appropriations restored to them and , in addition , the PEACE initiative should be given an extra ECU 100 million - but that does not mean cutting amounts for the other initiatives .
It is a significant and regrettable fact that the demand made by the Committee on Regional Policy has not been met in full . Instead the proposal that we are discussing today does nothing to restore appropriations for Community initiatives in full .
Mr President , as draftsman for the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , I must begin by thanking Mrs Dührkop most warmly for her ready cooperation .
Clearly she is all in favour of a green budget and looks kindly on matters of the environment .
An indication of that is that the budget for the environment has been increased by nearly 5 % compared with the Council 's figures .
We have achieved much towards the greening of the budget , notably as regards the Structural Funds , which can now be used to implement the habitat and birds directives - a major gain .
If the other Members of this House are willing to endorse the amendments which the Committee on Budgets has already approved , we shall of course be very pleased .
Notwithstanding this , I have tabled some further amendments on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
These concern the heading ' tropical forests ' and the programmes for cooperation with third countries .
We in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection proposed that 10 per cent of MEDA be allocated to the environment , and this was agreed .
It would be logical to do the same for PHARE and TACIS too .
That amendment was not approved by the Committee on Budgets , which is why we have tabled it again to be voted on in plenary .
It will make for greater consistency in the budget if we extend this line to TACIS and PHARE .
Lastly , Mr President , I believe we must not only take account of the environment in all areas of European Union policy ; it must also be systematically integrated into the everyday internal activities of the European institutions .
Through an amendment to the Viola report , we call on all European institutions , including our own European Parliament , to draw up an action plan for a more environmentally friendly internal administration .
Energy , mobility , recycling , all these aspects must be reflected in the way in which the European institutions manage their own affairs .
If we improve our own behaviour in this way , we can make our institutions into a model for other organisations , not just in Europe but worldwide .
Mr President , I wish to say that the initial Commission proposal was a slight disappointment to us , specifically in the culture sector where we saw a cut of 43 % .
However , the Committee on Budgets , and specifically Barbara Dührkop Dührkop , who understands the need for a strong cultural sector within the EU , have given it priority .
The committee is extremely grateful for that .
The Culture Committee is divided into three parts : education and youth , cultural and audiovisual , and information .
Throughout the process we have been trying to build on the principles of openness and transparency .
Our task has been to set out criteria and then to allow open competitions to take place .
Of course the whole process this year has been dogged by conflicting reports on the interpretation of the Court judgment on the legal base but , somehow or other , we have managed to find a way through .
A new approach has been initiated , creating a Europe of knowledge .
This has found expression in a new budget line called ' connect ' - the brainchild again of Barbara Dührkop Dührkop .
This will give an opportunity for cooperation between different programmes .
It will allow much more flexibility and fluidity , especially between the cultural and educational budget lines .
In the education sector , we are pleased to be able to resolve the problems regarding lesser-used languages , and we look forward to a legal base being proposed by the Commission on this .
The culture lines were the biggest headache of all , and still are .
I am , of course , referring to the Kaleidoscope and Ariane programmes .
The problem has been one of timing : these programmes were due to finish in 1998 and , of course , the new culture programme is not meant to start until the year 2000 .
So what we have here is a year 's delay , and we were very concerned that we would lose the momentum we have gained through these programmes .
We are pleased to see that the Commission and the Council are coming around to our way of thinking and we have set money aside ready for an agreement on this ; we are grateful again to Barbara Dührkop Dührkop for ensuring that money is available if and when that agreement comes through .
In the audiovisual sector , we are slightly disappointed that not more money has been made available for the experimental actions to help to develop a stronger , more vibrant audiovisual sector in Europe .
Finally , on the whole information sector : the governments of Europe talk about creating a more people-friendly Europe .
I think they should open their eyes because we already have a people-friendly Europe .
The problem is that people do not know about it , which is why we need to develop a better information policy .
It is critical that , especially during the time of the introduction of the single currency , this is carried through , and I hope that Members will reverse the bizarre vote in the Committee on Budgets on cutting the money for decentralised actions .
All in all , the Culture Committee has a great deal to be happy about , and we thank Barbara Dührkop Dührkop for her courageous support .
Mr President , first of all I should also like to pay tribute to the general rapporteur , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , with whom I worked extremely closely .
She has shown a tremendous amount of empathy for the work of the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
However , I still have a number of concerns , first of all about ECHO .
I wholeheartedly agree - no-one would disagree - that we have to stamp out fraud and corruption .
Fraud and corruption are bad enough and have to be condemned , but when they actually concern food aid to some of the poorest people in the world , that makes it even worse .
Therefore I wholeheartedly agree that we have to condemn it .
But to hold these poorest people in the world hostage whilst we sort out the administrative problems of the Commission is not fair .
Therefore I very much hope that this particular problem will be resolved .
Then we can get on with doing the work that we are supposed to be doing .
Secondly , on assistance to the ACP banana producers , we all know the desperate situation that these farmers face as a result of the WTO ruling .
We very much want to see the money placed on the line there .
People will have noticed in the last few weeks the horrendous destruction that the recent hurricane has caused in the Caribbean .
It is for that reason that bananas are produced in that area - because they actually grow within six months .
We know how important they are .
We want to see the money on the line to make sure that compensation is provided .
We would also like to see , as far as the Development Committee is concerned , the Committee on Budgets reconsider a couple of lines .
First of all , on landmines , we were all absolutely thrilled and delighted when the 40th country in the world ratified the Ottawa accord .
We know that on 1 March 1999 the ban on landmines will become a legally-binding treaty of the United Nations .
But there are still something like 110 million of these landmines killing or maiming someone about every quarter of an hour of every day of every week somewhere in the world .
Therefore we would like to see this particular budget item restored to what it was last year .
On gender , we would like an increase in that line up to what was ECU 5 million because we recognise the importance of gender as far as the development world is concerned .
If someone asked me what single action would make a huge difference as far as the developing world was concerned , I would have to say it would be educating girls .
We know how important gender is .
I conclude by saying that overall we are relatively happy with the outcome so far of the Budget Committee .
There have been a number of increases which we are pleased with , in particular the budget line on Nigeria , which has been increased by ECU 1 million because there is still a huge amount of work to be done there .
Many thanks , once again , to the rapporteur , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , I must firstly tell our general rapporteur , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , how pleased we are with the attention which she has paid to our concerns .
We had five priorities within the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs which have basically all been met .
Our first priority was the creation of the European Refugee Fund , and here I should like to thank not only the rapporteur , but also Mr Brinkhorst who played a leading role in this area .
The creation of this budgetary fund augurs well for the continuation of the European Union 's policy in this area of strategic importance . It will soon be brought under the first pillar and there are currently political discussions on how to share the burden .
The second priority for our committee was the continuation of measures to combat violence against women and children , sex tourism and the use of the Internet for criminal purposes .
The rapporteur took our request in this particularly sensitive area into consideration and we thank her for that .
The third priority for our committee was the integration of refugees and the fight against racism and xenophobia .
These budget lines were in a delicate position because they have no legal basis and the rapporteur proposed a solution with whose wording and amounts we are satisfied .
The fourth priority was our insistence , as has been the case for several years , on a Europol line being included in the budget , because we consider that part of the appropriations intended for Europol must appear in the Union budget , even if this is through a p.m. entry . We are grateful that our request was noted .
We have one regret with regard to cooperation in the fields of justice and internal affairs .
We wanted a small programme to help the Member States to agree on ways of fighting urban crime , particularly crime committed by groups of youths .
I clearly was not convincing enough as this small programme - and this is my only regret - has been rejected .
Mr President , our committee is not very much of a spending committee . But we look towards the future as far as the Amsterdam Treaty is concerned .
So it is against that background that the Institutional Committee was very pleased that it is possible to actually align the new budget on the new priorities .
Our colleague , Mr Deprez , has just mentioned this for civil liberties .
It is important that we provide orientations on Europol and on European refugees so that it is clear that once the first pillar receives the aspect of the third pillar we can actually do that .
Also , it is important that the Amsterdam Treaty takes into account the new rules on comitology .
It is against that background that we fully supported the orientation that we must discuss with the Commission and the Council , namely that on comitology there will be shared responsibilities between the European Parliament and the Council .
It will be one of the tough issues of the future .
A hierarchy of European Community norms is the essence of the Community of the future .
It is this kind of democracy and accountability which the Commission should take a forceful position on .
Mr President , until now , the procedure in the Committee on Budgetary Control has meant that , every year at the October part-session , we would vote on a motion for a resolution on the implementation of the current budget .
As a result , this was either confused with or clashed with the debate on the next year 's budget .
That is why this year , the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on Budgets have agreed a new procedure , namely that we should give a more comprehensive opinion on the coming year 's budget , and ask the rapporteur and the Committee on Budgets to take account of this opinion in their deliberations .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , for doing just that .
Now a few comments , both on the debate on next year 's budget and on the 1998 budget .
Since the summer , we have had a decision on legal bases .
The situation has thus been clarified and the uncertainties of the previous years finally dispelled .
At the same time , however , I should like to repeat my request to the Commission and the Council to actively work on those areas where they have given us assurances that the legal bases still required will be established , both those for the 1998 budget - before the end of 1998 - and those for 1999 .
On the ad hoc procedure , I should like to support Mr Sonneveld .
Last year , we introduced an ad hoc procedure , the Tillich-Mulder procedure .
In so doing , we thought that we had at last found - through the Commission presenting a letter of amendment in late autumn - a feasible way to forecast agricultural spending , and would thus be able to discuss the budget on a realistic basis .
That is why , should the Commission present a letter of amendment this year , it must also be possible - this procedure provides for it - for increased demand to appear in the Commission 's modifications ; both reduced and increased demand are possible .
We have taken account of this .
On Category 3 , we have a request for the Commission .
In the 1998 budget procedure , we adopted the SME technology facility in the hope that it would have a positive impact on employment .
I would ask the Commission to provide regular reports on the practical results , as the legal base was only adopted this summer .
One further comment on Category 4 : the Commission itself refers in internal documents to the fact that it is having considerable difficulties utilising the appropriations in MEDA and PHARE .
The Commission must take the necessary steps to improve this situation .
Mr President , first of all I would thank the rapporteur for her work .
I must say on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries that in general we are satisfied with the content of the budget : we are won over by the approach to international agreements ; we are content that the specific operation in favour of small-scale fisheries and coastal fishing has been maintained ; above all , we are certain that Parliament 's efforts in respect of small-scale fisheries have facilitated the establishment of projects which create employment , especially for young people , as well as land-based assistance for fishermen .
We are however mystified by some of the proposals relating to controls : funding is actually being cut back in this sector , and Item B2-901 is inadequate in our view .
We have therefore put forward an amendment concerning the allocation earmarked for controls under Item B2-901 , namely an increase from ECU 41 m to ECU 45 m .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , who has continued the process begun in recent years of feminising the budget and has already incorporated the concept of gender mainstreaming - enshrining equal opportunities in all policies - in the budget lines .
We are , however , still waiting for this principle to be applied consistently , as shown by several working documents on the 1998 and 1999 budgets , and as I can prove - for the areas in which the Committee on Women 's Rights is competent - from extensive correspondence with 15 of the Commissioners .
A further priority in our opinion was the fourth action programme on equal opportunities for men and women , and combating violence .
The Daphne programme is being discussed in the meantime , but as I recall , we in this House - namely 350 Members - supported calls for a European Year and a campaign to combat violence against women by signing the Declaration in May .
For reasons we fail to understand , this amendment to the remarks , tabled by the Committee on Women 's Rights , was not adopted in the Budgets Committee .
A new amendment is before the House , and I hope that all our colleagues will be consistent and vote in favour of it .
Mr President , in the Petitions Committee 's opinion , we emphasised that the funding provided for the committee 's work and the Ombudsman must be commensurate with the tasks we are asked to undertake .
The Treaty on European Union gives every citizen the right to petition , and to lodge complaints about the European institutions with the Ombudsman .
The Treaty of Amsterdam provides a more solid basis for Union citizenship .
The incorporation of part of the third pillar , justice and home affairs , into the first pillar will have an impact on the powers and the scope of the activities of both the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman .
The right of petition and complaint is an important instrument for a democratic Europe .
That is why we warn against being over-zealous when making proposals to rationalise the committees ' facilities , and the danger of only focusing on legislative work and budgetary duties .
Framing policy can and must amount to something more than austerity measures .
The Committee on Petitions asks to be given priority when changes to the establishment plan are being considered . We also need resources to make better use of information technology when exchanging documents with citizens .
We support the Ombudsman 's requests , and regard them as objectively justified .
The proposed solution to the problem - treating the Ombudsman as a separate institution for the purposes of the budget - allows additional posts to be created .
We are grateful to the Committee on Budgets and Mr Viola for this idea .
This will allow us to consolidate and continue to build up this institution , which is vital for democracy .
Mr President , I should first of all like to thank the rapporteur of the Committee on Budgets on the expiry of the ECSC Treaty , Mr Giansily , for incorporating all the conclusions in my opinion - adopted unanimously by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy - in his motion for a resolution , which was also adopted unanimously by the Committee on Budgets .
If all Members agree with our sensible and just proposals , then the ECSC money - most of which was , after all , amassed by the coal and steel industries themselves , in the form of the levy they have paid since 1952 - will , after 2002 , be used to promote research of future significance in the interests of these industries .
In my report , I have made it clear , for example , that only 20 % of steel 's potential as a material has been exploited , which means that both from the quantitative and , especially , the qualitative point of view , steel has a bright future .
The steel industry is not a sunset industry , and if it is able , by stepping up its research efforts , to meet customer demand for ever more sophisticated applications , then its bright future will become a reality .
The Amsterdam European Council has already decided to use the revenue from the reserves existing after 23 July 2002 for a research fund , which will benefit the sectors related to the coal and steel industry . It is therefore obvious to me - and this is also the easiest and most straightforward solution - that ownership of the ECSC assets should be transferred to the remaining Communities .
The ECSC Treaty of 1952 has a more developed sense of social issues , a stronger competition policy and an exemplary statistical system .
That is why we are asking the Commission to make proposals , in good time , on integrating these instruments , which have certainly proved themselves , into the EU framework .
It would actually be irresponsible and a great shame if we were to lose these instruments from the first European Community .
Mr President , the expiry of the ECSC Treaty presented us with a difficult task , because despite this Treaty being concluded for a limited period , it did not include any kind of winding-up provisions .
I can endorse very much of what the previous speaker said .
For the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , it is obviously particularly important that funding for research continues to be available .
We know from analyses of research in the steel and coal sectors that , by virtue of being closely connected to industry , this exerts a particularly large influence on the development of European industry and has , in broad areas , inordinately strengthened the competitiveness of this European industry compared with the United States , and also Japan .
It would be a shame if the Commission were now not to make the appropriate proposals , firstly so that this research can continue , and the expertise and instruments can continue to be utilised and , secondly , so that in the event of an enlargement , the states concerned can participate in these specific research programmes , in particular those related to coal .
Mr President , the wings of history are beating through Parliament today .
We are not only discussing the budgets of this and all the other institutions for next year , we are also looking back to the launch of the European Coal and Steel Community in order to perform the annual exercise of winding up the financial part of the old Treaty .
The proposal that has been presented contains the idea that the interest income on the capital of the ECSC should be used for research programmes within the coal and steel sector .
But it is not ambitious enough .
It is perhaps precisely this sector which is in the greatest difficulty in Europe today .
If we are to achieve the objectives of the Amsterdam Treaty in terms of growth based on sustainability and respect for human beings , we must think on other lines .
We must think in terms of more housing , more research and many more jobs .
That is what Europe needs , and that is also what Europeans need .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to preface my remarks with two pleasing points .
Firstly , on behalf of the presidency , I should like to congratulate John Hume who , together with David Trimble , has been awarded the 1998 Nobel Peace Prize .
I believe that Parliament can be proud to have Members of such calibre in its ranks .
Secondly , I should like to emphasise how glad I am that the 1999 budget is , for the first time , being drawn up in euros . This makes it very clear that economic and monetary union is becoming a reality , thus bringing Europe even closer together .
Parliament has voiced the criticism that the cuts made to the appropriations in the initial budget estimates were not always in tune with the Council 's political declarations on the sectors concerned , in particular in Categories 3 and 4 .
In this connection , I should like to remind you that the Council based the decisions it made on 17 July on the 1999 draft budget on several principles : firstly , establishing clear priorities for the financial resources available ; secondly , entering realistic amounts in the budget , which will be possible to implement but do not , in our view , hinder important Community policies ; taking account both of the criteria in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 29 October 1993 and the Court ruling of 12 May 1998 on legal bases ; and , finally , taking account of minor items of expenditure and retaining considerable room for manoeuvre beneath the ceilings of the financial perspective .
The Budgets Council did not , therefore , make its decisions exclusively on the basis of the priorities set by the Council ; it also took into account the budgetary principles I have just outlined .
That explains why - in accordance with strict financial management , which we are constantly striving to achieve - the appropriations , even in areas which are Council priorities , have in some cases been reduced .
I would like to confirm , however , that a special effort needs to be made in the Council procedures to ensure that the various interest-groups involved are adequately coordinated .
In that sense , it was particularly important for me to hear about the matters of particular concern to Parliament , and of course to understand them .
Obviously , I will bring these into the Council 's discussions .
Examples mentioned were an agreement on the fifth framework programme of research , and the continuation of Kaleidoscope and Ariane , so as to guarantee a healthy cultural policy in the Union .
I am also glad that Members addressed the issue of the alleged irregularities and cases of fraud which have recently been uncovered .
Like the European Parliament , the Council is concerned about these alleged irregularities and possible cases of fraud , which were of course recently the subject of a detailed report .
In the Council 's view , it is extremely important that the funds at the disposal of the European Communities are disbursed correctly and in such a way that gives no grounds for suspicion .
As one arm of the budgetary authority , the Council feels a high degree of responsibility to the taxpayer for the way in which public money is used .
Moreover , as a European institution , the Council is firmly convinced that the European ideal should not be allowed to be damaged by dishonest behaviour .
The Council is therefore very keen to see the Commission speedily carry out further thorough investigations into these cases , and to see all the necessary conclusions being drawn from their findings .
On 23 November , in the light of the Court of Auditors ' Special Report No 8 / 98 , the Council will consider how the efficiency of UCLAF - following the considerable progress already made - can be further improved .
In addition , the Council is familiar with the various observations , studies and reports - in particular Mr Bösch 's report - about a possible reform of UCLAF 's status .
Finally on this issue , I should like to stress that the recipients of ECHO aid are in no way responsible for possible administrative shortcomings .
Throughout the world , needy people are dependent on the resources which were set aside for them .
During the budgetary procedure , the needs of these people will , no doubt , be given the consideration they deserve by all those concerned .
Finally , I can assure you - as I have already said - that I will bring all your comments to bear in the Council 's continued deliberations .
I should also like to express my confidence that , through further constructive discussions with your representatives - but also with the Commission - we will produce a good budget for 1999 , a budget which is good for the people of Europe .
( Applause )
Mr President , I shall be speaking in general terms about my group 's position .
Several later speakers will go into more detail .
I would begin in the usual way by thanking the rapporteurs , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , Mr Viola and certainly Mr Giansily as well .
His report has been supported by our group with the small amendments which occurred in committee .
In the light of the President-in-Office 's remarks that we are not quite as much in tune with things as the Council , I have to say that in July the Council made known its decisions : one of the problems in July was that we did not have a dialogue on the PDB because all the time in conciliation was spent on the legal base .
So it is a great pity that we did not have the discussions we should have had .
By the same token , we have not had the ad hoc procedure which we should have had .
This is a breakdown in communications between our two institutions and it needs to be rectified next year .
Having said that , I thank the President-in-Office for the work he has done on the legal base .
It was appreciated .
It has helped to establish next year 's budget , certainly in Categories 3 and 4 .
We consider it to be a prudent budget ; we consider it to be a reasonable budget .
We have tried to make reductions where we think they are necessary .
The problem for the Council is the strategic reserve , the bridging budget that Mrs Dührkop Dührkop has spoken about .
We are going to leave no margin .
As you know it is our insurance policy , as the Commission has said .
It is our guarantee because if we do not get an interinstitutional agreement we have to have a fallback position .
Let us be clear : Agenda 2000 depends on the financial perspective . The financial perspective depends on an interinstitutional agreement .
From our side of the House we want to see an interinstitutional agreement but if we cannot come to a conclusion on that then , make no mistake , we will go back to Article 203 .
But to have Article 203 we need the finances for future years .
As the Commissioner said , if we adopt that strategy the Commission will have to call on own resources from the Member States earlier in the year .
There is a way round that which the Council should be discussing .
That was mentioned by Mr Samland in one of our discussions : namely , we need to get an agreement between our institutions before the end of the year which says that if there is no interinstitutional agreement , the basis for Article 203 in the future will be the maximum amount of spend for the year 1999 .
If the Council could take that on board it might solve some of the problems which Member States have .
I know they have these problems because they keep contacting us on this side of the House .
We now have more socialist governments than ever and they keep contacting us to say it is not a good idea .
We have to explain the strategy to them time and time again .
I turn now to the different areas .
Mrs Dührkop Dührkop has covered Categories 1 and 2 .
I would like to add the part that the peace programme funded by the European Union has played in Northern Ireland .
Parliament and the Council - and the Union in general - have something to be quite proud of with the role that money has played .
John Hume was instrumental in making sure that each year we had a case to make for that .
Let us add our congratulations to those the President-in-Office extended to John Hume .
On Category 3 , one of the reasons why things have been so easy is because the legal base solved a lot of our problems .
The recommendations made by the rapporteur on the pilot programmes and on the preparatory actions have taken a lot out of the debate .
We have not been arguing over small lines .
I was quite surprised how easily we came to a conclusion on those amounts of money for the pilot programmes etc .
The vast majority of actions on the lines that have disappeared have been placed elsewhere on other lines .
So , all in all , between the Commission , Council and the rapporteur , a decent job has been done in getting over the problem of the legal base .
Hopefully that has now been solved and we can move on in the future to have a better basis for the budget .
On the Fifth Framework Programme we are still looking for a solution .
While the Committee on Budgets voted the PDB , it may at the end of the day be far too big .
If we get an agreement in which it is less than the PDB - and if we are realistic , it probably will be - if , in second reading , we then reduce that figure we may have a gap and that affects our strategy for the bridging budget .
One thing that crosses my mind - and it has not been discussed in our group - is that we may have to frontload the Fifth Framework Programme in the 1999 budget to make sure that the margin is kept to an absolute minimum .
Concerning Category 4 , I should first like to mention Turkey .
The vote in committee was straightforward .
It is a token entry on the line and ECU 50m in reserve .
But there is no legal base for that line .
Whilst we voted for that in the committee because we consider it to be a political statement rather than a common sense action to vote out the line , we went along with it .
Since then our group has discussed the matter and our approach would be not to support that line ; not to support the ECU 50m in reserve even , because there is no legal base .
Our problem is how to do it because there are no amendments to scrap the line .
If we can get a split vote , that is what we on this side of the House will do when it comes to the line on Turkey .
On ECHO , in committee we voted against the money going in reserve and we stand by that position .
Regardless of the statements made elsewhere about the pressure being put on the Commission , we have to say the work done by Mr Liikanen and Mrs Gradin in trying to get this problem solved has actually gone unnoticed in many areas .
We want to pay tribute to the work they have done .
We thought it was wrong to put the money for humanitarian aid in reserve under threat for next year - we were penalising the people who needed those resources .
I could understand it if we were going to put the expenses of the Commissioners involved - or even the salaries of the people involved - in reserve , but we did not .
My group and I consider that putting actual humanitarian aid in reserve is the wrong thing to do .
We will therefore be voting against that amendment and if we vote against it , it will not get 314 votes and consequently the money will go back on the line .
Also in category 4 there are two items which Mr Cunningham mentioned , and others will mention , which have given cause for concern : one is tropical forests and the other is the line on anti-personnel mines .
I should like to explain why we voted the way we did .
On tropical forests it has been ECU 50 million for the last two , if not three , years .
Each year the Notenboom procedure takes money which is unspent from that line .
This year the Notenboom procedure will be taking ECU 11 million from the tropical forest line .
That is why our group has voted for the ECU 40 million .
A similar thing has happened with the anti-personnel mines .
We went along with the reduction proposed by the rapporteur because there are many other lines which have the facility for de-mining those areas which cause a danger to personnel in those areas .
We have agreed with the rapporteur in the resolution that we should get some concrete statements from the Commission on both these areas .
What is the situation with tropical forests ?
Does it need ECU 50 million or does it need ECU 40 million ?
On the anti-personnel mines , do we really need a plethora of lines for this action or can it be concentrated in one area ?
The Commission would help tremendously if we could get some clarification on that .
Still in category 4 , we have a problem with bananas .
We have always had a problem with bananas .
The Treaty of Rome was held up for 24 hours before it was signed because of bananas .
The final GATT round was not concluded until the EU had finalised its agreement on bananas .
We have problems even in our group about this .
The reality is that the majority of our group will be voting against the amendment which will put the money on the line .
This is an area where there is a lot of confusion and once again the Commission could help if they could clarify the difference between the ' spends ' in category 4 on this and the ' spends ' in the EDF and why it has to be done in one and not the other .
On Mr Viola 's report , most things can go through smoothly .
The one thing that will not go through smoothly on Thursday is the Members ' allowances and the Statute .
Our group was split on the vote last night and I am sure our group will be split on the vote on Thursday .
I will state now that the Socialist Group does not have a definitive position .
Whilst we discussed and voted on it last week , I am sure that position will change come Thursday .
I am sure you will see hands going up in several directions on the various votes that appear next week .
Finally , Mr President , the Court of Justice .
We voted against an increase in personnel there because we are being consistent .
All the political groups have had a policy of no increases in personnel in all the institutions , and that should also apply to the Court of Justice .
Mr President , this budget debate is the last one of this particular House before the elections next year and , indeed , when we come back to discuss the year 2000 , we should have an institutional agreement and a financial perspective which will be different from those we have today .
Before coming to my remarks on institutional budgets and the Commission budget , there are two general remarks I wish to make about the 1999 budget as a whole .
Firstly , I believe it is a sign of Parliament 's sense of responsibility that it has left large margins untouched in the budget .
It is true that the overall strategy will be earmarking some of the funds in the margin in the reserve but we have made it very clear from our Group 's point of view that these are not funds which will be committed - they are for strengthening Parliament 's negotiating position for the financial perspective and the interinstitutional agreement .
We have a budget which is very stringent : it has shown how , over a seven-year period , the figures that one is now voting on are very different from the financial perspective which we negotiated back in 1992 .
But these are unexpected developments : the CAP is well under the guidelines , as the rapporteur for the Commission budget has said , and much of the structural funds has remained unspent and uncommitted and handed back to taxpayers .
My second remark on the budget as a whole is that there is a real danger that we are moving into a period where the annual budget has no relevance whatsoever ; where we have multiannual programmes which have decided the figures year by year , and a financial perspective which has allocated funds well into the future .
This is why when it comes to the negotiations on the future financial perspective , we want to make it absolutely clear that there will be sufficient flexibility , both in terms of the allocation of funds and in the structure of a financial perspective .
Otherwise we would be better going back into 203 and into the annual budget process where Parliament can have its real relevance .
But we must ensure that the annual budget is a place where we can discuss the figures rather than the present state of affairs .
I have had the feeling we have been talking about small amounts rather than some of the bigger issues which we are concerned with in the European Union .
Above all , we must avoid what I would call a kind of Soviet-style rigidity in the way in which we set our budgets in the European Union in the 21st century .
Let me move now to comments on other institutions .
I wish to congratulate our rapporteur , Mr Viola .
It is not an easy task to be rapporteur on the budget when there are really sensitive issues around that the House has to decide on .
But we in the EPP Group have not taken the line that we have to be absolutely rigid : where there is a justifiable case for extra staff , as the Court of Justice convinced us , then we have voted for those credits for 10 LA staff .
We also want to make sure that next year , when Parliament comes back after the European elections , that we can have a properly organised system for information technology , which is why we will be voting to clear all the credits out of reserve on information technology .
The most sensitive issue is quite clearly travel expenses , where we , as a group , have held together so far - and I expect that this will be the position on Thursday - for the overall Committee on Budgets ' compromise which links the question of travel costs taken at actual cost for Members ' allowances to the overall question of the Statute .
The vast majority of us believe that the most sensible thing is to come to an overall agreement on this , linked to our signature on the interinstitutional agreement at the end of March next year , so that then we can have a really strong and satisfactory means by which Members know what their rights and duties are and we will then know how we will be paying for our travel costs for the next Parliament .
Because it is illusionary to think that simply having a transitional decision - which the Bureau decided last night - is something we can live with for a future Parliament and settle all our problems .
We would like the Statute to be resolved and decided as soon as it can be on the basis of the Rothley report .
I move to the Commission budget .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , on behalf of my Group .
I know only too well it is not easy either to navigate that kind of thing through the House .
There are three points here which stand out from our particular perspective .
Firstly , there are still some minor points which we wish to see instated , which have not been instated by the Committee on Budgets , relating to such issues as information outlets - I can assure Ms Morgan we will be voting in favour of that on Thursday ( B3-0301 ) - , on Alzheimer 's , tourism , and tropical forests : these are issues which we want to see part of the budget that is adopted .
Because we know that the provisions on the legal basis have not eased our decisions this year in terms of how to decide on what are pilot projects and what are preparatory actions .
Presumably this will get easier now as we move into a different process .
It is always the first year which is the most difficult .
Secondly , on the external budget , last night in the Committee on Budgets we voted on a proposal by my Group for Russia .
We want to ensure that credits have been set aside so that we can respond to the request for humanitarian aid which Mr Primakov has made to the European Union institutions .
We do not know what it is going to be , but these credits should be set aside for the budgetary authority to be able to take specific action , should the need arise .
That is the purpose of that amendment .
Lastly , I come to ECHO .
This is a question which has caused some real concern , but this arose because we in the EPP Group decided that it was intolerable that we , as parliamentarians , should have to go to look for a particular report in the Commission offices and that we could not actually view that particular document as parliamentarians on Parliament 's premises .
So that was the major condition which we attached to unblocking the funds on humanitarian aid .
Whether wilfully or not , this has been blown out of some proportion by many in this House because they did not vote in favour of it .
It always said in the amendment that this was up to the second reading .
It was a tactical reserve .
Now Mr Santer - and I thank the President of the Commission very much for the letter he has sent - has fulfilled those two conditions , and tonight I will propose to my Group that we release the reserve on this line for the vote on Thursday .
In my view , this has been a significant victory for Parliament in terms of making the Commission more open and accountable .
This is the only way we can really make our citizens confident in the financial process in the future .
Mr President , you may remember that about two years ago in 1996 , when the House was debating the 1997 budget , the Council and the Commission made a statement designed to overcome the European Parliament 's objections at that time .
They told us then that the 1997 budget was the last austerity budget .
Not only was that commitment not honoured , but subsequent budgets , including the one for 1999 , have been adapted to the dictates of a phoney EMU and have bowed to decisions made by bankers .
The common agricultural policy has come under attack .
Not only has European expenditure on agriculture fallen to 46 % of the budget , but the partial renationalisation of the CAP is already being planned , and the promoters of this strategy , which threatens Europe 's political cohesion , are the supposedly socialist governments of the neo-liberals Mr Schröder and Mr Blair .
The gulf between the poor South and the wealthy North will yawn still wider , and our farmers will have their backs to the wall .
Europe 's social cohesion and public health are again at risk .
Training activities for the benefit of workers ' organisations have been cut compared with 1998 , with payment appropriations falling from ECU 8 million to ECU 6 million .
The social dialogue shows a very small increase , just ECU 50 000 .
Funding for solidarity between generations is almost halved , in terms of both commitment and payment appropriations , from ECU 4 million to ECU 2.4 million .
Payment appropriations for the suppression of violence against children , young people and women - line B3-4109 - have been increased very little , from ECU 2 million to ECU 3 million .
For health issues , payment appropriations are down on the previous year , including in the areas of training , the fight against cancer and the fight against AIDS .
For employment , in lines B5-502 and B5-512 the increases are just ECU 1.5 million and 4.7 million respectively .
Payment appropriations for actions against anti-personnel mines are down by 1.5 % .
Interpreters and conference technicians are also victims of the new budget , with the corresponding budget items cut by ECU 1.5 million .

I am sorry , but as a non-socialist I cannot vote for such a budget .
I congratulate Mrs Dührkop Dührkop on her hard work and the trouble she has taken , but my own philosophy is different from hers and from the philosophy of the Council and the Commission .
Mr President , first of all I wish to congratulate the rapporteurs , especially as they have had to deal with such complex matters .
The current budget procedure has to be tackled by two distinct but inseparable approaches : not only , as you would expect , as a forecast of revenue and expenditure for the next financial year but also as a reference for the new financial framework due to be introduced at the end of that financial year .
In the light of this twofold approach the Commission - and the Council , even more so - have presented an extremely tight budget which , as a percentage of GNP , represents a sharp reduction compared with the 1998 budget .
Their aim is to pursue and intensify a strategy intended to set an example for meeting the convergence criteria and the stability pact requirements , to bring spending levels down somewhat lower than the ceiling on own resources established at Edinburgh , to provide continuity in the next financial year , and to make significant savings in readiness for enlargement .
The final value of this budget - after first reading but without taking into account the special reserves - is lower than was set out in Agenda 2000 for the current 15 Member States and for the next financial framework . The European Parliament is inevitably involved in this strategy , and in terms of fixing priorities its hands are tied .
It should therefore come as no surprise that we are rejecting this strategy today , as we have always rejected it , and its consequences on the budget . Let us say right away that the problem is not so much what we shall be voting for on Thursday but far more what we are not voting for .
For example , the fight against unemployment still has not met with the necessary response .
Furthermore , this new budget is being drawn up without the slightest regard for the world financial crisis or the need for Community measures internally and also externally , in particular to help Russia and Latin America .
On this score , it is obvious that the proposal approved in committee to set aside a special reserve of ECU 500 million for Russia only scratches the surface , because it is not just Russia that is at stake , and in any case I do not think that this is a matter for a special reserve .
On the subject of the reserves and the overall strategy of which they form part - creating a ' virtual ' or ' reference ' budget - we feel that they should be adopted , in view of the current situation and to avoid the failure to sign a new interinstitutional agreement .
We therefore go along with the rapporteur in this important area because of the tight budget proposed for 1999 , as I said earlier , and because that would in a way enable the European Parliament to avoid going along with the medium-term strategy I also referred to earlier .
I should also like to voice our dissatisfaction at the backward step in the ad hoc process . A different form of cooperation between the European Parliament and the Council is essential .
I should now like to turn to some of the other central aspects of the budget process and say a few words on the legal bases .
In this area , we also essentially go along with the position adopted by the European Parliament , although we have to point out that certain budget lines by which we had set considerable store , especially in the social field , have been sacrificed .
Even so , we consider that the tripartite agreement reached means we can salvage something of significance that would otherwise have been lost .
For our part , we regret the fact , for example , that the appropriations earmarked for migrant workers , tourism and small-scale inshore fishing have been scrapped .
Now for some more specific issues .
Above all , I welcome the fact that , generally speaking , the structural measures agreed at Edinburgh have been acted upon .
Putting into reserve certain amounts for Structural Fund authorisations and payments is acceptable to us , since negotiations on their future use are scheduled and because the actual take-up of the funds by the different Member States is being taken into account .
In our view , it is right not to make the innocent pay for the guilty .
As for the ECU 500 million reduction in payments , although that is technically understandable , at first reading we would have preferred it to be limited to the ECU 250 m placed in reserve .
Two more issues result from votes in the Committee on Budgets , both of them in the field of cooperation .
The first concerns humanitarian aid and the ecu .
We do not think that the best approach has been taken .
The decision to select a given heading and initially place the total amount of aid in reserve , leaving the final decision to the Commission provided that certain conditions are met , shows how the European Parliament caved in on its initially successful demands .
In the light of the positive if limited response by Mr Santer and the decision to go the whole hog and place the whole amount in reserve , the European Parliament was effectively in a catch-22 situation and , in the end , saw this as the only satisfactory response . But , in doing so , it renounced any means of exerting pressure in the future on this vital matter .
The situation would be different if , as we have always contended , the reserve was more limited ( albeit significant ) .
The Council statements that we have just heard on this subject , which we welcome , should enable us to do something about this issue in the current budget procedure .
The second issue also concerns cooperation : the cancellation of the line for banana production by ACP countries .
This is an especially delicate subject and , of course , we shall be voting against the proposal approved in committee .
May I also say that , although we consider the issue of parliamentary expenses to be extremely important , it is not a major issue - other issues are more serious .
For our part , we done our best to help the various bodies of the European Parliament to resolve this matter .
A consensus must be reached and we have said that we are quite willing to share that consensus provided that there is no demagoguery .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . It is done ; we have a budget !
And that is why I should first like to thank the rapporteurs .
In this bridging budget , Mrs Dührkop herself has been a bridge between the many wishes of the House and has constructed a very well-balanced budget .
Many thanks to her .
( DE ) Much of this procedure has also been painful , in particular redesigning budget lines in connection with the legal base .
Social policy was the most affected .
On the other hand , genuine priorities have successfully been set .
The decision of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , in the context of the Agenda 21 process , to support the promotion of renewable energies , sends out an important signal .
The fact that we managed to top up research funding in the fifth framework programme by 33 % marks the start of a genuine new trend .
This will not only have a positive impact on climate protection ; it will also provide increased employment opportunities in forward-looking technologies .
The much-discussed reserve for ECHO has had the effect that , from now on , the Commission has to make the UCLAF report and all future UCLAF reports available .
All the legal reservations which the Commission has hitherto used in its efforts to circumvent Parliament 's right to be fully informed have now disappeared .
I well remember informal discussions with four Commissioners and a secretary-general , and also other discussions in the Commission , when I was repeatedly told that there were legal reasons for our not having sight of the documents .
These have now been eliminated .
Parliament has managed to have Article 206 turned the right way up again .
But Mr Santer 's letter does not mean that all the conditions have yet been fulfilled .
That is why my group has tabled our original amendment to put 30 % of ECHO funds in a reserve for Central and Eastern Europe , as a kind of cushion , to give the Committee on Budgetary Control time to take full stock of Mr Santer 's letter and to scrutinise the UCLAF report .
For the future , it would be helpful if the Commission were to be more specific about the staffing problems it regularly reports in this context - being well aware that in the case of ECHO this was no ordinary mini-budget - and if it were to discuss these with the Committee on Budgets to see whether the Liikanen facilities or alternative possibilities might provide a solution .
Turning now to travel expenses , one might say that once you have lost your reputation , you can do as you please , and the Bureau has palmed us off with a new set of rules which could only be described as a joke , if this were not such a serious matter .
Last night 's vote produced a majority in favour of our group 's proposal , which was subsequently supported by Mr Dankert , Mr Brinkhorst and Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
That was a good starting-point .
However , the addition , which calls for a link with the Statute for Members , undermines the positive statements and stands in contradiction to the first part .
That is why Thursday 's vote in the House will depend on each and every Member .
This will show whether Parliament is capable of organising its own affairs and reforming itself or not .
Unfortunately , the Green Group is not represented in the Bureau .
Last night 's discussion of our proposal showed , however , that there will only be new rules on allowances - and , in this specific case , travel expenses - if the Green Group is involved .
For three years , my group has been working to ensure that those who work in the European institutions receive a pension .
A huge shortfall has occurred , which means that a new approach is needed .
Thanks to the work done in cooperation with Mr Viola and Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , there is now a joint proposal from all the groups to set up a pension fund for all pension entitlements arising after 1 January 1999 .
A reserve will first be created to make up the shortfall .
This is sustainable , forward-looking budgetary policy , and it remains to be hoped that an agreement will soon be reached with the Council on this matter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to congratulate Barbara Dührkop Dührkop for the excellent work she has accomplished , under conditions which were particularly difficult this year , on a budget which is effectively the last of this legislature and therefore full of ramifications , particularly in view of the expiry of the Interinstitutional Agreement .
In this respect , my group and I subscribe to one of the strategies proposed in this document , which involves reminding the Council of the political , moral and even legal arguments in support of the commitment to conclude a new Interinstitutional Agreement .
We would like the approach which we are proposing to Parliament , as the Committee on Budgets , to be adopted on Thursday to show that this Parliament will not be pushed around and that it is ready to use its powers to stand up for what we feel is a good working instrument which has proven its effectiveness .
I also welcome the agreement on the legal bases .
I believe that we have opened the way to a more comprehensive agreement which will allow a , shall we say , healthier view of things for many lines and several projects which are very important to the future of the European Union .
I hope that the Council , for its part , contrary to what has happened so far , will do everything in its power to ensure that the regulations are approved and that emphasis is not laid on Parliament 's budgetary powers to the detriment of its legislative powers .
With regard to the budget itself , my group and I are particularly annoyed that some people have tried to mix up our roles .
We have a budgetary role and we have a budgetary control role .
I believe that our control role must be exercised with the greatest possible rigour if we want healthier , more transparent institutions which are more capable of responding to people 's expectations .
If there are problems , such as fraud or misuse of Community funds , we must of course resolve these using the instruments which are available , but we must not act emotionally or make a big song and dance about them , because this always leads to a lot of coverage in the press .
We must not mix up our roles or use the examination of the 1999 appropriations as an opportunity to ask for explanations on the 1993 and 1994 appropriations .
I believe that this is not the way to go .
I believe that there were other instruments we could have used , in addition to the amendment putting the ECHO appropriations into reserve , and that it was precisely those instruments which helped to produce a very wise decision , in my opinion .
Where we need to protect a group of interests , including the interests of those presumed guilty of certain misdemeanours , I believe that we must act with a certain respect .
This is what happened .
Clearly , we played our part here , but it was in our budgetary control capacity , not our budgetary capacity , and we should have underlined this .
When I hear criticisms in a budget debate such as those made by an eminent Member of this House , Mr Giansily , I want to reply , as General de Gaulle did thirty years ago , by saying ' reforms yes , chaos no ! '
I therefore believe that , in this respect , we are not helping Europe by mixing up our roles .
I really hope that , between now and Thursday , we will be able to sort things out .
Our group is hoping , in any case , for an end to this blackmail which is undermining one of the most fundamental and important programmes that the European Union has managed to develop in six years .
For the rest , Mr Liikanen , we are waiting on you .
However , I am also waiting for my colleagues to shed light on the other cases .
We cannot have just one case filling the newspapers whilst others are completely ignored .
It rather depends on the person , I would say .
So we should settle this case , if there is one , and use it as an opportunity to resolve them all .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , I would strongly urge you to vote wisely and to vote in a manner consistent with the dignity of the House .
Mr President , as the rapporteur pointed out , the unique feature of the 1999 budget is the fact that it will be the last under the current financial perspectives .
This has led the Committee on Budgets to propose to us today not a budget , but a negotiating document with a view to concluding a possible future interinstitutional agreement with the Council .
The absurd thing about this is that it has led the Commission to propose structural measures up to the ceiling for each heading , so that all the funding decided in Edinburgh is effectively committed .
The Council , probably because it alone knows the real value of money , has rightly recommended that the structural measures should also be subject to the same discipline as everything else .
Parliament , however , intends to continue to give structural measures a privileged status , with an increase of over 16.6 % in commitments , yet everyone knows that these appropriations have been underspent .
Budget expenditure other than on structural measures and internal policies has been strictly limited by the Commission , releasing sizeable margins compared with 1998 .
The Council has applied even greater rigour .
As a result , agricultural expenditure , ever Parliament 's scapegoat , is alone in having no increase over 1998 .
In real terms , this expenditure is actually lower than 1998 and will , this year , represent no more than 42.2 % of the total commitments .
Internal policies , which the Council insists must also be subject to budget discipline , have been increased by more than ECU 300 million by the Committee on Budgets to a total of ECU 6.15 billion , an increase of over 7 % .
This is far removed from our budget guidelines of the spring which recommended a maximum increase of 2.5 to 3 % on last year 's figure .
The creation of four special reserves , totalling ECU 1.6 billion in commitments and ECU 4 billion in payments , is unacceptable .
It is a gamble by the Committee on Budgets in an attempt to put pressure on the Council , because the committee rejects a draft budget set at 1.09 % of GNP .
I refuse to allow European taxpayers to be used as hostages once again in a European Parliament stand-off with the Council .
The draft budget has been artificially increased to 1.17 % of GNP to serve as a calculation basis for the 2000-2006 period , but this is an increase of 7 % over 1998 , or 12.5 % if you consider just the non-compulsory expenditure .
Finally , we condemn the scandalous manoeuvre in the committee which resulted in the removal of subsidies to banana producers in the ACP countries and the pseudo-ultimatum issued to the Commission by placing appropriations for humanitarian aid into reserve .
The discharge vote will be the appropriate time for assessing the ECHO scandal .
A final word on the Viola report : we welcome the fact that our amendment on the reimbursement of actual travel expenses incurred has finally been adopted .
However , it is clear that this is a transparency measure which should not be linked to the Members ' Statute .
It is the responsibility of the Member States to alter MEPs ' pay if necessary according to the respective situations of their various MPs and their assessment of their role and importance .
Mr President , the proposal before us today is not a budget , it is an exercise in budgetary inflation , a ballooning of appropriations .
Although inflation is under control and indeed almost non-existent , and although the Member States are subject to restrictions in connection with the introduction of the euro , the European Union budget is increasing wildly .
We have a 6 % increase in commitment appropriations and a rise of nearly 3 % in payment appropriations in the draft budget , and an increase of over 7 % for commitments and nearly 4 % for payments in the budget which the European Parliament is preparing to vote on .
Of course , Parliament is always ready when it comes to spending without counting the cost !
This is not justified .
The bulk of agricultural expenditure will fall in real terms .
Furthermore , in its document on the reform of Community finances , the Commission is proposing to reduce direct agricultural income subsidies in the EAGGF Guarantee Section . This will result in a transfer of the burden from the European Union to the Member States .
Under these conditions , how can the overall increase in the budget be explained ?
Firstly by the increase in the Structural Funds budget : 18 % more in commitment appropriations and 9.5 % more in payment appropriations .
These figures are devoid of any reality and any rigour .
The European Union is throwing open the doors to regional favouritism , without any regard for the taxpayers and without any concern about the waste which will inevitably result .
The increase can also be explained by the growth of over 8 % in the budget for internal policies , whereas under the principle of subsidiarity the responsibility for this should lie with the Member States , the regions or the local authorities .
Finally , we have the increase of over 5 % in the budget for external measures .
This is also open to question .
Is the European Union right to be proud of the humanitarian measures which lead to the proliferation of fictitious activities and fictitious jobs ?
The only thing which is not fictitious in these humanitarian measures is the lifestyle and the self-publicity of those in charge .
Is the European Union right to be proud of its TACIS projects and its activities in the former Soviet Union when it shares with the IMF the responsibility of having given Russia the advice and structures which have led to its economic and social collapse ?
What can be said about the food aid which is now proposed by the Committee on Budgets when the production and distribution systems have been disrupted wherever food aid has been provided ?
Unjustified for internal policies , harmful for external measures and a source of waste for the Structural Funds , this inflationary budget will cost taxpayers dear : FRF 95 billion for French taxpayers alone , which is one third of income tax revenue , with an annual increase of nearly 4 % , more than any of the other main headings in the French budget .
This being the case , the National Front Members intend to vote against this draft budget , which is a budget for the Europe of Maastricht and Amsterdam and which is not in the interests of the taxpayers or citizens .
Nobel Peace Prize
Honourable Members , yesterday I had the opportunity at the beginning of the session of expressing the great satisfaction of the House at the Nobel Prize which has been awarded to our colleague , Mr John Hume .
( Loud and sustained applause ) Many Members expressed the wish that our colleague should hear their congratulations directly , so I propose that one member of each group should now extend congratulations to our colleague , for one minute .
Afterwards I will give him the floor .
We can do today what was impossible yesterday .
Mr President , it gives me the most enormous pleasure to be able , on behalf of the Socialist Group , to pay tribute to our colleague and our comrade , John Hume , who , as you know , is now a Nobel Peace laureate .
John Hume 's contribution to the peace process in Northern Ireland is without question the basis on which the Good Friday Agreement , which we all hope is going to lead to long and lasting peace in Northern Ireland , was founded .
We pay tribute to John and the immense work he has done , the personal trials that he and his family have overcome over three decades in the search for a peaceful solution in Northern Ireland .
In saying all that , we pay tribute as well to David Trimble who shares the Nobel Peace Prize this year with John , for the courage he has shown in more recent times in moving forward on the peace agreement for Northern Ireland .
But to John , our dear John , who has been a member of our group for some years now , we want to say how proud we are of him , how difficult the years have been , how we understand he has been subject to physical attack himself but also to vitriolic personal attack as a result of his efforts to open up the peace process .
That has been recognised in John , by the Nobel Peace Prize but more importantly by the Good Friday Agreement which is , we know , a testimony and tribute to the work you have done .
It is for us a great pleasure to share this moment with you ; it is a wonderful moment for us .
We thank you , we congratulate you and we wish that this will be a stimulus to fight and continue the fight for peace in Northern Ireland .
All of us are with you in that .
Mr President , on behalf of my group and as a very , very proud Irishwoman , I would like to pay tribute to John Hume and to say how pleased and delighted we are that he finally received his just reward and recognition with award of the Nobel Prize , both to himself and to David Trimble .
After a time of great anguish and pain in our country , these are the good days , John , and thank God you are there to enjoy them and to enjoy the tributes from your friends and colleagues and your countrywomen and men at this particular time in your life .
We look , too , at the great tenacity you have displayed in the past 30 years in trying to find peace .
Your path of non-violence has finally , please God , won forever the sort of peace we have all been praying for in Northern Ireland for a great many years .
Our warmest congratulations to you .
The country is proud of you .
The world is proud of you and especially also , of course , this Parliament of which you are a distinguished Member .
Mr President , on behalf of the ELDR and on my own behalf I want to warmly congratulate our colleague , Mr Hume .
Mr Hume has shown the most consistent commitment to the constitutional way in politics in very difficult circumstances throughout his adult life .
He has also brought powerful personal analysis to bear on the politics of a divided society .
It is based , most of all , on a sense of tolerance , pluralism and respect - respect for divergent and different traditions .
It is that analysis which has become the foundation stone of the peace process .
Mr Hume has also personally taken major risks for peace .
He had the courage , in the face of much criticism , to bring Gerry Adams and Sinn Fein into that process .
They are an important part in the evolving situation in Northern Ireland .
His award this week , an award which he has generously acknowledged is a mark of respect for the new situation in Northern Ireland itself , is richly deserved .
I congratulate him and his ever-supportive wife , Pat , personally on this achievement .
I wish , on behalf of my group , to warmly congratulate and acknowledge the role of Mr David Trimble .
I quote Senator George Mitchell of the United States , who played an enormous role in this process .
He argued correctly , I believe , that without John Hume there would be no peace process , and without David Trimble there would have been no peace agreement .
It is therefore right and proper that these two men , in their separate ways , through their separate political journeys long and recent , should be recognised handsomely in this way .
Mr President , it is a very great privilege and honour for me , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , to very warmly congratulate Mr Hume on his outstanding achievement in being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize .
I wish to congratulate him and his wife as well , who had to stand with him during a very lonely vigil down the many years .
I have watched Mr Hume very closely over the many years in which he has been trying to promote peace with justice in Northern Ireland .
There was a time , particularly , when he had very few friends : he was very unwelcome at most doors that he knocked on to plead the case for people who deserved what we take for granted here today .
I watched John Hume as a young man with a small band of loyal and dedicated followers trying to stir up the consciences of many people .
He made a great breakthrough , initially , here in the European Parliament .
It was here that he learned how the Member States could cooperate with each other after a very difficult time during World War I and World War II .
He brought this experience home to Ireland and asked people why , if the Germans , French and others can do it in Europe , we cannot do it in Northern Ireland .
This was a lesson from Europe which worked in Ireland .
Europe responded strongly to Mr Hume 's request in helping him to make it a reality .

I very much hope that the recent recognition - much deserved and much valued - that Mr Hume has had bestowed on him by the Nobel group will act as a further incentive to Mr Trimble and all the others that are there to follow right through to the end of the road , knowing that they have the full support , not only of Parliament , but of the entire world .
Well done , John .
We wish you God speed in everything you are trying to do .
( Applause )
Mr President , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , I would also like to express our delight at the award of the Nobel Prize to our dear colleague .
We see John Hume as a man of peace , a man of tolerance , an outstanding man who has explored the paths of peace , who has been ahead of everyone else , several years ahead , and who has always taken personal risks , has always been committed , and has always been convinced .
And he has set an example for us all .
For Europe , the Irish situation was a terrible wound in the very depths of its own political body .
And the determination of men like John Hume has made this light and this hope possible .
Some say that peace and a normal democratic situation have not been fully achieved in Northern Ireland , but he has made the objective of peace and political normalisation irreversible .
Like all the parliamentary groups , we believe that this prize actually bestows more prestige on the Nobel Prize than it does on John Hume .
The Nobel Prize gains in stature when people like John Hume receive the prize from the Academy .
So today , as Members of the European Parliament , we share John Hume 's prize .
His determination , his modesty and his friendliness mean that we feel as if he is family today , beyond the protocols of an institution .
And we are sure he can count on the whole of the European Parliament to go on working for peace in every corner of Europe and the world .
Thank you , John Hume .
Mr President , on behalf of the Green Group and especially my colleague Nuala Ahern , I would like to warmly congratulate Mr Hume on this honour .
It is an honour not just for Mr Hume personally , it is also a great honour for this House that a Member has received the Nobel Peace Prize .
He now follows in the footsteps of other great men of peace , for example Nelson Mandela .
It is also an honour for all the other people who have worked for peace in Northern Ireland .
Less than five years ago when I came to this Parliament it was still very difficult for John Hume , and there was a lot of opposition from the mainstream media in some countries , including my own , to the initiatives he had taken .
He has been proved right and what he did was clearly right .
It has moved peace along .
There is a lesson to be learned from this , and it is that very brave initiatives taken by people , who stand up to bitter and strong criticism against themselves , their families and their followers , can prove extremely important in achieving peace when in the end they are proved right ..
As many people have said , we still do not have peace in Northern Ireland , but we are getting there and I hope that the generation that is growing up in Northern Ireland , in particular young people , have the right to grow up in a demilitarized society where guns are seen not as the norm but as something unusual .
John Hume will have contributed to that .
On behalf of the Green Group I congratulate him most warmly for what he has achieved .
He has sent out a clear message to other people in the world that we must take courageous action .
It is the only way forward .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , and also personally , I should like to express our warm and heartfelt admiration for John Hume , and also our gratitude .
With clearsightedness , patience and courage , you , Mr Hume , have managed to stay on course and achieve the goal .
We hope that the peace agreement will hold firm and be permanent .
You have been an example to all of us and for us , as Members of Parliament , you are and you will remain the example to follow .
We are proud to have a man of your stature in our midst .
You have also been the embodiment of a message of hope and tolerance .
Clearly , tolerance should be the rule throughout Europe , as it is one of the fundamental values of our Union , but there are unfortunately still some very problematical areas in Europe .
Northern Ireland was one of these areas but , thanks to you , we are once again full of hope .
We thank you from the bottom of our hearts .
Mr President , on my own behalf and on behalf of my group , I wish to offer my warmest congratulations to a colleague , someone I have worked with as a Member of this Parliament for over nine years .
I offer my sincere and warmest congratulations on the award he has received not only to John but to his wife , Pat , whom I know very well indeed .
Indeed , there are occasions when , if you want to get something done , it is Pat I have to contact and not John .
I should also like to congratulate my own leader , David Trimble , who has shown remarkable fortitude and courage as the leader of the Ulster Unionist Party .
I know better than anyone else the risks he has taken and , indeed , the challenges still before him .
His courage should not go unnoticed .
( Applause ) I also wish to say that , as someone who has been in political life in Northern Ireland for the last 25 or 26 years , I know the difficulties , risks and challenges and what it is like to plough a long , lonely furrow through the last 30 years in Northern Ireland .
I have to echo the words of my leader at the time : he just hoped that it is not too soon .
We all hope and pray that it is not too soon and that we are on a route from which there will be no turning back to the last 30 years we have experienced .
We have a challenge before us .
I think we will face that challenge .
While there may still be a long way to go , I certainly believe that there will be no turning back and no looking back .
It must be said that John and myself , and indeed Mr Paisley , have shown by our cooperation within this Parliament what can be achieved , what is possible and how we can achieve it .
The challenge is there for us all to take up .
I know my party leader and I know John , and I know that my party leader and Seamus Mallon will be in Brussels at the part-session at the beginning of November .
We have an opportunity in this Parliament to recognise the work and the task and the deeds before us .
I end by congratulating John again , and wish him every success with the award .
( Applause )
Mr President , I am clearly very moved by today , and I thank you all for the warmth of your support .
Obviously , I was very honoured to achieve this award , but I see it not just as a personal award .
I wish to express my deep appreciation to the members of my own Group here and to the members of other groups who nominated me for this award .
As I have said , I do not see it just as a personal award : I see it as a very powerful expression of the international goodwill and support for peace on our streets .
I have no doubt that it is strengthening the will of our people to continue in the enormous task of ending a quarrel of centuries and bringing lasting peace to our people .
Throughout that peace process I was very grateful for the enormous support that the process has received from this House and the institutions of the European Union and , in particular , the programme for peace and reconciliation which was unanimously endorsed by this House and which is doing so much work at grassroots-level .
It is so positive that it deserves to be studied now by other regions of Europe .
But , most important of all , I have to say that , as far as I am concerned , the peace process in Northern Ireland has been most heavily inspired by the example of this House .
When I first came here in 1979 - I tell this story often - I went for a walk across the bridge from Strasbourg to Kehl .
I stopped and I thought : 30 years ago if I had stood on this bridge and said : ' Don 't worry , although there are 25 million dead for the second time in a century and for centuries these peoples of Europe have slaughtered one another , now it is all over and in 30 years they will all be together ' I might have been sent to see a psychiatrist .
But it happened .
Let us not forget that European Union is the best example , as we have learned , in the history of the world of conflict resolution .
The philosophy that created European Union and the peace of Europe is a philosophy - if you study it - that is at the heart of our agreement : respect for difference and for diversity , the creation of institutions which respect that diversity but which allow all sections to work together in their common interests and economics - spill their sweat , not their blood .
In this way the real healing process of breaking down the barriers of centuries begins and a new society evolves .
That is the philosophy of European Union and it is the philosophy of real peace and , might I add , that is the philosophy that we should be sending to areas of conflict in the world .
We should not be sending armies , we should be sending a philosophy .
The philosophy we have in this building is a philosophy that will resolve conflict everywhere because , at the end of the day , all conflict is about the same thing : it is about seeing difference as a threat .
What we all have to learn is what the peoples of Europe have learned and we are learning in Northern Ireland : difference - whether it is race , religion or nationality - is an accident of birth and is not something we should be engaged in conflict about , it is something we should respect .
Thank you very much for your support today .
( The House rose and accorded the speaker a standing ovation )
VOTES
Mr President , the text of the French version needs to be harmonised .
Sometimes the term ' principe de prudence ' is used and sometimes the term ' principe de précaution ' .
' Principe de précaution ' is the usual term and paragraph 7 must therefore be changed accordingly .
Paragraph 29 , in the French version , calls on the Union to ensure that sperm count surveys are carried out .
Counting the sperm of the whole of the European Union would be difficult .
I therefore propose that this is changed to sperm sample surveys .
This will probably mean that the other language versions will also have to be changed , but I am not sure how this would be phrased .
Finally , in paragraph 31 , second indent , the term ' anomalies de genre ' should be replaced by ' anomalies sexuelles ' .
Mr President , I can assure Mr Pompidou that I agree with his first two objections .
On the other hand , I cannot make a judgement on the third .
I will therefore say that if what Mr Pompidou is proposing conforms to the original Danish text , i.e. reads the same as the wording of the original text , I can also agree with his third oral amendment .
But if there is a difference , I cannot agree .
Mr President , I should like to draw your attention to the fact that in the German and English versions , recital B states that the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe is developing guidelines for tests on hormones .
This organisation is certainly very important , but it is not responsible for hormones .
Or has not been up until now , at any rate .
It should read the OECD , at least in these two language versions , and I assume in all the others too .
When I see what hormones do to some people , the OSCE is the appropriate organization .
Nevertheless , we will ensure it is corrected .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
It is with great pleasure that we vote for this report , since it represents an improvement of the present methods for the assessment of environmental aspects .
The key consideration is that the environmental assessment enters the picture at a much earlier stage in the process , and hence takes account of many more factors than was the case with previous assessments .
Hence this assessment approach can also represent a saving in economic respects , in addition to its coverage of environmental aspects , which means that this proposal links together environmental and economic aspects in an effort to secure sustainable development .
The fact is that a good environment must be a concern in all our activities .
We are voting against the Koch report on the harmonisation of examination requirements for safety advisers , because it is not an area that should be of concern to the EU .
In our opinion , it is the job of the national parliaments to formulate examination requirements for training courses , and the award of examination certificates is not an EU matter , but should continue to be handled by the national educational institutions .
It is also our view that the subsidiarity principle should be applied in precisely those areas of policy .
I should firstly like to thank our colleague , Mr Koch , for his work on this important and serious subject .
It concerns a particularly grave and important issue which affects the daily safety and lives of not only millions of our citizens who live near roads , railways and rivers , but also everyone else , given the potential extent of the damage caused by chemical , bacteriological and nuclear disasters .
This once again demonstrates the importance of Europe 's role on these major issues , and also the prominent role of the European Parliament .
Our fellow citizens should be better informed about these matters .
Specifically , we are asking for safety advisers with identical training in every company .
I approve the report without reservation , particularly as this harmonisation will reduce distortions of competition while at the same time increasing safety .
If we could similarly manage to harmonise the working conditions of drivers , this would also ensure greater safety and less distortion of competition .
I hope that the momentum generated by this report continues .
In our society there is , alas , in many respects no getting away from dangerous substances .
Using these substances means that they have to be transported .
Given the risks attached to moving them , there must be appropriate safeguards in place .
To guarantee this , persons professionally involved as advisers must possess sufficient expert knowledge and ability .
Because many transport operations cross international borders , it is important to consider the issues here in a European context .
In view of this , I gave my backing to the Commission proposal and to most of the amendments , aimed at harmonising the level of training required of these advisers within the Community .
A consistently high level of safety demands that all advisers satisfy stringent requirements .
I am sorry to see that the final proposal talks about minimum requirements rather than uniform standards .
The danger here is that countries which operate a strict system of examination will price themselves out of the market .
If certificates are valid throughout the Community , people will , after all , tend to take the easiest option , that is to say the easiest examination .
Although I have doubts about possible variations in the difficulty of the examinations , I think this proposal represents an advance on the existing situation and for that reason I voted in favour .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , obviously we supported the McKenna report , because today the European Parliament has made it clear that the game is up for the agricultural well-poisoners .
The resolution will force the Commission to snap out of its lax attitude to nitrates .
It is terrible that , seven years after the nitrates directive 's entry into force , it should still be possible to ignore the limit values and escape unpunished .
The Federal Republic of Germany is one of the prime culprits here , and we hope that the new German Government will change that .
The Commission has neglected to implement the action programmes on cleaning up groundwater .
It has given in to the lobby of farmers ' organisations , which put short-term yields ahead of preserving an uncontaminated environment .
The nitrate map reveals the EU to be an ecological disaster zone .
In almost 90 % of the agricultural area in the EU , nitrate concentrations in groundwater exceed the guide value .
In almost a quarter of agricultural land , they are even well above the limit value .
Even if animal husbandry were to become much less intensive , it would still be over 20 years before the surface and ground waters in the EU were even reasonably healthy again .
The blame mainly lies with the Member States - which are bowing too much to pressure from the farming lobby , and are not incorporating the relevant provisions of the directive into national law - but also with the Commission , because it is turning a blind eye to the well-poisoners .
The Commission must insist on the dilatory Member States keeping strictly to the maximum quantities of animal manure stipulated in the directive and , if necessary - and this is very important - also bring them before the Court of Justice .
Moreover , there should be no more EU aid for farmers who do not comply with the nitrate norms .
There are also calls for a nitrogen levy on animal manure and artificial fertiliser to be introduced , as several Member States are already planning to do .
We need to ensure that the precautionary principle is applied .
This is also about guaranteeing biodiversity and protecting the seas and lakes from becoming polluted .
It is always difficult tackling a subject where national passions often rule over reason - and agriculture is always a real minefield .
I would therefore congratulate Patricia McKenna on the quality of her report .
However , I have a few points to make which go beyond just the agricultural pollution of waters .
Firstly , we should remember that the current water situation is the result of a policy pursued over many years , the basic principle of which was to subsidise intensive production and therefore the excessive use of fertilisers .
In all conscience , I believe that if the common agricultural policy continues as it is , or even slightly altered , nothing will change with regard to the ecological risks run by both the environment and the consumer .
If we are to obtain tangible results , the common agricultural policy needs to change direction .
This is in the interests of farming and therefore of farmers .
The French government , through the former Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries , Louis Le Pensec , has begun this change .
It shows courage when you consider how certain farmers have been known to react .
However , we should note that many farmers seem to have got the measure of the challenges , aware that changes must be made in this area as consumers may no longer be happy to subsidise certain excesses .
I therefore believe that it is vital , in the context of Agenda 2000 , that we realise the importance of promoting good-quality agriculture which respects the environment .
Although I admit to having certain concerns about the commitment of some of those in charge , as a result of certain particularly active lobbies , I believe that the effort will be worthwhile .
It will certainly be in everyone 's interest .
Ladies and gentlemen , the House 's debates on these matters have often lagged behind the national politicians responsible for agriculture , but attitudes are changing .
We must seize this opportunity to confirm our desire to reform the agricultural and rural policy of the Union , with the constant aim of defending and promoting European agriculture while ensuring the best service for consumers .
The Commission 's report highlights the almost complete failure by all Member States to meet the terms of the 1991 Water Directive .
Excessive levels of nitrates in drinking water can cause a reaction in the blood 's capacity to move oxygen around the body and can be carcinogenic .
As a result of the uncontrolled growth in algae , high levels can also ultimately ' suffocate ' ecosystems .
The Irish Environment Minister , Noel Dempsey , must comply with the terms of the directive and publish the results of the government 's most recent study on nitrate levels in Irish drinking water .
The Irish Government says that an extensive programme of monitoring was carried out in 1992-93 to establish the extent of the problem in Ireland and that the results of this monitoring showed concentrations well below permitted levels .
It adds that a follow-up study is presently being carried out .
While the problem may not be as serious in Ireland as in other countries , we cannot afford to be complacent .
Ireland 's economy has grown by almost half since 1992 .
We know we have a problem with phosphorous but do we now have a problem with nitrates ?
The Minister should complete the follow-up monitoring study as soon as possible and let the public know whether nitrate levels in Irish drinking water are still below recommended levels .
If so , he should implement the 1991 directive in full .
There is little point in the Irish Government signing up to European legislation if it makes no real effort to live up to its obligations .
Whereas , like many Members , I have reservations about the amount of time given over in this Parliament to the discussion of own-initiative reports , Mrs McKenna 's concern over the poor implementation of the Nitrates Directive certainly justifies the use of the procedure .
I have sympathy for the case which Mrs McKenna has outlined .
This comes from recent experience of how disastrous poor implementation of the Groundwater Directive could prove to be to the environment in my own constituency .
Fortunately , a public inquiry managed to avert the danger but that was no thanks to my own Government .
I am pleased that infringement proceedings have now commenced .
Mrs McKenna 's report highlights the sometimes appalling record of our national governments in implementing environmental protection measures .
I agree with the view expressed by Commissioner Kinnock that the present situation is grossly inadequate .
However , I do not agree with his view that it is the farmers and the farmers alone who should pay .
Implementation requires more than legislative action .
It is easy for the Commission to say the world must be cleaner and farmers must pay for it .
Unless more funding is made available the benefits to be won from the Nitrates Directive will not be achieved .
Mr President , this is an extremely important report because of the health implications .
I am quite alarmed at some of the amendments adopted today .
Amendment No 11 states that ' sounder scientific data is therefore needed before relevant legislation can be drawn up ' regarding the setting of limits values .
It is quite clear that this goes completely against a precautionary approach which should , firstly , ensure that even without sounder scientific data precautionary measures are taken to ensure that people 's health and the environment are protected .
As regards some other amendments , such as Nos 6 and 8 , it is quite clear where these are coming from and which vested interests are involved : the plastics industry and Mr Pompidou , who probably supports their interests .
It is clear that those amendments weaken the report because industry 's research departments should be involved in research .
Even though industry itself has all the capabilities to employ expert researchers , when it comes to protecting people 's health , Amendment No 11 asks that sounder scientific evidence should be available first .
There is a total contradiction between the two .
It is quite clear that the precautionary approach is the first thing to be taken .
I am quite surprised that our Amendment No 2 was not adopted because this is extremely important as regards toxic chemical substances which persist and accumulate in organisms and which have serious and irreversible effects on health and the environment .
We asked for these to be phased out immediately , and we cannot see why this is not acceptable . We also consider that labelling is an essential requirement and should be introduced immediately .
I cannot understand why Parliament cannot accept such a thing .
Firstly , we have to protect people 's health and , secondly , we have to make information available to the public to give the consumer the opportunity to decide whether or not to purchase something which may be harmful to health .
There are a lot of contradictions here , the main one being the contradiction between the precautionary approach and the notion of sounder scientific evidence being available first .
It is clear that industry has enough sound scientific evidence to try to counteract the activities of the environmental and health movements .
Parliament has a duty to the health of the consumer , and the environment to protect their interests first and foremost .
The Danish Social Democrats have voted against two amendments from the Greens on an immediate phasing-out of PVC and three phthalates - not necessarily because the Greens are wrong , but because the own-initiative report already contains a demand for the Commission to present proposals for the phasing-out of endocrine-disrupting substances .
The rapporteur 's text describes a large number of potentially harmful effects of chemical substances on the endocrine balance in humans .
I emphasise the term ' potential ' effects , because the jury is still out on these effects .
Science has not yet established clearly and conclusively that there is a direct link between these chemical substances and changes in the endocrine balance in humans .
Nevertheless , this is a matter of deep concern to me .
The potential effects of these substances are not insignificant .
If it is true that these chemicals cause an increase in certain types of cancer , impair fertility or are dangerous to the unborn child , then something has to be done about them .
Human life deserves protection .
With a view to doing that , we need to know as much as possible about these substances .
All praise to the rapporteur in not yielding to all kinds of emotional arguments in writing her report .
In it , she stresses the importance of research .
In many Member States of the European Union , extensive research is being done on the effects of various chemicals .
We need to be abreast of this .
Until we know exactly what the effects of the substances in question are , it is difficult to take far-reaching decisions on removing certain products from the market .
So I did not support the Greens ' amendments on phthalates .
Regarding Mr Pompidou 's amendments , to my mind these points are covered sufficiently in the resolution .
I voted against his amendments in order to avoid duplicated and impossible pieces of wording .
The rest of the amendments I did support .
Once again , the main reason for voting for this report and this resolution is the seriousness of the changes which these chemicals might potentially cause .
Changes are taking place in the environment and in reproductive ability .
Hence there is increasing concern over the impact of chemical substances with hormone-mimicking effects .
The public is worried .
It is providing front-page stories for the press .
On the other hand the Commission dithers , and legislation is falling behind - legislation for which there is a crying need .
It should in fact be following the consumers ' wishes , which are that the precautionary principle should be applied and that our sights should be set on phasing out these substances , or at least that provision should be made for suitable labelling , with classification into risk categories if a risk assessment has been carried out .
If a risk assessment has not been carried out for the substances , this must be stated on the label .
We consumers have the right to a life without poison !
I should like to congratulate Kirsten Jensen on her own-initiative report , which emphasises the precautionary principle and contains a number of practical recommendations that could be a good , but also necessary , springboard from which to move forward .
I would draw special attention to the ideas on labelling rules , independent scientific studies which are not in the pockets of industrial interests , the phasing-out of chemicals , and better and new testing procedures .
But I also strongly endorse the call made in paragraph 19 for openness and transparency in connection with legislation on the environment .
This highlights a recently adopted convention on public access to environmental information in connection with environmental legislation .
I hope that the debate today and the European Parliament 's position will send a clear signal to the Commission on phasing-out and the amendment of legislation - we owe that to the consumers of Europe !
We can always ask for better scientific evidence .
However that does not solve the problems , but only brings delay and does not benefit the legislation or the main objective .
It is no longer a question of more or less safe or unsafe data , it is a question of adopting a precautionary approach in legislation , which does not even need to involve added costs to industry .
In Denmark we know this debate only too well , especially when it concerns phthalates in toys .
Denmark in fact wants to prohibit the use of phthalates from November this year , but may face a court challenge if the ban is introduced .
Ritt Bjerregaard and Emma Bonino earlier in the year called for emergency intervention to ban those phthalates that are used to make plastic products more flexible .
But Mr Bangemann , and perhaps a number of industrial interests , called it an overreaction and wanted to have further scientific documentation .
The Commission waited for a Dutch report .
When it arrived , it found phthalates not guilty .
The problem is simply that scientific studies , especially those that are not independent , can prove exactly what one wants .
The result depends on the premises on which the study is constructed .
A similar report from Austria advises against the use of phthalates .
Why was this not the report to which the Commission paid attention ?
We do not need more delays , we need legislation which takes account of consumers and the precautionary principle .
Although one does not vote on the reasoning behind a report , Mrs Jensen 's line of reasoning has such a weak scientific basis - and gives the impression that it is on this basis that we are voting in Parliament - that I am voting against this report .
I have been on the record of the House many times before on the issue of biodiversity and biotechnical matters .
Biotechnology is a new form of innovation which in general terms must be welcomed , but at the same time controlled mechanisms must be put into place to safeguard the public interest and public policy .
Any debate which takes place at European Union level in relation to understanding what legislation must be implemented on this subject must take place in an environment that is even-handed and balanced .
The problem I find with the debate taking place on biotechnology is that the opposing sides - whether in favour or against biotechnological inventions - are engaging in sensationalism with regard to the merits or demerits of biotechnological developments .
For farmers who are the custodians of our land resource and responsible to society for guaranteeing food safety and quality it is of the utmost importance that the benefits of science and research are made available and applied to the sector .
It is to the credit of those who manage our land resource , that they have been at the forefront in the application of modern technology which has helped in advancing food quality and safety .
It must be borne in mind that the world 's productive land resource remains constant and much of it will not respond to established agricultural practices .
It is only through ongoing research , the application of new science including safe and tested biotechnology that the full potential of the resource can be harnessed .
Biotechnology is not a recent discovery .
It has been applied in varying degrees since the 1970s .
There is now a greater understanding of its potential and benefit for mankind .
It is one of the key technologies of the 21st century and there is an obligation on us to use it in a careful and planned way .
As should be the case with the application of all new research , transparency and proper information for consumers are important .
I fully support the need for the labelling of all genetically modified food so that the consumer can ultimately decide whether to purchase GMOs or not .
The future of our agricultural systems and the profession of farming itself , the health of our citizens and those who are employed in the food sector are dependent on the modernisation and development of our agricultural structures in a balanced and even-handed manner .
It is pointed out in this report that there is a need to take into account the issue of biodiversity in the reform for the Common Agricultural Policy announced under the Agenda 2000 programme .
The strategy also stresses the ecological role of rural areas and the devotion to agricultural methods which favour biodiversity .
I support these recommendations in principle .
With regard to genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) and the possible impact of their release on biodiversity , it is proposed that the matter be dealt with by means of national legislation under which Member States would explicitly be allowed to adopt more stringent measures than those imposed at European Union level .
I do not particularly agree with this approach , because I feel that the European Union - through the European Commission and the European Parliament - should have the necessary foresight to legislate in a tough and reasoned manner .
I feel that this matter should be dealt with at the level of the European Union so as to ensure uniformity in the rules which apply within all the Member States and territories of the EU itself .
I am happy to give my support to this report which calls for our attention to be more focused on preserving the biodiversity of our natural environment .
Biodiversity is a scientific term of course - to me it means the sheer variety of animals , birds and plants we find , or sometimes used to find , in our countryside .
In my own country one of the mistakes of past EU policies for the agricultural sector is now increasingly acknowledged as the active encouragement of intensive , large field farming .
The most visible sign of this in Britain has been the destruction of mile after mile of ancient hedgerows , which in the past had acted as homes and corridors for countless species of animal and plant life .
I am looking to the reforms to be agreed for the future common agricultural policy to move from intensive agriculture to more environmentally-friendly ways of farming and rural development - how about moving a little subsidy from excess crop production to the replanting of British hedgerows ?
As I follow the enlargement of the EU to central and eastern Europe , I will be backing the report 's idea that applicant states should make biodiversity protection a key part of their membership bids .
The East should not be encouraged to repeat the mistakes of the West in our CAP designed for the 1950s when environmentally-friendly farming was hardly the fashion .
( The sitting was adjourned at 1.15 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

1999 Budget - Expiry of ECSC Treaty - 1999 ECSC Budget ( continued )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on the 1999 budget and the ECSC .
Mr President , I would like to take up the debate where the previous speaker , the socialist chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Samland , left off .
He argued very clearly in favour of placing the humanitarian aid in the reserve in view of the Commission 's refusal to let Parliament have the UCLAF information and that concerning the financial control of the so-called ' serious irregularities ' in ECHO .
Thanks to the pressure from this amendment and the good offices of the President of Parliament , Mr Gil-Robles , we have succeeded in obtaining an agreement from Mr Santer by which he undertakes , by letter , to ensure due compliance with and broad interpretation of Article 206.2 of the Treaty .
And that is why last night , in the Committee on Budgets , the common factor of the speeches of all the members of the Group of the European People 's Party was raising the reserve .
As regards Mr Santer 's letter , I want to make it clear to you that when he says the rapporteur for the ECHO report had still not been to look at the file , it is because the Commission 's Secretariat-General has not allowed me to study it with a translator and an official from the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Tell Mr Santer that when he talks about omitting the names mentioned in the ECHO file on grounds of confidentiality , he is being disingenuous , because all the names have already appeared in the European press before anyone in Parliament has seen a single paper .
And please do not fail to remind Mr Santer that there is no greater lie than a half truth , so the UCLAF and financial control files must be handed over entire and complete , both to Parliament and to the courts .
How can they explain the fact that UCLAF recommended the immediate dismissal of an official from his position and the order was not transmitted until eight months later ?
Mr President , I could not conclude without saying that this is a serious matter , recognised as such by the Court of Auditors , the Anti-Fraud Unit and the Commission 's financial control .
This is another reason to deplore the demagogy used when claims have been made that the PPE Group and the Greens have taken the starving children of the Great Lakes , the women of Sudan or the widows of Bosnia hostage .
Yes , yes , it has been said that we are holding them hostage in our private war with the Commission .
But that is demagogy , because the only thing we want to do is kidnap fraud and corruption and make them disappear .
Because if we do not make fraud and corruption disappear , then ECHO and MED and PHARE and TACIS and so many others will disappear . And above all we must make no mistake , we must not look for fraud where the aid is destined , we must look for fraud at the origin of the programmes , because there are no luxury hotels in the Great Lakes , nor are there any large brand new cars with Bosnian licence plates .
And anyone looking for an enjoyable weekend goes to Haiti , not Sudan .
Mr President , who is taking hostages : those who want to end corruption or those who are trying to hide their responsibilities behind the misery of the most unfortunate ?
It does little service to the future of the Union if we believe that this is all about northeners avid for transparency hounding corrupt southerners .
It is precisely we southerners who need to see the end of fraud and corruption , because when the last euro gets to its destination we will no longer find that talking about the new financial perspective means talking about cuts in the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund . If the net contributors want to pay less , there they have the scissors and pliers to cut down and tear up fraud and corruption , since there is no need to cut programmes and policies with a legal basis .
The 1.27 % of GNP is worth a great deal more .
Mr President , the European Union budget now being discussed is a very responsible and disciplined one .
Sufficient appropriations have , however , been allocated in the most essential areas .
I would also like at this stage to thank Mrs Dührkop-Dührkop , Mr Viola and Mr Giansily for their excellent work .
With regard to Parliament I am firstly pleased that the office of the Ombudsman is being strengthened , thus creating opportunities to develop this new and most worthy institution .
Secondly , the budget also contains a review of Members ' travel expenses .
Expenses are to be paid only for the actual costs incurred , which I think is the right solution .
The status of Members and the issue of equality will now be dealt with by the Council , and here the so-called dual mandate issue rears its head .
Can the same person be a full-time Member of two different Parliaments at the same time in two different places ?
The Commission 's budget now contains an exceptionally high level of appropriations in the reserve .
This has been a growing trend over the years .
The largest reserve is the ECU 1 500 million for the Structural Funds .
The under-use of the Structural Funds and the way they build up by the end of the programme are real problems .
It is not as if there were no need for them , as is borne out by Europe 's huge unemployment figures and regional inequalities .
Appropriations are being administered in a way that is too bureaucratic , ponderous and confusing .
The Commission and the Member States are applying a bureaucratic system to the administration of the Structural Funds that is out of all proportion to the amounts of money that need to be spent .
The biggest political reserve is for humanitarian aid , all ECU 330 million of which have been put into a reserve fund for further investigation and continued action by the Commission .
If it were a matter of anything other than humanitarian aid , this would be understandable .
But Parliament 's intention to put pressure on the Commission to help people who are suffering is questionable .
Hopefully Mr Santer 's letter and measures taken by the Commission will speedily resolve the situation .
The second sizeable reserve is for the TACIS programme .
One condition for releasing the funds is that the Commission must present to Parliament its overall strategy for solving the acute economic and political crisis in Russia .
I believe this is an impossible demand .
Three hundred years ago , the Frenchman Montesquieu put forward his doctrine on the three-way division of power , which forms a basis for constitutional government in western states .
According to this , the legislative , the executive and the judicial powers have to remain distinct from one another ; otherwise a nation 's citizens are vulnerable to despotism .
Perhaps we too should consider the three-way division of power in future , or , in other words , to what extent the European Parliament is a legislative and monitoring body and to what extent it should become involved in actual implementation .
Mr President , at the outset I want to congratulate all those who have prepared the various reports .
Looking at last year 's budget , ECU 40 billion out of some ECU 83.5 billion was paid to the common agricultural policy , which is one of the core elements of the annual budget .
The common agricultural policy is an integral part of the European Union and it is designed to keep farmers on the land , protect the European Union food supply and enhance rural development .
The policy has been in place since 1962 and has at all times been centrally administered by the Commission .
This is the way it should remain .
I refer to this issue because of the recent publication by the Commission of possible options for the future spending of Union funding .
One of the options under consideration which alarms me somewhat is that 25 % of direct income supports for European Union farmers be directly paid out by the exchequer of the Member States of the Union .
This is a dangerous proposal for a number of reasons .
Firstly , it would only suit those Member States which are not dependent on the agricultural industry , while it would have devastating effects for countries which have strong agricultural industries .
Agriculture as an industry is three times more important to Ireland 's economy than to that of many other European States .
Last year Ireland received some £ IRL 1500 million under the common agricultural policy .
If it were to be implemented , this proposal would lead to the renationalisation of the CAP .
It would have horrendous effects whereby different EU governments would engage in a process of outbidding each other in terms of the amount of grants they could allocate to the national farmers .
Let us be abundantly clear about one thing : the renationalisation of CAP would lead to a fragmentation of the CAP itself which would fly in the face of the social and economic policy objectives of the Union .
On another note , the European Union can never prosper , notwithstanding its economic success , if it alienates the less well-off and marginalised in a society , many of whom are farmers in my country .
More work needs to be done regarding the twin evils of long-term unemployment and social deprivation .
The decision to reduce the allocation for structural fund programmes in 1999 is certainly not to be welcomed .
In particular I want to welcome the proposal to provide another ECU 100 million for peace and reconciliation which was referred to so many times today by our Nobel Prize Winner , John Hume .
I am delighted with this , but we have to look to the future - there is no provision for the future .
Now that the foundations have been laid , it behoves all of us to find additional monies for the future to pursue peace in Northern Ireland through peace and reconciliation which has been such a success .
Mr President , the policy buzz-word in today 's euro economy is discipline .
The neo-liberalist discipline of the single-alternative policy concerns just people , but not capital or markets .
On the consecrated ground of the market-place discipline is synonymous with deflation , and is not considered to be a third way .
In global and electronic capitalism the markets are sacrosanct and safely beyond the reach of policy , or , in other words , discipline .
You can control people with policy , but not markets or capital .
Therefore people cannot trust policy that does not have alternatives .
While record sums of money are being made in the stock exchange sweepstakes , the price is being paid for it in the shape of mass unemployment .
Monetary policy is a European Central Bank monopoly .
We need a democratic body to oversee it , a council on financial policy that is concerned with employment and social matters .
The devaluation of the dollar is not only a monetary policy issue .
I would like to draw attention to one item in the budget , or rather not so much the item itself as the thinking behind it .
The European Parliament is imposing conditions in the budget for the provision of aid for Russia under the TACIS programme .
For aid to be continued , and it has been the western consultancy agencies that have done better out of it than Russia has , Russia is being told to continue with its ' policy of reforms ' .
In Russia reform and poverty go hand in hand .
They are synonymous , as are reform and racketeering , and reform and corruption .
The European Parliament 's resolution therefore wanted poverty , racketeering and corruption to continue in Russia before we supply it with the TACIS new technology aid .
In practice this might mean that our aid programme to Russia will end .
That might well be a good thing , if the only alternative is the continued programme of reforms we demand of Russia and our support for Yeltsin 's sick and corrupt administration .
The best human rights policy for Russia would be if the EU ended aid to Yeltsin .
There are a lot more victims of Yeltsin in Russia and Chechnya than of Pinochet in Chile .
Before we tell others how they ought to behave , it would occasionally be a good idea to take a look in the mirror and put our own house in order .
I am referring here to the urgent and fundamental reforms needed in MEPs ' salaries and travel expenses .
In the Nordic countries a politician cannot earn more than ECU 10 000 net per month after expenses for public duties , as I , for example , am getting today in this Chamber .
We have to create a new expenses claims system , and it should be brought into effect this week here in Strasbourg .
For this we need a single-alternative policy : travel expenses may only be claimed for bona fide costs incurred .
The Committee on Budgets has laid down the lines in this matter .
We need a Statute for Members , but we cannot wait forever .
Mr President , I have a comment on what Mr Seppänen was just saying .
Of course we cannot accept the principle of travel expenses being organised as part of our salary , and we should also lay that idea to rest this week .
I wanted , however , to say a word on the general debate : gone are the days when we could simply say that economising is certainly a good thing , and deregulation is fantastic ; today , the situation is rather different . The expiry of the European Coal and Steel Community shows - and this is actually the issue I wished to address - that the radical belief in market forces over the last 15 years has claimed unnecessary victims .
Instead of developing the European Coal and Steel Community into an agency on industrial policy , which would be able to tackle the problems of the energy and raw materials sector in a really constructive way , we have simply dissolved it and said : the market will see to the rest .
Now we have to deal with the problem of what to do with the enormous reserves accumulated .
It is quite right that we should allow them to benefit the sector , and here we need to consider more generally how , through a targeted industrial policy , we can revitalise this sector in the long term .
Mr President , nearly ECU 100 billion , or 750 billion Danish kroner , can be spent in the EU next year .
The Danish contribution will top DKK 15 billion by the turn of the millennium .
Danes are now going to pay more in their contribution to the EU than farmers and others in Denmark receive from the Union .
A typical family with a father , mother and two children will be paying DKK 11 000 on an annual basis .
The problem is not just that it is expensive insurance .
The problem is that a great deal of EU spending does not prevent , but causes damage .
Consumers and taxpayers pay high prices for products which encourage the use of pesticides and growth promoters , which gives rise to new expenditure for storage and destruction , without the farmers getting a reasonable income for their daily toil .
The net effect , it seems , is that we pay directly for the spoiling of our water .
Imagine if we stopped all the support for destruction and let our EU contribution assist a changeover to organic farming or promote sustainable development in poor countries and regions , or imagine if the budget and the accounts were made so transparent that democratically elected representatives could check every record and citizens could see what had been appropriated for whom .
Why not post all the EU accounts on the Internet , Mr Liikanen , so that it would be more difficult for fraudsters to live off EU funds ?
Here in Parliament too , we shall be able to set a good example on Thursday by cleaning out our own pigsty and finally switching to the procedure of only refunding expenses actually incurred .
I would urge everyone to vote for our amendment to the Viola report .
It is the thirty-eighth time we have tabled it , so I hope that it will also be the last .
Mr President , one question immediately occurs to us on examining this budget , which meets the need for rigour imposed by present circumstances : will Europe 's citizens be footing the Union 's bill out of their own pockets yet again ?
After Edinburgh , where it was decided that the EU budget for economic and social cohesion would be raised to 0.46 % of GDP , we are today being presented with a tight budget , one justified by the need to assist the Member States in their efforts to gear up for the euro , but above all to provide structural support for enlargement .
We wonder how the various Member States ' difficulties in terms of cofinancing projects can be resolved during these hard times , when a reduction of ECU 500 m in payment appropriations alone is being recommended for next year .
How , above all , can we convince our citizens that the Community is justified in showing solidarity towards the new democracies of Eastern Europe , which face an overwhelming task in developing their infrastructure , environment , production sector and human resources ?
The Commission has opted for a radical solution , harnessing the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund in their entirety to the requirements of enlargement : Alleanza Nazionale is convinced that this is necessary and proper , especially if we consider that the CEECs have only recently emerged from under the Communist yoke .
They are , nevertheless , in equal need of support from a political union - culpably slow in the making - which could at the very least lend some shape to a disparate array of policies , and of an institutional reform to give the citizens a voice at long last by placing the European Parliament at the forefront of the legislative and decision-making procedure .
The European people require strong signals and the knowledge that they are supported by representatives who are mindful of their interests and demands .
Unfortunately , we hear all too much nowadays of poor financial management in the case of the PHARE and TACIS programmes , and even of fraud and irregularities in that of ECHO .
Finally , I would like to speak out in favour of Europe 's public servants , who are now being faced with enforced cutbacks in the establishment plan , staff freezes and overhauled social security and pension schemes .
Let us beware , because a civil service under fire and demoralised would endanger the efficiency and independence of the institutions !
Mr President , in very sincerely congratulating the rapporteur I want to go beyond formality and parliamentary courtesy .
I have been through enough budgetary procedures by now to be able to say that this is undoubtedly one of the most peaceful as regards conflicts and frustration amongst committees and groups , at least as far as the rapporteur 's area of responsibility is concerned .
I also want to highlight the fact that this is the first general rapporteur from the Socialist Group who is a woman .
And she is also the first Spanish Member to occupy the position .
Moving on to the substance , I have two roles to fulfill : one as rapporteur for the Interinstitutional Agreement and the financial perspective , and the other as a representative of the Socialist Group .
My group has asked me to concentrate on the link between the Interinstitutional Agreement , the financial perspective and the present budget - the one we are debating - which is a fundamental concept for the rapporteur and our Socialist Group .
Although the State Secretary has gone , I am sure that the representatives of the Council will pass this on to him .
In addition , I have seen enough members and officials of the Committee on Budgets here to be sure that what I have to say will reach the Council .
Mr President , nobody is more convinced than I am of the general usefulness of a budgetary interinstitutional agreement and some medium-term prospects .
Some people miss the never-ending conflicts of pre-1988 budgets .
I will not go so far as to quote the saying about living in interesting times , but I prefer to reserve my excitement for other occasions and causes and to keep the budgetary peace as far as possible .
I think the 1988 and 1993 agreements were a sign of progress .
They were agreements on major decisions that allowed the harmonious development of the principal European Union policies to take place in peace and serenity at important times of change , such as the single market , the single currency , etcetera .
This peace and serenity is also required in facing up to the challenges of the first years of the 21st century , including pre-accession and perhaps even accession .
In the past I criticised - and I do not take back a single word - the flaws in the Commission 's proposal and underlined the weakness of some of the hypotheses on which it is based .
I will not labour the point .
But I do want to highlight two negative aspects of the financial perspective the Commission is proposing that are relevant today : if Article 203 of the Treaty were strictly applied and the increase in gross national product were 2.5 % a year , as the Commission assumes , the Member States ' budgets would , in fact , have to fall annually by 1.1 % to equal your proposed figures .
A higher percentage - for example , if the fall were only 0.5 % - or even any positive percentage would mean that the Article 203 option would turn out to be more advantageous than the Commission 's financial perspective .
Furthermore , the proposals mean that the European Parliament will decide throughout this period - 2000-2006 - on some EUR 20 billion less of non-compulsory expenditure than this Article 203 would permit and , in addition , it could do this or would do this in a new context without restrictions in terms of Article 203 .
What is offered in exchange for that sacrifice of Parliament 's powers ?
The answer is basic and we have already stated it several times : political power .
There are two areas where we can make progress : one is the resolution of old disputes , such as classification , which has dragged on since 1982 , but above all there is flexibility .
I would say that flexibility is the key word , covering revision clauses and certain opportunities for transfers between categories or carryovers .
We must define it and we are ready to look at any formula .
But be aware , representatives of the Council , that without flexibility there will be no agreement .
The Council does not seem to understand that to sign an interinstitutional agreement there must be at least two parties , usually three , but at least two , and one of these two is Parliament .
The same thing happened last time .
It took us a year and a half to draw up the Agreement .
After Edinburgh , the British Presidency thought it had completed the negotiations but the Agreement was signed by the Belgian Presidency a year later .
The next Belgian Presidency is in the year 2001 .
I hope to sign before then , but if there is no flexibility I give you advance warning that we may end up signing in 2001 .
In view of the lack of dialogue with the Council and because we have no faith in its capacity for reaction , we have been obliged , with the general rapporteur , to table some amendments - the ones we call strategic amendments - which use up the ceiling of the various categories .
Their objective , their real intention - as we know , and as we have always stated - is certainly not to be wasted but simply to give those responsible for the budgets in the Member States heart attacks .
Or rather , joking apart , their objective is for Parliament to do its duty properly and bequeath to the new European Parliament , which will be elected in June 1999 , either an adequate and flexible agreement or a sufficient basis for non-compulsory expenditure allowing the new Parliament to define its budgetary priorities easily if it has to do so using Article 203 .
Do not accuse us of squandering now .
After a great fuss , it turned out that last year - or the financial year in progress , 1998 - the Member States increased their budgets by more than the European Parliament increased the Community budget .
So do not accuse us of that , representatives of the Council .
This Parliament has been thrifty and you know that .
It has spent ECU 80 billion less than was agreed with you for the 1988-1999 period .
If we had put that in a savings bank , we would now be paying for the enlargement in cash , but we gave it back to the Ministers for Finance , representatives of the Council .
But you have no guarantee that the Parliament elected in June will follow that thrifty path .
Take that on board .
If we reach agreement , we all know perfectly well that the Treaty and the Financial Regulation contain methods of removing the dreadful inconveniences these amendments might cause the treasuries of the Member States .
In this context , you will understand that I was opposed to an amendment seeking to create a reserve of EUR 500 m for emergencies in Russia and the former Soviet Union .
Its aim is undoubtably laudable , but it lacks any legal basis and contravenes the agreement on legal bases that we signed on 17 July last .
I would call on my colleagues who proposed it yesterday to think again .
We will lose credibility if this amendment is approved in the House .
If it were approved , it would weaken and undermine the negotiating capacity and the credibility of this institution in the negotiations in progress on the Interinstitutional Agreement .
So I ask you to think it over and not to support it in the House .
The other point I would like to make relates to the famous 100 % reserve of part D operational appropriations .
In my opinion , one of the European Union 's most positive external actions , our emergency humanitarian aid , has been taken hostage to resolve some irregularities that are out of all proportion to the sanction .
It has been said that saying this is demagogy .
Obviously I do not share that view .
I think taking these appropriations and putting them in the reserve is demagogy .
That is indeed pure demagogy .
You cannot call for action in Kosovo or Russia and at the same time put the necessary appropriations in a reserve which begins on 1 January and so prevents us taking action in Kosovo or Russia on 1 January .
The only plausible explanation , in my opinion , is that it is easier to vote this reserve through in public than to shoulder the political consequences there would be for the discharge procedure if there were a real belief in the statements made .
Contrary to what some people here say , this is a way for Parliament to duck its political responsibilities .
Parliament has a path to follow : the discharge procedure , not the budgetary procedure .
I would like to make two very personal final points , ladies and gentlemen .
First , I want to support the proposals we made in the Committee on Budgets and also highlight all references to anti-personnel mine deactivation programmes as far as possible . At the same time , I want to congratulate the rapporteur on her formula for resolving the financing in favour of minority languages .
Having said that , let me appeal to the conscientiousness of the current Council Presidency so that between now and December we can make progress towards the solutions needed for the European Union budget over the coming years .
Mr President . I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop .
As the rapporteur for the 1998 budgetary procedure , I know what is on her mind at present , and what will be on her mind in the weeks to come , because we have entered the decisive phase of the budget deliberations .
She has endeavoured to present us with a balanced budget .
She has consistently strived for a greater degree of transparency and efficiency where expenditure is concerned .
That is why I agree with Mr Colom I Naval that the 1999 budgetary procedure is nothing out of the ordinary .
I should therefore like to draw your attention to a few special features of this budget .
Last year , we cut back on the number of Commission studies - which are , after all , assigned to every single budget line .
This year , the rapporteur has made a more radical proposal - in itself a good idea - to move this expenditure into part A of the budget in connection with the BUTS .
This will improve the Commission 's control over the expenditure and will increase our confidence in this respect .
Last year , we laid down criteria for the subsidies in part A of the budget . In the course of the 1998 budget , the Commission has responded to this and taken measures .
It has not only introduced criteria for the subsidies in part A of the budget , but has also decided on some for part B and introduced them . Now we have a problem - the problem which is overshadowing the whole of the deliberations on the 1999 budget - namely spending by ECHO and spending on PHARE and TACIS , where the Liikanen facility is concerned .
Parliament and the Commission are very distrustful of each other here .
At its first reading , the Committee on Budgets decided to enter a reserve for humanitarian aid .
This happened after the hearing of the three Commissioners in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
We listened to the Commissioners ' comments and explanations , but the Committee on Budgets thought that this was insufficient .
That is why the reserve was created .
The majority of the Budgets Committee were in favour and thought that the reserve would help to increase the pressure on the Commission to provide us with more information , along the lines of the UCLAF report .
The target of the reserve - and I am emphasising this in view of the fact that journalists and visitors are listening to us from the gallery - is not humanitarian aid and its recipients .
That means that we are not trying to stop or hinder humanitarian aid , but to ensure that spending on humanitarian aid is transparent and that the humanitarian aid actually reaches those for whom it is intended .
But what has happened since the reserve was created ?
The Commission has reacted .
The President of the Commission made a statement at the last part-session .
The President of the Commission has had an exchange of letters with the President of Parliament , and has also said that he is willing to make the necessary documents available to Parliament or the Committee on Budgetary Control for their perusal .

Regarding what Mr Samland said , I do not agree that Mr Liikanen or the President of the Commission should inform the Committee on Budgetary Control , in camera , of whether a complete set of documents is now also available to the courts .
I would like the Commissioner to address this issue today , as it is actually a familiar one .
I agree with Mr Wynn that the 1999 budget should not penalise humanitarian aid .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party invite all Members of this House to fight with us for the principle of transparent expenditure .
Because - and , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I should like to recall this for the sake of all those who have forgotten it again today - we concluded in letter K , that there has been a substantial increase in payment appropriations earmarked for humanitarian aid , in view of the developments in the sector in the last years , and that we are , therefore , in favour of an increase .
However , in the light of UCLAF 's inquiries in connection with irregularities in the execution of contracts for humanitarian aid , such funds should be put into a reserve in order to encourage the Commission to give Parliament full information on the situation between the first and second readings of the budget .
Yesterday or today there were reports in Le Monde and Die Welt stating that there are also irregularities associated with Altener , Thermie , and technical assistance in the case of Chernobyl .
That is why this matter cannot be regarded as closed , and we still have to face up to this task .
I would sincerely invite you to do so .
Mr President , I was very pleased to see how much importance the rapporteur attaches in her text to continuing the procedure we used last year in setting the farm budget .
I think this is most important , because the agriculture budget has to be based on the best forecasts available .
Secondly , this increases the influence which Parliament is able to exert , and that is good for democracy .
It is premature at this stage to say that the farm budget should remain at the same level or maybe even be cut .
What counts most for me is that the Commission and thus the European Union should stick to what has been agreed .
If it is true that expenditure turns out to be higher than expected , then that is unfortunate , but if it is lower , then automatically that is regarded as a welcome bonus .
We have to proceed on a basis of budgeting as realistically as possible , and at the same time we must discharge the obligations we have entered into .
There is one thing I have to say about the farm budget .
Last year , we expressly asked the Commission to clarify an important budget line , namely accompanying measures .
These are particularly important in that there will be more and more talk in future of cross-compliance with regard to income subsidies .
We asked the Commission for a report on those measures .
It came at the very last moment , just ahead of the second reading .
But it was a report made up solely of statistics - somewhat on the lean side .
Surely it was not beyond the Commission to produce an analysis of which environmentally friendly farming methods had been the most successful in the Member States ?
How is it that only five of the 15 Member States draw on the budget lines for accompanying measures , when everyone talks about a better environment and so on ?
These , I think , are the essential things we need to know as we prepare for the forthcoming round of Agenda 2000 and all the rest .
So I would welcome an assurance from the Commission that it will supply us with comprehensive information on the budget line for accompanying measures .
Mr President , I welcome the opportunity to speak briefly in this debate .
I welcome in particular proposals in the draft budget for an 8.8 % increase in appropriations which would provide adequate funding for the current round of structural funds .
I believe this is important .
I do not have to remind the House of the importance of structural programmes as an instrument for the economic and social development of the regions .
I hope that these programmes continue into the future .
I wish , however , in particular to put down a marker in the context of future EU budgets , particularly in the period 2000 to 2006 , and to reject proposals emanating from the Commission which suggest a move towards the renationalisation of the common agricultural policy .
The people responsible for this heresy need to be stopped in their tracks .
The economic and social philosophy of the European Union is clearly outlined in their own treaty .
To these new , self-appointed architects of European reconstruction I say : you are doing a serious disservice to the concept of European solidarity and undermining the foundation which has brought us to where we are today within the European Union .
From an agricultural perspective this Parliament is now aware of the serious threats to the European farm model based on family farming .
We are aware of the role of farmers as guarantors of food security and quality .
We are aware of the serious threat to Europe 's rural infrastructure through rural depopulation .
We have brought forward proposals to address many of these problems .
We must now stand up to those who would deny us the lifeline to implement the policies which are necessary to deal with these massive European problems .
Mr President , the constraints linked to the introduction of the single currency in 1999 are weighing on the national budgets and on the Community budget .
It is the sectors of education , social welfare and employment which are most threatened in these rigorous budgets , including at Community level .
We cannot debate the 1999 budget without considering the European Commission document on future financing .
Under pressure from Germany , the Commission has submitted several options , with the aim of rebalancing the national contributions to the Community budget .
The Commission is attempting to satisfy Germany , without regard for any harm which may be caused to the fundamental principles of European construction , such as financial solidarity .
This is particularly true both with the extension to other countries of the rebate on the UK contribution and with the partial renationalisation of aid to farmers .
Germany , which initiated these proposals , seems poorly placed to demand lower payments when you consider the economic and commercial advantages which it gains from the single market .
Its trading surplus should exceed FRF 500 billion in 1998 , the majority of it from the Community market .
This is a real record .
I agree with the recent assessment by the future German Minister for Foreign Affairs , Joschka Fischer .
Germany is , physically and politically , the main net beneficiary of the European integration process .
This being the case , there is no justification for Germany being given even more advantages .
Beyond the budget discussions between the Member States , with the rise in importance of the fair return principle which Parliament has always criticised , Europe is managing to paint a sad picture people in the Member States and the applicant countries .
This principle is the very negation of the European Union .
I propose a completely different approach .
We must move away from the shopkeeper mentality , whose only aim is to satisfy the appetites of financiers , and reverse the logic of the Community budget by basing it on the principle of solidarity : solidarity with those sectors which are struggling the most and with the poorest regions ; solidarity with the European people , by responding to their need for jobs , purchasing power and social welfare ; solidarity with the people of the applicant countries , by respecting their experiences and their desires and not imposing on them the diktat of the acquis communautaire
In order to ensure this solidarity , the Community appropriations must be used differently , for example by concentrating them on the sectors in crisis and on the most underdeveloped regions , by imposing a ceiling on aid to farmers and by developing employment and training policies .
However , we must also generate new income without burdening taxpayers , for example by looking for resources from the financial markets which have broadly profited from the liberalisation of capital .
Why not plan a new Community resource based on the taxation of financial transactions ?
Mr President , I certainly would like to make a small contribution to this debate .
I congratulate the rapporteurs and all involved .
I welcome the continued support for the special programme for Northern Ireland .
I would like to thank the Committee on Budgets for the way in which it has controlled this issue on this occasion .
We did not have the hype we have had for the past two years .
In Northern Ireland the Peace and Reconciliation Programme has been doing a very good job .
It has created new ideas and shown new ways forward .
However , the whole future of the structural funds has to be borne in mind as well and there will be a fair battle ahead in this Parliament over the next six to nine months when we discuss Agenda 2000 and the entire reform package .
While we continue to give massive support to the agricultural industry , throughout the European Union the industry is bleeding and dying .
In my own area farmers in my lifetime have never had it so bad .
The situation is impossible .
We are still putting all this money in , so we have to ask the question : where is it all going ?
Is it going the right way , or where are we going wrong ?
Surely the time to examine this is over the next six to nine months .
Farmers cannot continue as at present .
We are going to destroy the whole fabric of rural society if we allow the present situation to continue .
Money itself will not solve this problem .
We need to have a new look at where we are going .
We need to have a new look at our markets .
We need to take a positive position on the way forward .
I appeal to the Commission to take this point on board .
The defence of our small family farms and our rural farms structure must be maintained .
Mr President , I should like to examine certain aspects which , in truth , represent only a tiny percentage of the budget but are of major relevance to Parliament and its relations with the European citizens .
I refer to the education and culture programmes .
This year the budget discussions have been especially tough in this field , and my colleagues and I are very satisfied with the agreement reached on the legal bases .
Although this agreement is positive in respect of interinstitutional relations and at last clarifies thelegal options and creates transparency in the budget , it has placed the rapporteur in a considerable dilemma .
The rapporteur has done a tremendous job concerning the sum earmarked for pilot schemes and preparatory actions , managing to take on board the demands of all the committees and of Parliament as a whole , as well as - most importantly - those of the citizens .
The so-called ' other social operations ' are always something of a Cinderella in the budget , even though they are a means of enabling citizens to identify with Europe and to expect that their problems will be addressed .
The work of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Budgets Committee pre-empted the Amsterdam Treaty , in a sense .
I really would have expected the Council to be equally bold at its first reading .
Although it was not , we were .
I hope that , at second reading , the Council will not assess Parliament 's decisions in its traditional manner , but will comply with the undertakings it made when drawing up the agreement on the legal bases .
In particular , I think that it is important to satisfy the voluntary sector , which has been seeking in recent years to confront problems that cannot be solved by either the Community budget - not being competent to do so - or the Member States .
I should like to draw attention to one final aspect : training .
As the rapporteur said this morning , education and training shape the future of our young people , enabling them to find their way in this frontier-free Europe and look forward to a brighter future .
Finally , I should like to thank the rapporteur once again for having done whatever could be done , and indeed more - within such tight budgetary constraints - to satisfy all concerned .
Mr President , yet another rigorous budget , yet another budget prepared against a backdrop of disagreement about the future financing of the European Union : this exercise , which is repeated every year , is becoming monotonous .
However , this debate should not allow us to forget two important aspects .
The first concerns our desire to bring the Union closer to the concerns of the citizens , which would have been condemned to oblivion if those responsible for implementing the budget had not had to draw lessons from the recently publicised problems .
I do not need to add that each failure in this respect only serves to make people more sceptical , particularly when we are preaching the virtues of rigour at them .
We cannot claim , and this is my second point , to be in tune with the concerns of our fellow citizens if the lack of adequate legal bases means that whole areas from cooperation to social development and commitment are paralysed .
I hope that the Interinstitutional Agreement will put an end to a situation which , in the community arena , has blocked the activities of the most committed people in our society and withheld aid from those who most desperately needed it .
The monotony of the exercise should also not make us forget that the closure of the next financial year , on whose budget we will vote on Thursday , will coincide with the passage from the second to the third millennium .
1999 will be a transition year which will raise yet more questions about the future of our societies and the way in which we intend to meet the major challenges . It will only be positive if our management capacity from our past , and more particularly from the 20th century , remains intact .
In this respect , I am very pleased that the Committee on Budgets accepted our amendment about the republication of the Nuremberg records in the various languages of the European Union .
Although the sums reserved for this may seem derisory , they are still evidence of our desire to substitute our duty to history for our duty of remembrance , given that our memories are failing and history , when widely taught and understood , constitutes the best protection against the pollution of revisionism and denial .
Mr President , let me use the short time available to comment on two seemingly minor points in the budget , which could nonetheless have major consequences .
Just over a year ago , I tabled a proposal here in this Chamber for a campaign to be undertaken in 1999 to combat violence against women .
There was a large supporting majority in the House and the Committee on Women 's Rights put forward a proposal for a very modest budget of ECU 5 million to fund the campaign at EU level .
A majority in committee then rejected the proposal .
I hope that the ECU 5 m will be reinstated when we vote on the budget . There are hundreds of thousands of women throughout the Member States who agree with the majority in this Parliament that this is a matter of great importance .
People might be wondering whether this would lead to an overall increase in the budget . It is worth remembering that we managed to add ECU 5 m for participation in the Hanover World Fair .
I am sure that Europe 's women would appreciate a similar reallocation here too .
I should also like to use this opportunity to say how pleased I am that we voted in favour of having our expenses reimbursed on a real cost basis .
There is of course a problem with linking the expenses issue to a Statute for Members . In my opinion , we are here to represent voters back at home , not to represent the EU institutions vis-à-vis our electorate .
Mr President , a word or two on two important points - the overall budget strategy , but firstly the refunding of expenses .
It is high time Parliament sorted out the matter of expenses .
Already when it looked at the estimates for 1998 , it adopted an amendment that travel and subsistence allowances should be paid on the basis of the actual costs incurred .
A full year later , nothing has been agreed .
This is largely the fault of the Bureau which , up to yesterday evening at least , seemed incapable of dealing with the question of expenses .
Members of the Committee on Budgets quite properly took matters into their own hands .
The amendment by Mr Dankert and others , adopted yesterday evening by the Committee on Budgets , contains some excellent proposals .
Unfortunately , at the insistence of the PPE Group , an addition was made to the effect that the payment of expenses should be covered in a Statute for Members .
This is a malign connection , because it may take a very long time for the Council to approve a statute of that kind .
I urge all Members of the House not to tolerate any further delay in reforming the payment of expenses , and to undo this connection .
Turning to the question of overall strategy , the 1999 budget debate looks like being pivotal in the discussions on the financial perspective for 2000-2006 .
To give Parliament maximum room for manoeuvre , the rapporteur is seeking in 1999 to have the margins beneath the expenditure ceiling carried fully as reserves in the budget .
If Parliament does that , it will be sending out a completely wrong message .
The European Union cannot wriggle out of the budgetary discipline which it is demanding of the EMU countries .
The talks on an interinstitutional agreement envisage the management of expenditure .
It is not acceptable for Parliament to opt for an alternative which will mean maximising spending in 1999 and beyond .
Mr President , I will talk specifically to two amendments .
Firstly , B1-3800 .
We must increase funding for the promotion of beef-eating ; we must advertise beef ; we must cut the amount of beef in very costly intervention storage .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development tabled these amendments , the Committee on Budgets rejected them .
Since then , we have had confirmation of the loss of our Russian market : 400 000 tonnes of European beef went to Russia last year .
That will have to go into expensive storage this year , in addition to the 580 000 tonnes already there .
A huge beef mountain of a thousand million tonnes !
The Committee on Budgets turned down a proposal to increase beef promotion to cut this intervention storage .
If we vote this extra money , we could save on intervention costs - probably up to ECU 100m .
Let us spend ECU 20m to save ECU 100m - this is good economic sense .
Secondly , I hope we will support line B2-518N which would help fund the creation of future jobs involving the exploitation of sheep wool .
Sheep farmers all over Europe are having serious problems .
If only we could get added value for the wool of sheep , besides the meat , it would help our rural areas .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , overall this has the potential to be a sound budget , and I should particularly like to thank the rapporteur for her commitment to this budgetary procedure .
It is a bridging budget to the next financial perspective , and it should also be a budget which will help to prepare the ground for introducing the necessary flexibility in the future agreement between the institutions .
I also think that the way in which the European Parliament has framed a sound budgetary and financial policy in recent years should make it easier for the Council to take the first practical steps towards concluding the necessary agreements with Parliament over the next few weeks .
On Category 1 , I think we need to develop the Tillich-Mulder procedure further , to allow agricultural expenditure to be forecast as precisely and accurately as possible , but at the same time to formalise , in the budget , the commitments entered into .
Our experience with this procedure has been good .
But I also wish to add that this procedure will only be able to prove itself in the long term and receive the support of this House if it is adjusted , firstly to take account of budgetary discipline , but also to provide some room for manoeuvre one way or another in the decision-making process , before the final decision is made .
The Tillich-Mulder procedure - I will say this quite explicitly - is not meant to make the management of agricultural expenditure one-sided .
Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , yesterday in the Committee on Budgets we made some slight changes to the original text of your motion for a resolution .
There were some phrases which might have compelled those concerned not to trust completely the singing of the Agenda 2000 sirens , and also to be a little sceptical about the Tillich-Mulder procedure for the same reason .
I should like to say something about two particular points concerning us in this budget which are obviously of particular interest to the public - because in the end , the budget itself gives less cause for general concern than the ensuing use of the appropriations - in the light of current problems regarding ECHO , MED and TACIS , to mention three examples .
In the Committee on Budgets , we put the money for ECHO in the reserve and set two conditions for its release .
In the meantime , we have received the letter from the President of the Commission , Mr Santer , which I welcome .
But I would add that these are promises for the future .
We all know , do we not - from other committees and committees of inquiry - that promises for the future are only made for the purposes of overcoming present difficulties .
That is why , Mr Liikanen , I would very much like a statement from you , in today 's plenary debate , on how the Commission proposes to deal with the second condition , that is the question of handing over documents concerning the fictitious contracts to the judicial authorities competent in each case .
Has that already happened ?
Is it going to happen ?
I say to all Members that this is not about taking humanitarian aid hostage .
We have plenty of time before the second reading .
But anyone whose resolve is weakening today will basically take us into a difficult discharge procedure in December .
That is why we are well advised to tell the Commission that there are two conditions and that these need to be met .
Otherwise , the money will stay in the reserve until the second reading .
In view of the motion , we will certainly also have to take further clear action on this .
One final word on the Viola report and the arrangements for reimbursing Members .
I tell you clearly : without a Statute for Members , we only have the bare bones of a proposal .
Secondly , the Bureau 's proposal does not solve the problem , but is actually a further step towards the realms of the absurd , with obvious preferential treatment for particular groups .
It is just one dubious proposal in place of another .
That is why the motion , adopted yesterday by the Committee on Budgets , is an attempt to form a majority in this House and to take action , so that together - without trading accusations - we can take practical steps towards finding a workable solution , not only for travel expenses , but for the whole issue of allowances , reimbursement arrangements and the legal status of Members of the European Parliament .
Mr President , the European Union 's draft budget for 1999 is a particularly harsh and restrictive austerity budget , a budget dictated by the harsh financial policy imposed by progress towards EMU and the stability pact .
Once again the Commission and the Council have become exponents of monetarism at the cost of social policy and the social rights of working people .
The Commission and the Council have learned nothing from the continuing worldwide financial crisis which is already a threat to the real economy , to development and to employment .
They have learned nothing from the dramatic consequences of the restrictive policy squeezing Europe 's citizens .
Farmers , mainly those in the South , working people , entrepreneurs in the small and medium-sized cottage industry sector , young people and pensioners have all reached the limits of their endurance .
They cannot cope with still more austerity .
These financial perspectives and budgets are not going to improve the situation of citizens or of the Union 's less prosperous countries .
The European Parliament , as the Union 's only elected body , must at some point speak up for Europe 's citizens and send out a message denouncing this policy and demanding that it should be reversed by voting against this austerity budget directed against the peoples of Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must say first of all that the budget on which we will be voting on Thursday morning has the peculiar characteristic of containing some very high figures for research and development . Clearly , these are purely theoretical figures as they relate to a sort of game within the European Parliament which has produced a compromise between the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy and the Committee on Budgets based on the preliminary draft budget tabled by the Commission .
Actually , the conciliation procedure between Parliament and the Council of Ministers is not over , and I must say that the situation as it stands does not give cause for optimism .
We had hoped that a conciliation agreement would be reached just before the vote in the Committee on Budgets .
Unfortunately , this is clearly a long way off , to the extent that I cannot today guarantee - and I am personally quite pessimistic - that we will have an agreement before the second reading of the budget . This would certainly put us in an extremely difficult situation .
How can we give a legal basis to the research expenditure which we would be required to allocate from 1 January 1999 if there is no agreement with the Council ?
My pessimism is based on the gap between the Parliament and Council positions - 16.3 billion for Parliament and 14.3 billion for the Council , give or take a little - and particularly on the atmosphere in which the conciliation procedure is taking place .
We really do not feel that the Council of Ministers wants to reach agreement here .
On the one hand , the Council is completely obsessed with the revision of the financial perspectives and it wants to impose on Parliament a clause which goes against the rights conferred on Parliament under the Treaties .
On the other hand , we have the impression that , despite everything , the Council wants to advance very carefully , as if it were already convinced that the financial perspectives would be even more unfavourable than at present in terms of resources .
We are therefore at an impasse and I cannot exclude the possibility that we may attempt an agreement with the Council for just one year , 1999 , and defer the overall agreement for the following four years of the framework programme until after the revision of the financial perspectives .
We must therefore consider this seriously when we vote on the research budgets on Thursday and we must ensure that the Commission , which is an important intermediary - I nearly said mediator - between the Council and Parliament , and particularly the Council bring whatever pressure is necessary to bear on the ministers for research .
Finally , I would draw your attention to the fact that the operation of phasing the ECSC into the budget of the framework programme for research has still not really been dealt with , as we are not sure whether the framework programme will include research on coal .
Mr President , I will not go into details of the various articles and chapters of the budget - other speakers have analysed them sufficiently - but will restrict myself to expressing a number of general thoughts concerning the role of the budget and how that role is developing .
In fact , if we consider the development of the European Union 's budget over the years , it is evident that it has contributed to the promotion of policies that have influenced the Union 's development .
In other words , it has basically been a policy instrument , and its manifestations and expressions at various levels demonstrate as much .
The common agricultural policy and its development , the issue of the Structural Funds and the efforts towards convergence , the European Union 's foreign policy and the way it has been financed without bureaucratic impediments at times and has therefore been able to be effective on the few occasions when it has been used ; all this shows that the European Union 's budget is basically a policy instrument .
However , the goal of EMU , whose achievement has entailed the exercise of rigorous financial policy at national level , has encouraged the idea that the Union 's budget must itself be just as strict .
As a result , the budget has been drawn into a short-term mentality which is gradually altering its basic function and leading to the view that revenues should be saved or , more precisely , that Member States should contribute less to the Union 's budget . In fact , we are going back to 1988 levels in terms of the proportion of GNP contributed , as other speakers have already pointed out .
The worrying thing is not the austerity of the budget as such , which will naturally increase awareness that excesses must be avoided and that appropriations must be allocated and utilised sensibly .
What is worrying is the emerging trend of using the net financial contribution , which is somewhat arbitrarily defined , and the principle of subsidiarity , which is equally arbitrarily defined , as a means of partially depriving the budget of its ability to function supportively in the context of EMU and adequately to offset the consequences of differences in the regional development of the EU 's Member States .
In other words , the budget will cease to play an active part and become a completely passive book-keeping exercise .
The European Parliament , which is the custodian of the real policy the budget ought to be pursuing , because that is its role , has certainly grasped the need for the budget to be drawn up and implemented in a sound manner .
The current budget demonstrates that , and further proof is to be found in the recent agreement on legal bases which already applies to the budget under review .
That agreement is very important and it has already begun to bear fruit .
It must , of course , be applied consistently and must not lead to ad hoc deviations which would undermine Parliament 's credibility .
What that agreement achieved was to rid us of many situations not entirely in keeping with the spirit of the European Union in which legal bases were exploited without anyone 's endorsement .
So austerity is not an end in itself .
The 1999 budget is very important because it can become the basis on which financial perspectives are developed .
We must therefore be very careful about the way we formulate it .
We must also distance ourselves a little from the Council 's book-keeping approach which unfortunately tends to prevail .
In the past , when we were drawing up the budget , we started off with the policy we wished to implement .
In other words , we used to say that this is the European Union 's objective , this is the policy it wishes to implement , and then we found the resources .
Now , unfortunately , we do things the other way round and we say : this is the money available ; what can we do with it ?
That does not help the European Union , especially during the critical period we are going through at the moment , a period when everything is changing and which will require genuinely positive action on the part of the European Union .
We will have somehow to reconsider how to restore to the EU budget its true political role .
Mr President , it was stated in this Chamber earlier on today that the European Union budget sends an important message to the citizens of Europe about what issues the Union considers important .
In my opinion , one of the most vital messages that we should be sending out is that we have a sense of responsibility towards those Europeans who are in danger of becoming excluded from society as a result of unemployment , poverty , disability , homelessness or other problems .
In the draft budget we are now discussing there is a proposal for a new item covering measures to combat social exclusion .
ECU 10 million has been allocated for the measures for next year .
When the Treaty of Amsterdam comes into force and places obligations on the Union in this area too , we must be ready and willing to commit much larger sums in the future .
The Council of the European Union has begun a campaign of global solidarity .
I hope that the European Union , and its Member States , will bear a part of this responsibility .
Finally , greetings to Mr Liikanen from the inter-group meeting .
Everyone agreed that the reason for the Commissioner 's absence was perfectly understandable .
Mr President , it goes without saying that ever since the 1980 budget , I find myself looking back nostalgically to 203 , but at the same time I cannot deny that the financial perspective has done much to secure budgetary calm , budgetary balance in relations between the institutions and within Europe too .
So I find it most unfortunate that we currently have finance ministers in Europe who , seeing that the ceiling has not been reached , think that a policy of zero growth has to be applied to the budget .
It is as if they had been bitten by a millennium bug which sets the clock back to 1980 and before .
There are some who have sought zero growth even in their own national budgets .
That defies belief , of course .
It cannot be and it must not be .
Looking at how the budget has developed in recent years between Parliament and the Council , I see that the budget has developed in a very controlled manner , that it has been very close to zero growth and would even have been below that had it not been for the Council - the Council - deciding to make a considerable increase in the Structural Funds , which in fact I welcome , and which led to this extra growth .
Parliament has not been guilty of profligate spending even in recent years .
We too have shown great restraint in the budgetary process .
But that does not mean you can now say that zero growth must be the rule for the next few years .
We are in favour of enlargement .
Whilst the Commission has already done a few sums on the cost of enlargement , it is not clear exactly how much the cost will be .
My feeling is that the Commission errs on the side of caution .
And then , looking at the agricultural markets - the honourable Member behind me raised the question of meat just now - the CAP will be yielding fewer windfalls than it has done in the past .
Payments out of the Structural Funds will fall due after 2000 which are not included in the financial perspective .
In short , then , it is not possible to meet all the challenges facing us if at the same time we decide on this zero growth which is so popular at present with a minority of the Council .
I think that will bring us to a far more serious budgetary situation than we experienced in the early 1980s .
We shall have to try to steer a good course for this budget , maintaining our role as joint budgetary authority , namely Parliament and Council together , and not just a minority of the Council .
So I welcome the fact that Mrs Dührkop does not suggest lowering the financial base for the 2000-2006 negotiations to the level to which the financial perspective for 1999 will bring us .
The difference is about ECU 4 billion , soon to be four billion euros .
We certainly do not want that money to be spent , as has already been said here .
We want to go on having room for manoeuvre in budgetary policy , though the attitude of some finance ministers seems to be threatening its survival .
The budget must make a confident transition into the twenty-first century so that the European Union can take every opportunity which that century affords .
I have a few comments to make on the system of reimbursement of Members ' travel expenses .
And I have to put these to you , because in all honesty I wonder which parliament our Bureau actually represents .
Parliament instructed the Bureau to come up with a proposal for the realistic reimbursement of travel costs .
The Bureau decided on a system in which it is apparent on three counts that an income is being paid as well as travel expenses .
Previously that was hidden in the reimbursement of travel expenses , but now it is explicitly stated in the proposal .
Mr President , if you want problems over this in one or two Member States , that is the right way to go about it .
I recall the judgment of the Court of Justice about travel expenses in the case of an English lord .
If the lawyers get to look at it , the system is doomed from the start .
So the Bureau has failed to carry out its instructions .
Mr Böge said just now : I have a far better solution .
I will put off any solution for ever and a day .
I will vote in favour of actual costs , but I will not introduce the system until we have a Statute .
The Christian Democrats see that as their negotiating position .
I think it is a bad one .
I think the only thing we can do is to accept a proposal based on the Bureau 's decision , namely that reimbursement should be made for actual costs incurred for actual travel .
Amendments have been tabled to that effect .
The Committee on Budgets achieved some progress yesterday , though it was later reversed by Mr Böge 's additional demand .
It is not a compromise , because we are fundamentally in disagreement .
It has to be the case that actual travel costs and only those costs are reimbursed .
Lastly , Mr President , mention has already been made of this , but for the sake of political clarity I will refer again to Turkey .
The Socialist Group advocates scrapping the reserve in the budget line for financial cooperation with Turkey .
That is a direct consequence of the Court of Justice 's decision that a legal basis should be required for budgets .
There is no denying it : there is no legal basis here , and as a result the reserve must go .
It is a pity that some people put a political construction on this .
That is not the intention .
It is the inevitable consequence of what the Council itself has sought to push through in the budget .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the 1999 budget reflects current European policies as they were enshrined in the interinstitutional agreement leading to the Delors II package .
As such , it could be regarded as a good budget all in all .
I wish to express my sincere thanks to our rapporteur , Barbara Dührkop , who with intelligence and perseverance has done an excellent job .
Nonetheless , I should like to make the following points . The 1999 budget respects in full the amounts set aside for Chapter II on the Structural Funds whose application has generally proved to be a success .
The cohesion countries are now either already in the euro zone or , in the case of Greece , making progress towards it .
What has happened in my country , Portugal , is proof of that .
Ten years ago it would have been unthinkable that Portugal would now be part of the founding group of the single currency .
Our extraordinary growth rate shows that , if correctly applied , European regional policies , along with the opening and creation of the single European market , are a vital instrument of cohesion and harmonious development .
When negotiating the next interinstitutional agreement and Agenda 2000 we should bear those results in mind . Otherwise , we risk destroying the European development model achieved after so many years .
I should also like to welcome the fact that , in the chapter on the Structural Funds , the European Parliament 's budget proposal calls for more money to help the ultraperipheral regions - in the case of my country , the Azores and Madeira .
On agriculture , the policies applied in this budget do nothing to correct the unfair imbalances between different types of agriculture and farmers .
I hope that current discussions on CAP reform will bring an end to this scandal .
As far as internal policies are concerned , the European Parliament 's proposal bolsters the action programmes on environmental protection , renewable energies , consumer protection , school exchanges , historic heritage restoration , occupational and social integration for those with special difficulties , sexual equality , NGOs , job creation , assistance for SMEs , and others .
In effect , the European Parliament has done what the Council was loath to do .
It has scrutinised the programmes and policies that give the European Union a human face , seen what progress has been made , and demanded and approved the amounts needed for them to continue .
Showing a total lack of consistency and , I would even say , stupidly and cynically the Council of Ministers brutally cut back these programmes even as the Heads of State and Government were heaping praise on them in their European Council statements .
On foreign policy , I would like to stress the role of the European Parliament and my political group in insisting on having more details about the rumours of fraud and misuse of funds in the ECHO Programme .
The Commission has tried to cover up these very serious accusations in order to protect someone - exactly who , we do not know . Were it not for the decisive action taken by the European Parliament there would have been no transparency nor would plans have been made to set up an independent body with more teeth than the current UCLAF .
Just another couple of points : we wish to support the amendment tabled to restore the ECU 50 million to be spent on tropical forests .
We also support the strategic global reserve so that the Year 2000 budget can start out from a reasonable base should the European Parliament and the Council fail to agree on Agenda 2000 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to reiterate what Mr Böge said about ECHO .
Mr Liikanen , please take this matter seriously .
We both know that we have not yet heard the last of these suspected cases of fraud for this year , and it is important that you give us a clear indication here of how seriously you view this whole business .
In a few days , the summit on the European Union 's responsiveness to citizens will take place in Austria , and I believe that it is legitimate , in this context , to ask how responsive the European budget is to citizens .
I recently read the following - and I will quote it in English - in the Financial Times : ' Opening up the whole budget system to make it more simple , more fair and more transparent is a political nightmare , far easier to keep it complicated . '
In this context , I particularly welcome the European Commission report , ' Financing the European Union ' , on the operation of the own-resources system .
I have already said in committee that the Commission could perhaps have been a little more emphatic about its own position , but this is a very good report .
It also examines the individual proposals on financing the Union in detail , considering the revenue 's visibility to citizens , its yield and how easy it is to monitor .
It is a first step in the right direction .
Mr Liikanen , I hope that you will keep to this path .
As regards the expenditure , on which we have to take a final decision on Thursday , I should like to highlight in particular - in connection with the theme of responsiveness to citizens - the successful resolution of the legal base problem under the Austrian Presidency .
All the budget lines now have a legal base , and the appropriations can also be disbursed .
After many years of squabbling over legal bases , the citizens of Europe can now have confidence that appropriations entered in the budget will also be converted into expenditure .
I believe that here the European Parliament has proved itself to be a reliable and valuable partner .
After all , we have cancelled 16 budget lines without a legal base amounting to some ECU 124 million .
It was our rapporteur 's idea to create a closer match between certain Union policies and promises .
Look at the Leonardo programme - seemingly a priority in Cardiff - now cut by ECU 100 million .
Look at external actions , where even more appropriations have been entered against PHARE , even though we know that the money cannot be absorbed .
I believe that to be our rapporteur 's achievement in the 1999 budget .
On this I offer her my warmest congratulations .
Mr President , I want first of all to thank the rapporteur for the good work she has done and indeed to compliment that small group of experts in the Budget Committee who work extremely hard and apply a lot of skill and expertise to this whole business and also the excellent Commission staff who have a lot of patience .
Sometimes the mood in these meetings can be very combative , sometimes unnecessarily so .
Nevertheless , I often see the whole apparatus as a big locomotive pushing a little wheelbarrow , a bit like children playing shop sometimes , because there is not so much substance there as people would like to believe .
This one per cent is all that we deal with .
By contrast the national governments elected with smaller numbers of people and having less mandates than we have in so many ways control 50 % of public spending throughout the European Union .
If you look at the major newspapers , you see that nobody worries about the effect any decision we take will have on the stock market .
Turn on ' World Business Today ' and unless they are making some kind of joke about us , they will not be making any comment on the importance of the decisions we are making here .
It is important for us to say that because this whole budget of the European Union is so small , it makes little difference .
The only place where it makes a real difference is in agriculture where the recipients get real money - six million farmers throughout the European Union are the recipients of real money .
On the other hand , if you look at the Structural Funds , while in agriculture the average is ECU 5000 per farm-family throughout the European Union , assuming a figure of 7 million farmers , in Structural Funds spending comes to between ECU 200 and 300 per capita in those regions .
It is a relatively small amount of money .
Nevertheless we welcome the fact that the agricultural budget is as big as this .
In relation to agriculture let me say briefly that , as Mr Nicholson said , all sectors of agriculture are going through hard times , in spite of the fact that real money is being spent .
We have to look at it again and say this must be more to do with marketing and processing and our trade regulations , because throwing money at it is not resolving the problem .
Agricultural spending has maintained the same level for the last ten years , while the number of farmers has dropped from something like 12 million 10 years ago , to 6 million today .
In real terms we have maintained spending without resolving their problems .
We should tell farmers that we have made a real effort and applied real resources .
On the other hand , there is a regrettable tendency at national and European level to say there must be a balance between what people put in and what people get out .
If this sort of calculation is going to be made , we must do it over a wider front .
Firstly , we have to look at the countries which make the biggest contribution .
These are the countries which gain more from the single market and which have a surplus in their balance of trade with other members of the Community .
We should draw attention to that .
If we enlarge the Community , the countries that pay most at the moment are probably the countries that will gain most from enlargement .
Some policies suit some parts of the Community , others suit others .
We are not going to resolve the problem by reducing the size of the budget and making it smaller .
It will be resolved , as Mr Christodoulou and Mr Bourlanges said , by developing new policies .
We need a bigger budget for the European Union .
We need it because we have a wider vocation than just financing agriculture and collecting a few shillings in tax .
We are trying to create a real political union and if this is to be a Union of regulation only , then it will alienate ordinary people .
One only has to look at what impact ECU 100 million had in Northern Ireland .
Two communities were anti-Europe and both communities have been largely reconciled by the spending of small amounts of money .
Thank you , Mr McCartin .
I must admire your commitment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is the last budget of this parliamentary term .
It has been my first term in Parliament and in the Committee on Budgets .
I have greatly admired the massive expertise on budgetary matters and the dedication shown by my fellow members of the Committee on Budgets , but I should add that I do not think this expertise and dedication have had enough of a political impact in shaping the major policy options chosen by Europe .
We have been careful stewards of Europe 's coffers .
In so doing , we have done a very important job , but that is not enough as a political authority .
Much of this is down to the Interinstitutional Agreement .
Piet Dankert reminded us of the background , of the pros and cons : an agreement which one way or another means a voluntary limitation of our budgetary powers .
In the next few months , this Parliament will have to weigh thoroughly the pros and cons of a new interinstitutional agreement .
The reports of Mr Colom I Naval contain enough material to serve as a specification against which any negotiating result can be measured .
I agree with Mr Bourlanges that the notion of flexibility between the chapters must be paramount here .
The 1999 budget is a good run-up to the final talks on the Interinstitutional Agreement .
The extra reserves built in provide a good basis which we can fall back on , if we need or want to switch to Article 203 .
The next six months will be crucial , not only for the budget of this Parliament , but for the future of the European Union .
The Interinstitutional Agreement , the financial perspective , Agenda 2000 and the debate on own resources are all up for discussion and are indissolubly linked together .
On the subject of own resources , we should not avoid any of the issues .
It all has to be discussed - expenditure , agricultural structural spending and revenues .
The rebates granted in the past will also have to be reviewed and tested against the reasons for which they were granted .
They have to be updated .
I have to say I was not happy with the first debate we had on the budget in the Committee on Budgets .
We must at all costs avoid a situation in which the European Parliament connives at renationalising European policy and European politics .
We must try , as the European Parliament , to rise above national interests and exert firm pressure on the European Council to overcome the unanimity rule and secure a reasonable new package .
Lastly , ladies and gentlemen , Europe has sadly lost credibility .
John Hume has proved here how noble a project Europe is .
If there is one point on which we can show exemplary credibility , it is our own Statute .
Please let us do our utmost to achieve , before the end of the year , a revised system for reimbursing travel expenses and , ideally , a new Statute for Members .
On the eve of the elections , we owe that much to the citizens of Europe .
Mr President , the rapporteur has handled a complicated budgetary exercise quite brilliantly .
It is complicated because it coincides with the debate on Agenda 2000 , the financial reform of the Union and the negotiations on the Interinstitutional Agreement , that is , all sorts of ingredients that the rapporteur must mix together in one bowl , cook and finally serve up to the citizens of the Union as something edible .
I think she is on the right track and that we will be able to come up with a dish that everyone likes .
The rapporteur is right to get Parliament working on a hypothetical failure of the negotiations on the Interinstitutional Agreement .
If these negotiations were to prove fruitless in the end , we would find ourselves faced with an Article 203 under the worst conditions for us .
Therefore , her bridging amendments , which commit the available margin of the categories , are , firstly , an imaginative solution to strengthen the role of the European Parliament and make the Council face up to its own inconsistency and , secondly , proof that the ceiling of 1.27 % of own resources is ridiculous and does not help deepen Community policies .
I think that the Committee on Budgets is more aware of this inadequacy today thanks to the proposals by Mrs Dührkop .
Within that strategy , we would like to look at the reduction of EUR 1 500 million in commitment appropriations and another EUR 500 m in payment appropriations in Category 2 , Structural Funds .
This reduction is bound to cause at least a certain amount of fear and suspicion .
The rapporteur calls this the ' flag and amount ' mechanism , tying a reserve in Category 2 to the degree of uptake of the appropriations in each of the Member States .
In theory , this will prioritise budgetary effort and good implementation .
But bear in mind that , for the first time , this Parliament is going to accept a change to the Edinburgh Agreement which could result , in the worst case , in payment problems in Objective 2 in 1999 .
But , of course , from a budgetary point of view , the strategy is consistent with the interinstitutional negotiations that are still to be concluded .
However , in the end , we are going to rely on variables outside our control , such as whether the Council does or does not approve an amending and supplementary budget or , more simply , how the Notenboom transfer evolves .
In other words , we are going to give the Council a negotiating advantage without keeping any for ourselves .
So it is risky and we should perhaps take advantage of having Commissioner Liikanen with us to obtain more details from the Commission on how it expects payment appropriations to evolve in 1999 .
If they are not going to , or if the expected evolution is not sufficiently adequate , perhaps politics and the budget are on different tracks here .
Finally , I want to express my very sincere thanks to the rapporteur for her goodwill and the open and conciliatory way she has handled the whole parliamentary procedure .
Mr President , I should like to concentrate my remarks on the two excellent reports Mr Giansily has presented for this House 's consideration .
As he said this morning , unlike previous years , there has been a unanimity of views in the Committee on Budgets .
Two years ago , as draftsman for the EMAC committee for the ECSC budget I said : ' Most of all we need to know that there are no plans to transfer any of the ECSC funds away from the programme and that any surplus funding will be treated as the rightful inheritance of the ECSC , the foundation of its future existence in whatever form it may take ' .
We are now looking at that future existence .
In a period when the Coal and Steel Community still faces big problems , let us look at the changes in global markets , the collapse of the Far Eastern economies and the flood of steel into Europe which is undermining our own steel industry , the effects of enlargement , of ongoing job losses and our need to upgrade technology .
I am delighted that the Commission has proposed that Article 4 should be used to accommodate Parliament 's concerns and that this money should not be lost in the budget , or be subject to any complicated and costly procedures and that in this way we can maintain , specifically , targeting in relation to ECSC funds .
However , I am less than delighted that the Council is not showing the same spirit of cooperation .
By failing to authorise the transfer of ECU 30m for use in time to be able to commit appropriations by the end of next year 's budget , the Council is failing to support the aims expressed by Parliament to help create jobs in areas suffering from the consequences of sectoral closures , principles echoed so clearly in the Amsterdam Treaty .
I hope the Commission will make every effort in line with Articles 49 and 56 of the Treaty to use its powers to implement the proposals by other means .
The difference this money will make to the social and research programmes will be significant .
I want to remind this House that we are looking at a predicted 17 000 job losses in coal and steel for 1999 .
For the candidate countries it is obvious that the inclusion of their low-tech , over-manned coal and steel plants will have a huge impact on the Community .
It is equally clear that the required modernisation will have enormous social consequences for the regions concerned since there is a massive geographical concentration of production .
We are talking single-sector dependency here .
Parliament has expressed its awareness of the problems and its desire to take positive action .
I hope that neither the Commission nor the Councill will show themselves any less committed to these problems , and that we shall see , starting with this budget and continuing throughout the process of change accompanying the ending of the ECSC , the positive , direct and effective measures put forward here operationalised by the Commission and supported by the Council .
We want to make sure that ECSC money goes to help restructure the communities the coal and steel industry has served .
After all , that is the legacy we are being left with .
We must make sure that people in those communities have a future .
Mr President , first let me compliment the rapporteurs , Mrs Dührkop and Messrs Viola and Giansily , most sincerely on their reports .
We have here a budget which is rigorous , but nevertheless meets most of the reasonable demands made by Members of this Parliament .
At a time when there is turbulence in Asia and Russia and when the Americans too are panicking a little , the European Union , thanks to the euro , remains an oasis of calm and stability .
That has to be underpinned by the right financial policy .
In absolute terms the budget is up , but as in recent years , its relative value is down - which is more than can be said for some national budgets .
I think that national Member States would do well to take a leaf out of our book when it comes to budgets , especially when they find , after an election , that they cannot quite deliver on what they promised before it .
We have also shown that we are able to be a reliable and constructive partner for other European bodies .
We are seen to be responsible .
Despite the financial perspective , which allows for a ceiling on expenditure of up to 1.27 % , we are well below that ceiling .
So the idea of a spendthrift European Parliament is a misconception .
Few parliaments in Europe would be prepared , with this perspective , to stay below the expenditure ceiling , and the Council and Commission should realise this , though often the Council does not seem to do so .
Let us hope that our record has a positive influence on the talks on the Interinstitutional Agreement .
A few comments on the additional amendments which have been approved .
They are of course intended solely as a basis for negotiation .
It was never intended that they should stand as they are .
That is not what Parliament intends .
It is not what anyone intends , but hopefully it will make the Council willing to negotiate .
So far , I have not put that willingness to the test with a number of governments .
The budget lines for social policy and employment are up on the preliminary draft , at ECU 48.3 million and 14 million respectively .
But spending this year is down on last year , largely due to the debate on the legal basis for matters relating to the social area .
The Court judgment caused some confusion .
I think Parliament has now largely succeeded in clearing up the confusion , but it has complicated matters very much this year .
And we have to take the conclusions of the Luxembourg summit seriously .
It is important to conduct an investigation into the effectiveness of the trans-European networks and the money tied up in them .
For Category 3 this is a great deal of money , and the size of the sum may even put the rest of it in jeopardy .
So I think we must be very careful not to find that , after one or two projects , we have spent all the money that we have .
Happily , the Committee on Budgets has reconciled the various parts of internal policy .
And I am very pleased with the extra ECU 99 m for the Leonardo programme .
Here again , the Council is being particularly unreasonable .
The money is being well spent , and there is a great deal of interest in it in the Member States .
It is money within the envelope of the financial perspective , and yet the Council is trying to cut it .
One last thing , Mr President .
Will you take a look at the text of the amendment to the Viola report which was tabled by the Greens and adopted by the Committee on Budgets ?
In two respects , the text really is no good and to my mind not altogether consistent with what was agreed in committee .
It is vital , with an eye to the future debate , that we should check this .
Thank you , Mr President .
I just wanted to make a few comments on Mr Giansily 's two reports on the ECSC Treaty , although it is of course tempting to give an immediate response to what colleagues have just said .
But that is not my intention now .
The ECSC Treaty might not expire for another three years , but Parliament has already spent some time considering the question : what actually happens afterwards ?
The ECSC 's political aim has undoubtedly been achieved , namely to secure peace in Europe by putting the coal and steel sector - which played a decisive role in post-war economic regeneration - under supranational control .
There it has succeeded .
But its economic achievements should not be underestimated either .
In providing economic and social assistance and supporting structural change in the coal and steel industries over the past decades , the ECSC Treaty has overall proved itself to be a very flexible , very effective , and thus very helpful tool .
On the basis of the Treaty , several specific economic and social instruments were developed , which were very useful to the coal and steel industries and regions during their difficult processes of readaptation .
Without it , it would have been very much more difficult to manage the dramatic structural change in these two sectors in a socially acceptable way .
I know what I am talking about , because I come from just such an area of coal and steel production , and now I live in one .
Now we all know that the restructuring of the coal and steel industries has not yet been completed , that these sectors continue to lose jobs , and will possibly do so at an even greater rate in the future .
Moreover , the importance of the coal and steel sector will again increase with the admission of the first Central and Eastern European countries into the European Union .
That reinforces our view that we cannot simply bid the ECSC farewell and leave nothing in its place .
Our firm intention - as reported by Mr Giansily and agreed by the Budgets Committee - is to continue the phasing-in to the budget , to use the provisions and reserves accumulated by the ECSC as the capital for a future Coal and Steel Foundation , to do all this on the basis of a transparent and uniform budget , and on no account to give up the European Union 's powers within any such multilateral organisation .
Bearing in mind the points I have mentioned and in keeping with them , we have put forward our proposal for the ECSC budget .
We urgently call on the Council to give the go-ahead for our funding of conversion activities in the coal and steel industries and regions .
We want to create and convert jobs , and to do so we need support for training and continuing education for employees in these regions .
We are expecting the Council to approve the EUR 30 million for 1999 and to bring in the 30 million from 1998 through the supplementary and amending budget .
We want to use this to generate further momentum on jobs .
Areas of coal and steel production are in particular need of our help .
Mr President , first I want to congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr Viola and Mrs Dührkop , on their excellent work .
I am aware of how difficult it is to reconcile politics and various interests , as well as of the need to set priorities in a budget because , in the end , that is making politics .
And I am delighted to say that our rapporteurs have succeeded in doing that , so I will vote for this budget in its entirety .
What would a European citizen say about this budget ?
First , he would say that it is a budget that strengthens the cohesion policies and the cross-border solidarity of the European Union , and that it is a budget that fulfills the Edinburgh Agreements considerably better than last year 's .
And it does so in a key year - 1999 - when the financial perspective and the principal European policies for the next few years will be determined .
The cohesion priorities concentrate on the least favoured areas , the so-called low income Objective 1 areas . But there is also an effort to assist other areas of the Union that have suffered conversion processes and are regenerating their economic fabric or running training programmes for their human resources - for the people - geared towards employment , or for regions dependent on the countryside , so that people can live in a rural environment , work and be assured of services and infrastructures .
To give a simple example , the Basque Country , which I represent , will receive 37 billion pesetas under those headings - covered by Objectives 2 , 3 , 4 and 5 - for next year .
This investment is no doubt helping to boost our economic fabric with positive results because the whole of society is making an effort .
It is a joint effort that is giving rise to a real convergence in terms of the Community income .
And , to give you an example , the Basque Country 's GDP has risen from 79 % to 91 % of the Community average over the last 12 years .
This budget also strengthens the Union 's internal policies in the face of the Council 's planned cuts .
In this respect , the amendments by the Committee on Budgets strengthen culture and education through programmes such as Leonardo , Socrates and Youth for Europe , and , as Jacques Delors said , promoting projects like these is , in a sense , creating the European soul . I think we all support the project of continuing to build this Europe that respects diversity .
And I want to mention one particular cultural point : the item on support for less common languages , because if anything is crucial in supporting cultural diversity , it is these languages . They are less common but that does not mean that they are unimportant , because they are spoken by over 10 % of Europeans .
ECU 4 million is inadequate from any angle , but maintaining it against the Council 's intention to cut it is a step towards consolidating a stable programme of support for these languages at European level .
And I want to thank Mrs Dührkop personally for the effort she has made on this , as a Basque and as someone committed to cultural pluralism .
There has been controversy , in the approval of this budget , about placing the amounts intended for the humanitarian aid office , ECHO , in the reserve .
This is a necessary measure from any point of view , because our duty as managers of public money is to fight fraud and corruption and there was enough information to indicate that a clear misappropriation had taken place .
We have not taken the weakest people hostage , those who need humanitarian aid , by establishing this reserve because , first of all , the reserve affects next year 's budget , so we have not paralysed any project today given that we are at first reading .
And , in the second place , the establishment of this reserve has borne fruit because the letter received from Mr Santer contains a clear signal that this Parliament will receive precise details from UCLAF , and promptly , on possible cases of fraud and corruption that might affect the Community budget .
Therefore , Mr President , thanks to this operation we will be able to go on granting humanitarian aid and improving the routes so that this aid effectively reaches the weakest , and perhaps we will be better able to control the corruption that , unfortunately , often accompanies aid programmes to some extent .
Mr President , this is probably the most important work Parliament does in the whole year .
Therefore , I was very sorry this morning to see that Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , after more than a year 's work behind the scenes , was harried by the President in the Chair while making her presentation this morning .
It was unfortunate .
I want to address the two contentious items in the budgets today .
The first is the scandal in ECHO , which concerns humanitarian aid .
Some would say - and some did last night in the Committee on Budgets - that we should not mix together the work which the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on Budgets does .
The fact is that four agents are involved on the European scene when trying to deal with fraud and irregularities : the Court of Auditors ; UCLAF ; and the Parliament in the form of the Budgetary Control Committee and the Committee on Budgets .
If the Budgetary Control Committee cannot get satisfaction , the teeth of this House are in the voting on the budget .
I want to pay credit to Mr Fabra and Mrs Müller for the work they have done in the field of ECHO .
It is unfortunate that the non-governmental organisations , the people who work for us and with this aid should be the ones that suffer .
But if the you look at the way the budget is structured , because the Commission would like to see ' umbrella ' lines in the budget , it is very difficult to target those areas which one wishes to target .
So the weak suffer with the strong .
The President of the Commission must have been rather embarrassed to have to write that letter which was addressed to the Committee on Budgets .
He referred to misunderstandings .
The fact is that they were not misunderstandings ; they were questions of principle .
This is why the Budget Control Committee and the Committee on Budgets took a strong line .
I have to say that the UCLAF reports must be dynamite if it is necessary to go into bomb-proof shelters in order to read them .
I feel sorry for President Santer .
This House is empowered to dismiss the whole of the Commission .
This has never happened .
I think when we look at the Treaty in the future we might make an amendment which empowers the President of the Commission to retire one or two of the members of his Commission if he thinks so fit .
I turn now to the European Parliament budget : expenses of Members of this House .
In 1979 the failure of the Council , acting as a summit in that case , to agree a salary for MEPs meant that we had a temporary solution put into operation by the Bureau of Parliament .
That temporary arrangement was to compensate those MEPs on low salaries compared with the others by way of a rather generous travel expenses system .
That temporary system has been working for 19 years .
It is a great pity that we are now arguing about a Members ' Statute .
We put into the budget for 1980 a token entry for a Members ' Statute .
We are still waiting for this statute .
I realise that the present Council had nothing to do with the origins of the problem , but I look to it and its immediate successor to make the Members ' Statute fair for Members of this House .
I cannot support any proposals unless I can be assured that those less well-paid Members of this Parliament are not made worse off by the proposals put before the House .
Mr President , in making my comments , I should like to focus on Category 4 , external actions .
We are still dealing with the repercussions of the Cannes decisions , and I am still of the opinion that the Council acted unwisely in making them .
It decided that we should focus our external policy in particular on our immediate neighbours in Central and Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean basin .
I still think this is questionable , for two reasons .
Firstly , I have my doubts about whether the money is really put to good use everywhere ; with MEDA in particular , these doubts are increasing rather than abating .
Secondly , this has its consequences , which the Council brutally forces through every year , unfortunately often supported by the Commission .
Cuts are repeatedly made in the field of traditional development policy , that is , for the poorest of the poor .
I am glad that the Committee on Budgets , and Parliament as a whole , do not go along with this policy , and that we continue to attach importance to showing solidarity with the people of Asia , Latin America and Africa .
In my view , budget line B7-6000 , ' Cofinancing of schemes carried out by NGOs ' , is particularly important .
People are at work here who , with great idealistic vision and very considerable resources of their own , repeatedly make project proposals , and all they receive from us is support .
That is expressed by the word cofinancing , which is also , I believe , a guarantee that this money will be used very efficiently .
We still have the problem that the office which processes the applications is grossly understaffed , and I call on the Commission once again to improve the staffing situation in this administrative office , by carrying out an internal reorganisation .
A few words on ECHO from the point of view of development policy .
I believe that it is in the interests of development policy for us to get right to the bottom of this scandal , because the fact is that we have problems making people understand why we are providing more resources for development policy when , after all , times are hard at home too , and when we cannot prove that the money is being put to good use .
These problems of gaining acceptance will become worse .
That is why I am very disappointed by the statements Commissioners Marín and Bonino have made on this subject in recent days and weeks .
But whatever we do , money will still be tight in Category 4 , and we need to think very carefully about how we spend these meagre amounts of money .
That is why I am also against cofinancing being provided here , for areas which have little or nothing to do with development policy .
I am talking about bananas .
There is a dispute here , mainly to do with agricultural policy , to which the proposed solution is , in my view , inadequate . Appropriations are being taken from Category 4 - appropriations which are actually intended to benefit the poorest - and are being used to promote the banana industry .
You see , the money does not go to small farmers .
That is why I tabled an amendment to exclude multinational concerns from this budget line through its legal base .
This was rejected by the Commission .
So the money will go to the multinationals .
Taking money from the poor to give it to banana multinationals - regardless of whether these have European or American names - is wrong .
That is why I support the Budgets Committee 's proposal not to withdraw the appropriations from this line , but to consider whether they can be taken from Category 1 or from the European Development Fund , where we have surpluses every year .
One final remark on the subject of population policies , budget line B7-631 , an important area which Parliament has always supported .
We struggled over the legal base for this topic and made it clear that population policies have nothing to do with abortion , but that other methods are to be chosen here .
Now the Committee on Budgets is proposing to change the title of this budget line .
My question for Mr Liikanen is this : what does the Commission think about changing the title of a budget line when we actually have a legal base ?
Will we not get into a terrible mess if we constantly change the title so late in the day , having established the legal base ? How do the Commission experts view this proposal ?
I would be glad if the Commission could give its position on this specific point .
Mr President , I will not need three minutes to tell you of my surprise .
My colleague , Mr Le Gallou , and I have tabled nearly one hundred amendments to the Committee on Budgets , based on three guidelines .
Firstly , respect for Community responsibilities and the principle of subsidiarity ; secondly , respect for moral values which are the cement of any civilisation ; thirdly , respect for transparency , namely , a reasonable , detailed and well-defined use of public funds , because we owe it to all European taxpayers to provide them with accounts .
We have to say that there is a great deal of complicity evident in the refusal to give the people of Europe precise accounts , just when the news is full of stories about millions of ecus having been embezzled within the Commission and funds having been stolen from appropriations allocated for international cooperation .
This is a curious concept of cooperation , and also of morality and public health , given that the aid will be distributed to the associations without the slightest transparency !
We wanted to prevent public funds from being used by anyone and everyone , particularly for subversive purposes , as is the case with certain bodies which try to legitimise what is illegal , for example illegal immigration or drug use .
We also wanted to guarantee the concept of Community preference , in other words ensuring priority for aid to nationals of the Member States , which seems the least that we can do .
This has also been rejected .
So , for example , vocational training will not be reserved for Community workers and apprentices .
Once again we are paying for the whole world .
We also wanted to prevent public funds from being used for the electoral campaigns of certain candidates or certain parties .
This concern is also not shared by our colleagues , all of them very obedient , I have to say .
The federalists , or rather the fusionists , will therefore continue to enjoy the ongoing campaign in favour of the euro and the forced integration of states within a single supranational entity known as Euroland .
Euroland : it has the flavour and name of a theme park , but is much less entertaining . It actually genuinely undermines democracy and the principle of subsidiarity , it undermines our individual freedoms , those of our regions and those of our nations .
Mr President , those still here listening to our debate are punch-drunk from the dozens of speeches we have heard .
But may I ask you to consider briefly one of the nicest areas we have to deal with , namely tourism .
In the course of this month , we shall be receiving the findings of the committee of wise men and women who have been looking at tourism and employment .
The enviable expectations of growth in many countries , and in the European Union too , mean that we ought to give greater consideration to sectors that are likely to create more jobs .
And tourism is one such sector .
At the same time , we have to acknowledge that currency devaluations in a number of South-East Asian countries will make it harder for our own tourist industry to be competitive .
The weaker dollar does not help either .
I am thinking in particular of conference tourism , which is very important for jobs in our countries .
I urge the Commission to respond appropriately to the recommendations which the committee of wise men and women will be making shortly .
The Austrian President-in-Office of the Council has reassured us that the action programme for tourism currently under consideration will be approved by the end of the year .
So we shall need a legal basis for that .
In these circumstances , it would be a missed opportunity not to include a modest sum in the budget for this objective .
Sadly , neither the Commission nor the Council has done that so far .
I have a very specific question for the Commission and the Council President . Can we be sure that , if necessary and depending on what happens now , they will be resolute in proposing a budget amendment to take account of this point ?
I think that the many , still far too many , people in our countries who are out of work have a right to expect that .
I should very much appreciate a specific reply to this question of mine to the Commission and the President-in-Office .
I wish to begin by expressing my pleasure at the broad participation in this debate : we have been here more than five hours .
Many participants have other engagements now , so only a few have been able to resist the pressure to go elsewhere .
That is why I shall reply only to those questions put by Members who are here now .
Firstly , on the tourism issue , I cannot take a position on the conclusions the Commission will adopt on the basis of a report yet to be submitted .
We will study it carefully and then , I am sure , the Commission will inform Parliament on the follow-up .
Secondly , on the question of the legal base and the title of the budgetary line , I have not been able to take the requisite legal advice but my position is that it is the substance of the action that matters .
If the action has a legal base , the title of a budget line is secondary .
Thus the substance of the action must have a legal base .
Thirdly , the question put by Mr Samland , the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , and others on the documents transmitted to the Luxembourg authorities .
During the debate I consulted our services and I can read the four points of the French text I have on the so-called issue of fictitious contracts .
Firstly , the department of public prosecutions has been informed of the relevant facts relating to the four contracts in question , i.e. the fictitious contracts ; secondly , the department of public prosecutions has been given the facts specifically relating to the links between an official and the contracts in question ; thirdly , the UCLAF report has been sent in full ; fourthly , to avoid any ambiguity , the department of public prosecutions has access to any other documents which it may consider useful when examining the case .
Of course , the Commission has cooperated in full : the department of public prosecutions will be sent any documents which it deems useful .
Mr President .
Since this is such an important issue , I should like to ask Mr Liikanen one more question : what did you mean by ' the court ' just then ; which court were you referring to , please ?
Mr President , I put a question to the Council too .
Given that the Council is the budgetary authority , together with Parliament , I would also appreciate an answer from the Council .
If it cannot be given now , I would be glad of an assurance that it will be provided in writing .
There was obviously a problem of translation . ' Parquet ' means ' Luxembourg judicial authorities ' here .
No other court is meant , only the Luxembourg judicial authority : the ' parquet Luxembourgeois ' .
I see from the Council 's representative that an answer will be given in writing , if necessary .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 10 a.m.
European Union progress in 1997
The next item is the report ( A4-0357 / 98 ) by Mrs Spaak , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on the European Council report to the European Parliament on the progress achieved by the European Union in 1997 ( Article D of the Treaty on European Union ) ( 8690 / 1 / 98 - C4-0411 / 98 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , Representative of the Council , the European Council report for 1997 , pursuant to Article D , adopts , as in previous years , the purely perfunctory approach of listing the legislative and other activities carried out in the year under review .
Disregarding the criticism of the European Parliament , it makes no assessment of the progress achieved , the problems encountered , or the shortcomings still to be remedied , even though Article D itself requires the Council to generate the impetus required for the Union 's development .
It is regrettable that the real political impetus is stemming , for example , from certain Heads of State or Government , as could be seen when Mr Kohl and Mr Chirac wrote their letter just before the Cardiff European Council .
The Committee on Institutional Affairs has therefore decided to focus on the elements that appear to give the necessary impetus to the Union 's development .
In this respect , I support Mr Corbett 's amendment , which is aimed at modifying the procedure by providing for a European Parliament debate on the Council 's annual report immediately after it has been presented , without referring it back to the Committee responsible .
I call on the Council - and I am not sure whether it is present and listening - to give us its opinion on this matter .
This brings me , Mr President , to the second half of my speech .
With the entry into force of economic and monetary union and the prospect of enlargement , we can no longer put off answering the questions that we have been hearing so often for years ; why Europe , what sort of Europe , and what ambitions do we have for this Europe ?
Last week , the President , Mrs Ferrero Waldner , in her work with the Committee on Institutional Affairs , told us that she shared this concern and that it had been included on the Pörtschach Summit agenda .
This has not been done for years .
For fear of revealing a lack of consensus , and in order to avoid dangerous clashes , Member States have for decades preferred , at an institutional level , to use the policy of the lowest common denominator .
Today this procedure is no longer viable .
Public opinion supported the political impetus given by the founding fathers because after two terrible wars that united the victors and the vanquished in the same disaster , the peoples aspired to peace and democracy .
So two generations have passed , during which time the European Community has established free movement , the single market and the single currency , ratified treaties and authorised the accession of 15 new Member States .
It is an impressive record of achievement , but during this period European citizens witnessed company closures and relocations , experienced constraints linked to meeting the convergence criteria and were the powerless witnesses of events in Europe , Bosnia , Albania and Kosovo .
The link with the past was broken .
The whole raison d 'être of this great adventure escaped them because , as President Delors himself said , one does not fall in love with a single currency .
The aim today - and this is something that needs to be reiterated clearly and emphatically - is for the European Union to be a unique political project in the world , because it is based on peace , democracy and values : human rights , solidarity between peoples and generations , the establishment of a model of society that allows the people in it to blossom and prosper as much as possible .
This morning , John Hume gave us a wonderful example of these values when he said that one of the things that Europe and the European Parliament have taught him is respect for difference and diversity .
It is this aim , remembered and shared by all , that gives full meaning to any discussion relating to the type of institution we need .
I would like to add that the forthcoming discussion on the budget will stem from the same urgency and must take into consideration the same criteria as regards the aims of the Union .
The intergovernmental method has failed to bear fruit at institutional level .
This is the great weakness of the Amsterdam Treaty .
We must learn the lessons of this failure and reactivate the Community method , whose effectiveness was recognised when the Treaty of Rome , the Single Act and the Delors Committee were established .
The next institutional reform should be completed before the first accessions take place , to ensure that they can proceed in all clarity , without risk of delaying or compromising their success .
Furthermore , the objectives of this reform should be included in the Community acquis .
These , Representative of the Council , Commissioner , are some of the challenges facing the Austrian Presidency , to whom we offer our best wishes .
Thank you , Mrs Spaak .
We must hope that the Council also heard what you had to say .
Mr President , tomorrow we shall hear Commission President Santer deliver his annual statement on the European Commission 's plans for 1999 - the ' state of the Union message ' .
Today we are debating the progress made during 1997 .
Mrs Spaak has compiled an excellent report on that , and I would have thought it better to have a joint debate on this report and the state of the Union report .
Looking forward carries much more weight if you have some positive achievements to look back on .
The resolution and Mrs Spaak 's report make a number of pertinent criticisms in that respect .
Mrs Spaak finds , for example , that the Council shows little vision in its 1997 report and really gives just a summary of decisions taken in the course of that year .
As regards the Amsterdam Treaty , the rapporteur notes that Parliament 's position that a number of reforms are needed prior to enlargement is acknowledged in a letter from Messrs Chirac and Kohl , that the Commission has since set up a working party headed by ex-Commissioner Frans Andriessen to seek solutions , but that the Council has done very little .
What is the Council doing here ?
We wait with keen interest to see what the informal summit in Austria will produce .
A third criticism is that no real progress was made in 1997 on crucial topics such as foreign policy and internal security .
The paralysis is as great as ever .
In that context , Mr President , may I anticipate tomorrow 's debate and set out my priorities for the informal summit .
Firstly , there must be a solution to the permanent stagnation in the Union 's foreign policy .
The only way to achieve this is by removing the need for unanimity .
This requires at the very least an annex to the Amsterdam Treaty .
I hope a decision will be taken to that effect .
A second priority is the democratic deficit , which has partly been eliminated in respect of Parliament 's legislative duties .
In our view , the final obstacles need to be removed too .
These remain primarily in the field of agriculture .
Here too the Treaty must be improved .
The third priority lies in the field of justice and home affairs and the fight against international crime .
The Treaty needs to be tightened up here as well , and a decision is needed at the informal summit .
The fourth priority concerns own resources .
This is something which looks set to bring everything grinding to a halt in the very near future .
We think that a better , neutral formula must be found in order to distribute revenues more fairly .
That too must be discussed at the Austrian summit .
The fifth priority concerns the question of refugees and asylum seekers .
We think they have to be shared more fairly among the Member States and that decisions have to be taken on this .
This is a further subject which the informal summit in Austria must address .
Lastly , of course , the institutional problems have to be resolved , as Mrs Spaak says , in particular the question of voting and unanimity .
Well , Mr President , it would have been better if this problem had been expressed more clearly , not least in the Council 's report .
If we had known we were so far from achieving our goals , we would have had a better basis for improving things , and we fervently hope that the Austrian Presidency will see its way to making some small progress on that front .
Mr President , Commissioner , I also criticise the Council 's report for comprising too few declarations of political intentions and objectives .
I sometimes have the impression that the Council is developing more and more into a gathering of 15 Heads of Government , who merely place the individual interests of their countries at the centre of their political intentions and objectives .
I consider this to be a dangerous development because the Council is the political centre of the European Union , and the political initiative for further integration in Europe should come from it .
I therefore think that there are some very crucial points that must now be clearly established as political intentions and objectives .
The first is a clear declaration that we are really seeking to achieve enlargement of the European Union .
I sometimes have the impression that the objective of enlargement is becoming something that we merely preach about and that , when all is said and done , many people will be happy if , in the end , it does not happen at all .
That is the first clear objective that the European Union , the Council and all of us must tackle .
The second is Agenda 2000 .
I understand that there is a growing body of opinion , right up to the President of Parliament , that it cannot be adopted within the period stipulated .
We must realise that Agenda 2000 is the most immediate objective that needs to be met in order to be able to keep enlargement on track and also to maintain the ability to make decisions within the European Union .
The third is the transition to majority voting .
That is a prerequisite for the European Union 's ability to make any decisions at all in future .
These objectives must be tackled immediately , and I hope that the Council regains its political strength on the path towards Europe and further integration .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in order to prepare my speech I went on a journey in time back to 1997 .
Then I realised that it is nearly 1999 .
This type of report - regardless of its quality on which I must congratulate our colleague , Mrs Spaak - is only useful when it is adopted in good time .
I hope and predict that there will be no more journeys back in time like this .
Now for the content of the report .
Paragraph 11 deals with finding a different approach to ' closer cooperation ' , a new concept to be found in the Amsterdam Treaty .
If I remember rightly , Parliament has already adopted the Méndez de Vigo-Tsatsos report and , more recently , the Frischenschlager report which contradict , or seem to contradict , these proposals .
By adopting this report , as far as this particular point is concerned , we might puzzle some people , especially those whom it targets .
We really ought to avoid contradictions of this kind .
In any case , I have to say that if we deepen the European Union we must respect what the different States want .
We talk about a Europe of citizens and states , although certain powers may be delegated , as and when we agree to do so .
Closer cooperation might be one way of achieving the objective of European integration .
Accordingly , we feel that the arrangements made in the Treaty should be left unchanged because , in our view , the arrangements are not the main reason why the new institutional framework of closer cooperation is still ineffective .
Institutional reform is also tackled in this report . Let us begin with the proposal to give the Union fresh impetus , especially the arrangements for revising the Treaties .
Unfortunately this report makes no substantial reference to the role of the national parliaments , contrary to what is specifically said in the De Giovanni resolution already adopted by the Committee on Institutional Affairs , to be voted on tomorrow .
We think that measures aimed at deepening and widening the Union need to be supported by the citizens of the different states through their elected representatives .
As for Council deliberations , this report contains a proposal to boost qualified majority voting .
There is no doubt that , if the European Union 's institutions are to be made more effective , one approach would be to broaden the scope of their powers and even to increase their respective weightings .
However , in my opinion , there are still areas , especially of a constitutional nature , that should continue to be decided upon unanimously .
We think that this rule could strengthen solidarity and political cohesion among the States making up the European Union .
If we are to strike an institutional balance , then we must definitely transfer certain powers from the Member States to Community bodies , voluntarily and in an acceptable way .
Mr President , the rapporteur is naturally right to draw our attention not to European Union progress in 1997 , but to the numerous unresolved problems that lie ahead , and she expresses the impatience and discontent of this Parliament that have been reflected in dozens of resolutions of this House , though without particular success .
We have not managed to put any real political pressure on the Council and Commission .
Our resolutions are in increasing danger of becoming a general lament .
A glance at 1997 certainly explains the causes of this inability on the part of the Union to take action : responsibility lies with the failure at Amsterdam to reform the institutions , as well as with an Intergovernmental Conference that , as an instrument and a procedure , has increasingly become a setting for fighting out national interests .
A type of imperial college of princes has become established here instead of a European Council .
This Parliament is urged to exert greater political pressure and to exert a firmer influence on the Commission and Council in order to remove the blockade to enlargement towards the East , the blockade to the development of political union , and the blockade to the establishment of a European democracy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank our rapporteur , Mrs Spaak , for her report and for the manner in which she has drawn it up . And in this connection , I would like to highlight the disappointment felt by the Committee on Institutional Affairs as regards the sheer scale of all that could have been achieved and was not , of all the ideas that we will have the opportunity to take up again tomorrow in the De Giovanni document , which in our opinion remain on the agenda in view of the Union 's development in 1997 , even in 1998 and beyond .
I therefore think that the report 's criticism will give the Commission food for thought , as Commissioner Oreja and Parliament wish to work together to develop a joint project , whatever shape this may take , and I very much hope that the Council will support this approach .
A number of paragraphs in the resolution are addressed to the three institutions and I , personally , fully endorse the text .
I would like to draw the attention of the House and of the Commissioner to one particular paragraph that I consider to be important in the context of a foreign and security policy that is one of the weakest links in this Union . Proof of this can be seen both in Maryland and in Belgrade , where the two major issues of foreign policy remain , as usual , beyond the scope of the European Union and of each of its Members .
I therefore draw your attention to a paragraph of this resolution which focuses on two measures that could be taken and that in our opinion would by their very nature increase the European Union 's standing in the world .
The first is the creation of a military and civil intervention corps - particularly a military one - for the European Union as a whole ; the second is the idea of establishing joint diplomatic representation at Union level by means of setting up joint embassies where fewer than four Member States have diplomatic posts .
Mr President , when our ideas about Europe were once outlined in committee , the rapporteur responded by saying : ' That is not our Europe ' . Precisely these words came to me when I read her report , which in itself is thorough and of a very high standard .
It is just based on a completely different philosophy from ours .
We reject an unrestrained move towards integration .
We consider the poor Amsterdam results to be a sign that there is a lack of willingness among citizens for further integration .
We consider the contents of the annual fraud reports , the collapse of the concours , and the news of misappropriation in connection with various programmes , which is growing almost daily , to be indicators that the Union has reached the limits of its manageability .
We know that the majority of our citizens do not want over-hasty enlargement that includes neighbouring states .
Therefore , we would have liked the report to deal in greater depth with the position of our citizens , and their wishes and concerns , and with the issue of their integration .
My amendments , which were rejected by a majority in committee , also proposed this line of action .
If we do not want to allow the concepts of transparency and closeness to the citizen to become merely empty cliches , we must show by means of concrete examples that we take the wishes of our citizens into account and that we take them seriously .
Let me give you a brief example of how this concept is put into practice .
A few days ago , when my assistant requested a Commission document on my behalf , which incidentally was quoted in an answer to a question , the official in charge refused to forward the document because the Members of Parliament only mess around with them anyway and because that gets ' on his nerves ' .
If even Members of Parliament are treated like this , then you can imagine how our citizens are treated .
That may be an isolated case , but I am convinced that the means to make the Union more acceptable to our citizens lie precisely in the detail .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have three remarks to make on the Spaak report , which will in a way be an advance discussion of the subject of our talks tomorrow with President Santer and the Austrian Chancellor , Mr Klima , and on the basis of which we will be adopting the De Giovanni resolution .
I should like to begin by expressing my warmest thanks to Mrs Spaak for her commitment in her work on her Europe , and I add in this connection - because this was mentioned just now - that this is , I think , also our common Europe .
Admittedly , there is still a lot of work to do on this common Europe .
We must work towards deepening and widening Europe .
We need strong institutions , as this report also says .
We need a strong single currency .
We need more solutions and we need solutions that are more convincing , particularly in the area of the second and third pillars .
The key words are Kosovo , the fight against drugs and the fight against child abuse , to mention but a few , and these show how much we need a strong common Europe of this kind .
Secondly , I have a criticism to make of the Spaak report .
I feel - and I am almost certain that Mrs Spaak herself and all of us would agree - that greater attention should be given to the subject of human rights .
Amendment No 8 , which Mrs Lenz introduced on our behalf , calls for an adequate basis for an EU human rights policy .
I hope that we can gain wide approval for this amendment tomorrow .
A few weeks ago in Vienna we presented a research project undertaken by the European University Institute in Florence , entitled ' Human rights for the year 2000 ' .
We saw from this that Europe has achieved a great deal in the area of human rights in recent years , but that much remains to be done before we in Europe can say that we do not merely claim to fully respect human rights , but actually practice what we preach .
The third subject and my third remark indirectly concern what we have heard again and again today and in recent days .
In reality , we are dealing here with a very crucial point in the question of a ' People 's Europe ' .
That is why I , like Cato in ancient times , always try to take the caeterum censeo line .
We need European money to be managed honestly .
In the past few days we have received many letters on the subject of human rights and on putting the money for the NGOs in reserve .
Many of these non-governmental organisations , whose views on the subject of human rights are convincing , and which contribute a great deal in this area , are right to fight against a situation where the money for their work is , where possible , not being made available to them .
However , it is not a question of taking something away from the NGOs ; quite the reverse .
We seek to , and we must , ensure that money for those in need is not re-routed through dubious and fraudulent practices to those who are out for themselves .
That is why the second indent of paragraph 8 of the resolution on the Spaak report calls for greater control in this common Europe .
Mr President , I should like to raise two matters .
One is the question of the financial framework .
It is very clear that the whole development of the European Union will hinge on the finances for the next century , and the Commission has recently put forward a new financial perspective and a new financial division of responsibility between European Community countries .
Paragraph 15 of the resolution very clearly indicates that the new financing of the European Union must be such that a continued solidarity and cohesion remain the key words .
By putting forward a number of choices , the Commission has given a certain vision of the future .
It has been courageous on the issue of agriculture for instance .
It has also been very clear that a number of continued approaches - like having a British-style rebate for four other countries - will not work .
For this reason it is very important to demonstrate that this Parliament wants to reject the concept of ' juste retour ' for future developments .
Secondly , Schengen .
Paragraphs 22 to 24 deal with justice and home affairs .
We should be very concerned that the division of Schengen between the first and the third pillar has not yet taken place .
I regret that the presidency is not here , because if the Treaty of Amsterdam enters into force without any agreement , the net result will be that everything will stay in the third pillar .
I would like to ask the Commission how it judges the situation ; if that is happening , we can forget the free movement of workers , we can forget the free movement of persons , we can forget the beginning of an asylum and common immigration policy .
Why is it that 15 months after the signing of the Treaty of Amsterdam there is not a single agreement in sight for the division between the first and the third pillar on the question of Schengen ?
That is my serious question to the Commission .
Mr President , I want to address my remarks to the section on the common foreign and security policy in the Spaak report .
On reading this report I wonder whether this was a product of politicians on the Committee on Institutional Affairs or academics living in intellectual ivory towers .
It does not seem to me that what is here relates necessarily to what I find out in the real world .
Turning to paragraph 17 , it says the Union plays no political role on the international stage .
Self-evidently that is nonsensical .
Of course the European Union plays a role on the international stage .
We may question how big that role is but it is nonsense to say it plays no role .
Similarly to suggest that in the pubs and clubs of Bolton the public are concerned about this on a daily basis is also rather to exaggerate matters .
What my electors tell me they are concerned about is that the European Union should play a much firmer role in crisis prevention and crisis management , and peace-keeping and peace-making .
So we need to be specific about what it is our citizens want .
Turning to paragraph 19 , the suggestion seems to be that we could have resolved the Kosovo crisis if we had better institutional arrangements .
I really do not see how anybody can actually come forward with that idea .
Kosovo was a failure - if it was a failure - of political will .
Whatever institutional arrangements you have will not make any difference whatsoever .
The fourth indent of paragraph 20 seems to imply that the Institutional Committee thinks that the European Union is a member of NATO .
Of course the European Union is not a member of NATO .
Certain Member States of the European Union are members of NATO .
I therefore do not understand the point that is being made by the Institutional Committee .
What we should be focusing on is to make sure that the provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty and the Berlin Declaration on the European defence identity are implemented .
Finally we come to paragraph 21 .
I know this has been something which Parliament keeps approving in its resolutions , but do we really believe that there is a demand among the public for a European military intervention corps ?
We already have NATO ; we already have a whole range of organisations around the WEU - joint ventures , Eurocorps , Anglo-Dutch Brigade , etc .
What is a European intervention corps going to do that the others do not do ?
We should stop chasing down these intellectual cul-de-sacs and address ourselves to practical measures which will secure the defence of the European Union and the better security of its citizens .
This section on a common foreign and security policy quite frankly does not achieve that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to congratulate Mrs Spaak on her work .
I think the spirit of Article D of the Treaty on European Union was about trying to distance oneself sufficiently from debates and day-to-day issues to be able to think more generally about the meaning of European action .
That is what I expect from the report the European Council produces each year . It should be a report on the progress of the Union and specifically correspond to the European Council 's role in guiding and driving forward the Union 's general policy .
I agree with Mrs Spaak 's appraisal of the report and I have to say that I also share her disappointment .
I think there is nothing for it but to recognise , once again , and in spite of the criticism last year and in previous years from both Parliament and the Commission , that this report by the Council is actually limited to presenting a balance sheet of activities that is merely factual and often lacks the political scope it ought to have in accordance with the actual spirit of the Treaty .
Perhaps , instead of recalling what a political action means , it would be preferable to offer an overall view allowing us to go more deeply into the various issues and see what impetus the European Union can be given with a view to the future .
In this respect , I also agree with Mrs Spaak 's analysis of the importance of certain objectives achieved during the past year in terms of the construction of Europe , and specifically what is implied by the signing of the Treaty of Amsterdam , the launch of Agenda 2000 and the preparations for Economic and Monetary Union .
In fact , the challenges we have to face in each of these fields are well-known and the responsibility we all have is to see how we can put the citizen at the centre of our concerns , how issues as important as growth and employment can be renewed and how the European Union can prepare for enlargement , in both financial and institutional terms .
Clearly , these debates continue to be highly topical .
It is the Commission 's intention to provide different responses - concrete responses - through actions inspired precisely by those objectives .
I could mention here , for example , the conclusion of the Treaty of Amsterdam . It is evident that the long process of negotiation has culminated in a text that has been frequently criticised , and I have criticised it myself .
I came straight from Amsterdam to Parliament , to the Committee on Institutional Affairs and Mrs Spaak was there . We finished at 4.30 a.m. and at 10 a.m. on the same day , 18 June 1997 , I was in Parliament to give my reaction .
And at that time I expressed some disappointment , which has probably become much more muted with the passage of time , because there was a series of questions and it seemed to me that if the plans that were on the table a week earlier had been adhered to , we would probably have obtained different results from those that were achieved as a result of some amendments that were introduced in the last 72 hours .
All the same , my disappointment was probably most intense at that first moment and the passage of time has made me see things more calmly and see the more positive side of the Treaty .
I have heard some very negative comments about it here .
I believe that if we want to highlight the positive aspects , we can , for example , stress - as Mrs Spaak does - an issue that is very important and that has been with us as long as the institutions and the Treaty , ever since 1958 : institutional balance .
I very much like the way Mrs Spaak emphasises the issue of institutional balance .
I remember how a person I respected a great deal , Emile Noël , who was Secretary-General of the Commission for many years , always talked about the magic of the institutional balance , and I think it is one of the things we must safeguard , especially now , with the prospect of enlargement .
Enlargement cannot be allowed to introduce imbalance .
There was balance with six .
There is balance with 15 .
There must be balance with 25 .
And I also think we should remember the efforts that have been made to strengthen the role of fundamental rights and the impact of society in the European Union , not forgetting the responses the citizens expect from the Union .
The whole issue of fundamental rights , which was in a sense outside the scope of the Treaty , has been somewhat included in the Treaty with the Amsterdam reform .
And there are some very telling examples in this respect , as there are in areas such as all the issues relating to employment , which was excluded and is now included , and the creation of the great area of security and justice , much of which comes into the Community arena .
Mr Brinkhorst - who is not here now - mentioned this issue just now .
It is what the Commission wants , but I hope and trust that it is also what the Member States want .
A major contribution of the Treaty has been Schengen , which was excluded from the Treaty and is now included .
It was impossible to include it in the Treaty originally , so it remained outside .
And that was an anomaly ; it was outrageous .
Now Schengen is included in the Treaty .
Obviously , we must look at what remains to be done .
And I share Mr Brinkhorst 's concern over whether it will be included in the first or the third pillar , because , clearly , if we did not do anything , there would be nothing left in the third pillar . There are some issues that must continue to be intergovernmental , such as cooperation on criminal or police matters , but there are other issues that must come under the first pillar .
This is probably one of the things the last minute changes at Amsterdam prevented , that is , having a time period - three , four or five years - for issues to come into the Community arena simply by majority decision .
Nevertheless , the change introduced at the last minute was that such a decision must be adopted unanimously , which means that , over the five years , a single state can stop the transfer to the Community arena . Of course , that was a step backward , but it was a real step forward that what was outside the scope of the Treaty at Maastricht - because it was simply under the umbrella of the European Union - is now included in the Treaty , and we will have to see what form that inclusion takes .
Furthermore , the reform of the CFSP instruments will mean - and we hope this happens - that the Union can express itself on the international scene with a single voice .
A moment ago , someone mentioned that some progress had been made on issues relating to the common foreign and security policy .
It is clear .
What is happening is probably that the fact of merely having the instruments is not enough .
The instruments are there .
What is lacking is the political will to act in foreign policy , and that is a different matter .
It is perhaps regrettable that , in institutional terms - and Mrs Spaak highlights this - the results have not been very encouraging .
Parliament has certainly achieved an unprecedented extension of its powers as a co-legislator , but certain important and longstanding problems remain unresolved . However , there was not enough time to resolve them at Amsterdam , and that is why so many important issues are outstanding , such as an increase in qualified majority voting , the weighting of votes in the Council , or the number of Commissioners .
So there is some unfinished business here . These points are clearly set out in the Treaty itself , so we therefore know that another Intergovernmental Conference is going to be required , and it needs to be held soon .
We hope the Treaty of Amsterdam will soon enter into force . But it still has not done so and , as a result , it may be premature to draw up a balance sheet and make new plans for reform .
However , it is clear that we must start getting ready to be able to respond , firstly , to the questions that actually appear in the Treaty , the issues the Treaty itself asks us to respond to . This is the case for institutional issues - the ones I mentioned a moment ago - and security issues , for example , everything that affects the integration of the Western European Union into the European Union .
This will also require an Intergovernmental Conference , at the appropriate time .
It is therefore obviously necessary for each institution to carry out its work and play its part in accordance with the Treaty , and to seek what we have called for on so many occasions , namely , effective and democratic solutions for the future .
And in this connection , the Commission has already announced , in Agenda 2000 , that it wants a new Intergovernmental Conference to meet immediately after the turn of the century .
Moreover , the arrival of the euro , the opening of the enlargement negotiations and Agenda 2000 are also long-term projects initiated in 1997 that commit us to the future .
Parliament and the Commission have worked very harmoniously on those issues .
I am coming to an end , Mr President . These questions clearly go far beyond the framework imposed by a calendar year or even a legislature .
I am sure these challenges will be present in the minds of the Heads of State or Government meeting in Pörtschach on 24 and 25 October , and we hope that this meeting will be an opportunity to launch a joint study of the European Union 's mission in the 21st century .
That is all I have to say , but just one more word , if I may .
Mr Hager referred earlier to a document he had asked the Commission for and the fact that no-one had bothered to reply .
If he will tell me what he wants , I will make sure he gets an immediate reply to his request .
I cannot understand why a request from a Member has not been given consideration .
So I am at his disposal and I will gladly try to sort this out because it was probably due to a misunderstanding that he did not receive a response to his request .
In any case , all I can say is that although I may not be the relevant Commissioner , I am speaking here now so I am happy to offer to seek a response to Mr Hager 's request .
Commissioner , thank you very much for your offer .
However , it is not at all about the document not being forwarded , but about the way in which this was refused .
By this I mean a Member of Parliament being told that Commission documents are often messed around with , and the official in charge saying that what the Members of Parliament do with them - and I quote - gets on his nerves .
I protested against that , nothing else .
However , I would be pleased to give you more detailed information , though I do not want to do so before the House .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.15 p.m.
Commission statement on MAI
The next item is the Commission statement on the Multilateral Agreement on Investment .
Mr President , the Asian financial crisis has reminded us that investment and other financial flows can have a dramatic effect on the growth of competitiveness .
Long-term , good-quality investment can help strengthen economies and is the opposite of short-term speculative flows .
Such good-quality investment is clearly vital if developing countries are to move forward in an increasingly globalised world .
Investment has already made a significant contribution to world economic growth and the benefits are innumerable .
The European Community is the world 's largest outward investor .
Developing countries receive fresh capital , technology and know-how , and investors themselves gain access to new markets .
Investment can bring with it a raising of local labour and environmental standards , rather than a lowering of them .
There is also the question of the rooting out of corruption and unacceptable business practices .
The transparency that any general framework of rules would bring with it in this area would be very helpful to combat corruption , unacceptable practices and , indeed , crony capitalism generally .
Although investment decisions are ultimately taken by private companies , the policy environment makes a vital difference .
Predictable and transparent laws and regulations offer a prospect of greater investment flows , lower risk premia and higher returns .
At present , investment rules are set by a complex network of bilateral and regional treaties .
Important as these are , they lack many of the disciplines needed to create a transparent rule-based framework .
Moreover , their coverage is far from complete .
The question is : how to deal with this situation ?
I have always believed that the WTO is the best long-term home for work to create a predictable framework of investment rules .
There are already some WTO rules . In particular , the Uruguay Round agreement on trade-related investment measures , which impinge on investment .
Further work would not , therefore , be a new departure for the WTO , although it would offer the prospect of extending the existing rules in ways which would directly benefit both the European Union and developing countries .
In that context , I strongly supported the decision in December 1996 at the WTO Singapore ministerial meeting to establish a WTO investment working group to examine the relationship between trade and investment .
I believe it is important , as we move towards the WTO ministerial meeting next autumn that we should continue to press the case for investment rules to be tackled substantively in the WTO .
Meanwhile , of course , negotiations on a multilateral agreement on investment , the MAI , have been in progress since May 1995 in the framework of the OECD .
The EC and its Member States have participated in these negotiations on the basis of a strategy adopted by the Council in April 1995 and accepted by the European Parliament in its resolution of 14 December 1995 .
This March I responded to the Kreissl-Dörfler report by setting out the state of negotiations at that time .
Since then , OECD ministers decided in April on a period of assessment and further consultation of civil society , bearing in mind among other things economic concerns and political , social and cultural sensitivities .
As part of that process the Commission and the Council have held consultations with European industry , trade unions and a number of NGOs , including those particularly interested in the environmental , development and cultural aspects of the MAI .
These enabled some key aspects of the current draft to be discussed .
We were able to assure NGOs and others that , for example , it is not the aim to allow the MAI to undermine national observance of internationally recognised core labour standards as set out in ILO Conventions , nor to weaken the observance of internationally agreed environmental standards .
We were also able to reassure NGOs that on cultural matters we would stoutly defend the Community 's acquis , including the outcome of the Uruguay Round on audiovisual matters .
I believe that this dialogue , and parallel dialogues held by Member States with civil society , have gone some way to reassure those who had originally questioned the effect of the MAI on labour , environmental , cultural and other public policy issues .
Nonetheless , of course , the MAI negotiations continue to generate strong feelings in some quarters and in some Member States .
In particular , on Wednesday last , 14 October , the Prime Minister of France announced in response to a parliamentary question that France would withdraw from the negotiations .
As a result , the planned meeting this week of the OECD negotiating group will not now take place .
Instead , consultations under the chairmanship of the Deputy Secretary-General of the OECD will be taking place in Paris today with the participation of the Commission and Member States .
Coordination of the EU 'S collective attitude towards the MAI negotiations is still in progress .
We note the French Government 's view , on which it is in touch with the Commission and all Member States , and expect the implications to be discussed in the Council in due course .
We will clearly need to consider , against the objectives set in the unanimously agreed mandate of 1995 , what the best way forward now would be on further work on trade and investment , including the MAI .
Let me , however , give you my own views on the issue .
It seems to me that we have made substantial and strong efforts to achieve the kind of transparent framework within the OECD which would benefit both the European economies and those of other MAI participants .
The MAI negotiations have already done much to clear the ground on investment and to highlight those issues which are of key importance to the EU , including to civil society .
Nevertheless , I have always taken the view that the WTO is the best long-term home for this work , for which the MAI has already provided valuable signposts .
In present circumstances , the chances of bringing the current MAI negotiations to a successful conclusion frankly do not look at all promising , to put it mildly .
The Commission and the Member States , however , will need to continue to discuss collectively the outcome of our contacts with civil society , set against the objectives in the original negotiating mandate agreed by the Council of Ministers .
I shall , of course , keep Parliament and the Council closely informed of developments on this important issue .
Mr President , Sir Leon Brittan , you have outlined the background to the debate that the House is holding once again on the Multilateral Agreement on Investment , and you have also described the different points of view and interests , some of which vary a great deal .
In addition , you have dealt with the position of the French government , and with the Kreissl-Dörfler report .
Allow me to mention a few points , perhaps .
They all concern an aspect which you have mentioned .
Which strategy should we in fact be developing in future in view of this situation ?
This is practically the only remaining issue of interest .
Moreover , like you , I believe - this is my personal opinion , and I do not want to pretend that I share the view of the majority of my Group on this - that we need an international agreement on investment , and that this should have a high level of protection . I am also grateful in this connection that the Commission has just drawn up the REIO clause , and it was a success !
Nevertheless , we have made mistakes , and we should learn from these mistakes because we will have new rounds of negotiations , as you have mentioned , hopefully in the framework of the WTO , and we will in fact have the opening of the next WTO round .
I feel , and I also fear , that the widespread uncertainty and criticism , in part justified , are linked to two aspects .
The first is that there is growing uncertainty , and there is increasingly the feeling that globalisation or international trends and institutions undermine national sovereignty .
This is seen in America , and we are also witnessing a similar trend here .
We often follow the Americans anyway , and it seems to me that we are also following the Americans in this area , instead of going against them , which in my opinion would be the better position for Europe .
You were right to say that it must be in our interests to strengthen Europe 's international position , and in this respect this would be a step in that direction .
However , the second difficulty , as I see it , is that we do not know how to deal properly with sensitive issues .
We have not learned to include sensitive issues , such as culture , the environment and agricultural policy , in international negotiations , with the result that we always discuss them in a negative sense only .
We always say simply that we do not want them to be included , which is also right , and that we want the acquis communautaire to be preserved , which is right too ; that is our position .
However , we constantly fear that international agreements serve to gradually undermine us , because the others , our opponents so to speak , are clever .
We always assume that they are cleverer than we in the European Union are .
I believe we must now , with the help of an extremely open strategy , learn how to deal with this and perhaps also to convey the message that both the European Commission and the European Parliament are capable of formulating very good and very firm positions .
Finally , I am also concerned that if we fail do this , the non-governmental organisations will increasingly take on a parliamentary role , and this is something that I would not like , since I still firmly believe in a parliamentary democracy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I accept the basic statement by Mrs Mann , who made a personal remark on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , namely that we need an international agreement on investment .
We should not talk around the issue , as we simply need it .
Conversely , fears of globalisation and many other things actually protect us from making mistakes .
Anyone who wants there to be investment in the Third World must also make sure that a protective framework is in place for those who invest their money , precisely because of what we have experienced with the Asian crisis , for example .
We must also stop making an ideology out of this .
Of course , I understand that everything is discussed at length here in the European Parliament , and we always see problems somewhere or other .
No , we need an international agreement on investment .
That is why the Group of the European People 's Party states quite clearly that we need a multilateral agreement .
Secondly , we must redress the balance between the rights and obligations of investors .
The European Parliament must always be fully included in this issue , and you always do so , Sir Leon Brittan ; I know that you like to be praised , as I am doing here .
I must also explain that we have stated clearly that the WTO negotiations need to be concluded soon .
In parallel with this , the matter must be considered within the OECD , because it is legitimate that we consider in the OECD what the situation is in the WTO : with 134 countries in the WTO , how are we to achieve anything if we are not prepared to provide a framework .
In conclusion , the French Government is a sovereign government .
It may allow itself to be pushed into a corner by the Greens if it wishes .
Yet , as an industrial nation , France will not in the end be able to avoid making a clear statement here on what we all want .
I would therefore be pleased if the parliamentary groups were to talk a little more calmly with each other about how this can best be achieved .
Mr President , the multilateral agreement on investment is designed to provide greater freedom for international investment , to protect it and set up a machinery for resolving disputes between governments and investors .
All in all a good thing , I would have thought , for a number of reasons .
Firstly , it will put an end to the more than 1 800 bilateral agreements on foreign investment .
These will be replaced by one large , transparent agreement , making for a framework of greater legal certainty and so expanding the investment formula , which will then lead to greater economic growth and prosperity .
Secondly , it seems to me logical that a multinational agreement on trade should be complemented by a multinational agreement on investment .
Trade and investment are after all closely interlinked .
Cui bono ? Who benefits ?
In the first instance , the multinationals .
And why not ?
Are they not entitled to equal treatment , just like any ordinary citizen - and thus entitled to protective measures and compensation in the event of appropriation or other measures which deprive them of their assets ?
But the developing countries too will benefit from this agreement .
Foreign investment creates jobs which would not otherwise exist .
And growth in the new export sectors driven by foreign investors , multinationals amongst them , brings spill-over effects which benefit the whole economy .
The facts bear this out .
To take just one example , wage increases in Taiwan and South Korea : whilst the hourly wage there in 1975 was on average just 6 % of that in the USA , by 1995 the figures had risen to 34 % and 43 % of it respectively .
This positive development is a direct result of investment .
There are of course some undesirable situations . But these have nothing to do with the investment agreement .
There are of course countries which pay no heed at all to social and environmental standards in their efforts to attract investment .
And these countries do not need the agreement , because they are for the most part authoritarian regimes .
So the answer is not to weaken or block the multilateral agreement , but rather to bring political democracy to these regimes , in other words what is needed is not only economic liberalisation but political liberalisation , an MAD , a multilateral agreement on democracy , as well as an MAI .
The conclusion is that most of the criticism is exaggerated , indeed unfair , though the draft agreement certainly has some shortcomings .
The developing countries must be directly involved in the negotiations on the agreement .
Ideally , the negotiations should be conducted under the aegis of the World Trade Organisation , and the MAI should be inspired by the principles of the WTO .
The dispute-resolving procedure must be more balanced , so that the host country is able to take action against the investor .
My final point is that we think the MAI must be made more democratic and that the present draft text must be amended in a number of respects .
But for the rest I am convinced that the agreement on international investment needs to be concluded as speedily as possible .
Mr President , over the last ten years , growth in direct investment has increased at twice the rate of growth in world trade .
This observation concerns all products and all sectors of the economy , and it is because of this that the idea of a Multilateral Agreement on Investment , or MAI , has been proposed since the beginning of the 1990s .
However , if there is indeed an emerging need for a multilateral framework , as several speakers have mentioned , we must note that the United States has always preferred to conduct these negotiations within the OECD , with industrialised countries , whereas the European Union tries to hold them within the WTO , a global organisation that brings together all countries concerned with investment , including the less developed countries .
The MAI is aimed at protecting investors ' rights and guaranteeing stable rules of operation .
But the proposals put forward so far do not respect the cultural exception clause that Europe fought to obtain in the GATT or the integration procedures employed by the Union to facilitate the progressive accession of central and eastern European countries into the single European market .
Neither do they respect the social and environmental standards laid down by the European Union , less still the sovereign right of the Member States of the European Union to determine them .
Lastly , this agreement stipulates that American extra-territorial laws be recognised , and we object to these laws being implemented indiscriminately .
So within what framework should these negotiations be pursued , or not , as the case may be ?
In the OECD each state negotiates on its own behalf and , in this way , the US seeks to undermine the solidarity between the states of the Union .
On the other hand , if the Union grants Sir Leon Brittan a mandate to negotiate this matter within the framework of the WTO , which is what we want , this mandate must include the exception clauses , for example the cultural exception that the Baladur government fought so hard to obtain in 1994 , along with the other clauses that we do not want to retain .
How can we fail to see that the United States is trying , by means of the OECD , to take back with one hand what they have given to the GATT with the other , and to undermine our social and environmental framework in their quest for absolute liberalism .
The position of the UPE Group is that negotiations should continue within the framework of the WTO .
Mr President , the Prime Minister , Mr Jospin , chose the only correct option last week in announcing that France was to withdraw from the OECD negotiations on the MAI .
As rapporteur on the legal framework for the MAI , I am extremely pleased by this , Mr Kittelmann .
The European Parliament 's resolution in March established clearly that the draft agreement not only has serious shortcomings , but that it even goes completely in the wrong direction in many areas , because it gives priority to the rights of investors over everything else , for instance .
We therefore urged that the agreement should not be signed in this form .
The Commission 's answer to this was certainly incredibly disappointing .
Yet we have seen the effect of Parliament 's resolution , of the widespread international mobilisation of hundreds , if not thousands , of citizens ' interest groups , non-governmental organisations and trade unions in Europe and worldwide , Mr Rübig , and the same applies to the sound report produced by Mrs Lalumière for the French Government , and to the important signals given by the Greens in France .
Sir Leon Brittan , you now have clear evidence that European politicians , European governments and European civil society do not share your line on free trade !
Accept the consequences of this , bury the MAI , shelve it .
Mr Jospin rightly said last week that the MAI cannot be reformed .
That is why it also makes no sense to transfer it to the WTO in the near future , because the WTO is anything but democratic , and is urgently in need of reform itself .
Developing countries would be overlooked once again , with disastrous consequences for them .
Nevertheless , one thing is clear - pay attention now , ladies and gentlemen - , we need an international agreement to regulate and supervise investments , the number of which has increased and is increasing by leaps and bounds .
However , the crucial issues are : who takes part in the negotiations ?
Are weaker parties granted an equal right to a say in the matter ?
Are all those parliaments affected , including the European Parliament , granted power of codecision , and what is in it afterwards ?
This is really crucial .
That is why this agreement should not lower environmental and social standards .
It must establish political control of the economy and make democratic supervision the norm .
Please inform the French Government of this , Sir Leon .
You always place emphasis on the developing countries yet they were not even at the negotiating table .
Please read the texts first !
Mr President , the MAI as formulated by the OECD is dead .
Let us not beat around the bush or waste time with a text that has lost all credibility .
France , quite rightly , has definitively rejected this MAI in the light of Catherine Lalumi & # x010D ; re 's excellent report , which showed the extent to which this pseudo-agreement attempted to strike a fatal blow to the social , cultural and environmental acquis .
What is more , France has stated openly what a number of governments , trade unions , NGOs and even some Members of the Commission have been thinking .
The MAI has been in the spotlight for some time now .
But how many other agreements of this type are concluded by the OECD to then be rendered inapplicable ?
The shipbuilding industry is one example .
They are inapplicable because they are prepared behind closed doors by people who are completely cut off from reality .
People who are doubtless very competent but perhaps a little too confident , to the extent that they take over from the political officials and make the decisions that they are supposed to make .
As a result , this type of institution finds itself in a situation in which technocracy prevails over politics and in fact over democracy itself .
This is why I personally question the role of the OECD and think that today we should no longer hesitate to call its very existence into question .
You will be aware , Mr President , that the Chateau de la Muette in Paris , where the organisation has its headquarters , has become rather like the Bastille at the end of the 18th century , in other words a symbol that has lost its purpose .
I myself strongly believe that the dissolution of the OECD should be accompanied by a strengthening of the WTO .
It is within this organisation , and no other , that this type of debate on investments should take place .
But if we want to be as efficient as possible - and here I am specifically referring to the millennium negotiations - we should consider a more democratic way of monitoring the WTO .
This is why I would like Parliament to agree to create a powerful committee , one which is fully involved in monitoring the work of the WTO , along the lines of the system already in operation in the US Senate .
If the French Government has dealt a fatal blow to the OECD 's MAI , it did so in order to better create a new dialogue , one that involves all actors , both large and small , who have a part to play in the globalisation of the economy .
Once again Mr President , this should take place in the WTO and nowhere else .
Mr President , I have been listening carefully to Commissioner Brittan , but I would like to remind you that we were among the first to draw attention to the detrimental nature of the MAI project developed by the OECD , mainly because it called into question the vital regulatory role played by the states , it introduced a new legal hierarchy amongst international actors by favouring investors and it marginalised developing countries from the negotiation process .
I would like to welcome all parliamentary and extra-parliamentary initiatives , including Mr Lannoye 's initiative , in which I am involved ; these have mobilised a large part of the European political community against a draft treaty that is both unreasonable and unamendable .
The way it has been drawn up would , in practice , have prevented major European interests and specific characteristics from being defended ( cultural exceptions , high social and environmental standards , unacceptable extra-territorial legislation ) .
These initiatives have in my opinion contributed to a significant shift in position for some Member States , including France , and of course I welcome this .
The definition of a clear regulatory framework along with complete and harmonised rules would indeed be very useful . Consequently , a number of Member States think that negotiations should be resumed but on a completely different basis and within the appropriate framework , one that allows participation of all parties concerned .
This is certainly not a touchy reaction , Commissioner .
The debate calls for negotiations to be carried out within the WTO and not the OECD .
But the rules of the WTO - let us not forget - do not take into account the social and environmental concerns so dear to our peoples .
We shall therefore once again have to be extremely vigilant : the Council must be very precise in the way it draws up the new mandate that it will grant the Commission , and we in the European Parliament and the national parliaments must monitor its implementation rigorously so that in the long term investment flows benefit all our populations .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , initially an attempt was made behind closed doors over many years to work out an international agreement that aimed to achieve complete control of financial capital .
This attempt was temporarily unsuccessful due to an indiscretion in Canada , which attempted to eliminate national , social and environmental legislation that had been secured previously by years of legal cases .
The structure of the MAI programme has made every democrat aware of how quickly fundamental democratic rights can be lost .
We are facing a large-scale redistribution throughout the world .
Multinationals no longer make their profits predominantly from production ; up to 70 % of profits are now a result of speculating in money .
This is a system that is bound to go wrong , and is already doing so to a degree , and one that leads to mass unemployment and widespread poverty in favour of a small number of people .
The MAI was an instrument that aimed to remove even the minimal residual risk from this speculation , and to undermine the remaining sovereignty of the nation states .
You are unsure , and that is why you feel the need to interrupt .
I know I am right .
That is why I do not need to interrupt you !
Mr President , the MAI can be reduced to a simple formula : multinationals have all the rights and the states have all the duties .
However , at a time when some multinationals have bigger budgets than some Member States of the European Union , I do not think it is the multinationals that need protection , as Mr De Clercq proposed .
It is to this Parliament 's credit that it has debated and endorsed the Kreissl-Dörfler report , which serves as a warning to Member States that the Multilateral Agreement on Investment could endanger democracy itself .
As it was the cultured men and women in France who immediately took action to preserve the cultural exception , it very quickly became clear that this MAI affected every area and that , had the agreement been signed , a national parliament would not in future be able to adopt a text that was not in line with the provisions of the MAI .
As Prime Minister Lionel Jospin stated , the arguments against this draft agreement do not hinge on sectorial or technical points , rather they relate to the very reasons behind these negotiations and pose fundamental problems as regards state sovereignty , given that each state would be obliged to make an irreversible commitment .
Irreversible !
So what would be the point of changing government , voting , changing policies , if everything were determined elsewhere ?
It is one thing to confer sovereignty on delegations within the framework of this Community , in a state-controlled procedure and a historic adventure , as we perceive and currently shape it , and which for us is of considerable importance .
But it is quite another thing to confer sovereignty on private interests .
Therefore , for those of us who campaigned against the MAI , Lionel Jospin 's decision to leave the negotiating table is very satisfactory , and is not a touchy reaction , as Commissioner Brittan said .
It is a decision that was thought through carefully and taken following the excellent work by Mrs Catherine Lalumi & # x010D ; re .
Does this mean that we are against all agreements ?
No , it does not .
But we very much hope that none of the agreements currently under discussion , be it the MAI , the New Transatlantic Market or the Transatlantic Economic Partnership , are devised in secret or abandon the rights of the people in favour of private financial interests .
It is to be hoped that future debates will take place under the auspices of the WTO , for example , where developing countries will be able to have their say and will no longer be presented with a fait accompli .
In short , democracy should still have a purpose and a future .
Mr President , I welcome Sir Leon Brittan 's statement .
Criticism of the MAI is largely based on a misunderstanding .
It is not a matter of instituting privileges for foreign investment , but of establishing guarantees of equal treatment .
Under an investment protection agreement , a country may adopt the environmental provisions of its choice , provided they are not used to discriminate against foreign investment .
Contrary to what some critics seem to believe , the MAI would not facilitate short-term capital movements .
The underlying aim is quite the opposite : promoting long-term investment .
For the underdeveloped countries , long-term investment can be preferable to short-term borrowing or foreign portfolio investment .
If the economic situation changes for the worse , short-term capital of this kind can easily be moved away - with potentially dire effects .
Since it is usually the best companies that invest abroad , the social conditions on offer are likely to be better than average .
These companies will normally engage in transfers of know-how and technology , providing better support for long-term development than national exchequers could achieve by means of transfer payments .
There are more than 1 600 bilateral investment protection agreements .
One MAI could replace this contractual jungle with a more transparent system .
There is no obligation on countries to join .
If the current criticism leads to negotiations being broken off , long-term investment in the developing countries will be one of the first casualties .
All the more so if a renegotiated MAI , instead of enshrining non-discrimination , were to impose higher requirements on foreign companies than on domestic ones - which is what some critics seem to want .
Private investment does not come on demand . And slowed investment flows would be to everyone 's disadvantage .
Many developing countries today are so keen to attract foreign investment that they are offering subsidies to foreign companies . An agreement involving extra burdens on business would undermine their attempts to make themselves attractive to investors .
The purpose of some opponents ' endeavours to block the MAI could precisely be to put obstacles in the way of international investment .
There is a widely held belief that , if companies cannot invest abroad , they will do so back at home .
Protectionism of this kind can easily have the opposite effect .
Companies unable to invest abroad - in support of new market strategies , for example - might then find it hard to do business at all on the domestic front .
Maybe it was a mistake to hold the negotiations under the auspices of the OECD . Suspicions are bound to arise when the lead organisation has such a limited membership , with a mere handful of developing countries participating .
As Sir Leon said , even though its remit is primarily trade and not investment , the WTO is probably better placed to handle the negotiations .
Mr President , the French Government 's decision to withdraw from the OECD-level MAI negotiations was a courageous one , and leaves me gratified on two counts . Firstly , the agreement that was being worked on would grant unilateral rights to multinational companies at the expense of democratic principles , and that is totally unacceptable .
Secondly , the decision demonstrates that democracy works ; the will of the people can prevail . Nothing dictates that the multinationals will have their way , with unfettered free trade as the be-all and end-all .
The French decision puts down an important marker in this respect .
I am surprised that other governments calling themselves left-wing - the Swedish one , for example - have not followed the French lead .
Instead , they have simply absorbed the underlying philosophy of the MAI .
We should now jettison the current proposal and start the process all over again , basing ourselves this time on a more socially and environmentally oriented agenda , and offering a place at the discussion table to the third world countries .
Mr President , in my opinion this incantatory talk of the virtues of liberalism is not likely to restore health to a project that is so obviously ailing .
Following the French Government 's decision to withdraw from negotiations , it seems quite clear that political conditions are no longer appropriate for these negotiations to continue .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the French Government is not alone .
The Belgian Government was greatly disturbed by what happened in Paris , and the future government of Germany is also questioning the relevance of a project that is evidently flawed .
We are talking of transferring negotiations to the WTO .
Firstly , I would like to remind you that the WTO is not the temple of democracy people presume it is , and that the small states of the South barely have their voices heard in this forum .
So as Mr Sainjon suggested , we will certainly also have to review the way in which the WTO operates .
Furthermore , to transfer the debate without changing the basic project would not change a great deal .
In this respect , I am very concerned to hear Commissioner Brittan reiterate during meetings his faith in the virtues of the present project .
It is a project that can be likened to a poor-quality film , or what we might call a ' turkey ' ; changing the set or adding extras to crucial scenes will not turn it into a good film , especially if the script and the stars appearing in it are the same , and if it continues to be directed by the multinationals .
I therefore think that if future negotiations take place within a new framework , the conditions in which they take place should be discussed democratically , and that Commissioner Brittan and the European Commission should be given a clear mandate that is monitored democratically ; otherwise we are in real danger of misleading ourselves totally in this debate .
Mr President , an agreement on investment is doubtless needed , but not simply any agreement .
The present draft MAI treaty almost caricatures the concept of ultra-liberalism .
We are told that it is aimed at protecting non-national investors who , it would appear , have a lot to fear from the states .
But this protection is to be put before the rights of citizens and the rights of the states .
This would give non-national investors the opportunity to question any government policy or action that might reduce their predicted profits .
It would also grant them the right to full and constant protection , and this would ban the states not only from taking future nationalisation measures , but also from taking any measure that has the equivalent effect . In addition , there would be a special clause that would render irreversible any liberalisation measures laid down by a government .
How could such a monstrosity ever have been negotiated ?
Did the OECD believe that science and money create world peace ?
No , world peace is the result of an agreement between democratic governments who create and protect it .
Investors are able to prosper within the framework of this peace , on the condition that they do not destroy , undermine or evade these democratic agreements .
Public opinion is well aware of this , as it has demonstrated in the space of a few weeks by speaking out against this very attractively packaged draft agreement purporting to guarantee that in future everything would be free and without discrimination , with a couple of exceptions , namely cultural and audiovisual exceptions which the states , like naughty pupils , would be granted on the condition that they submit a specific request .
Is this promise that everything will be free and without discrimination for foreign investors aimed at the non-democratic states ?
Of course not .
We are all aware that they can sign treaties and have absolutely no intention of respecting them unless threatened with war .
We are therefore getting closer to the real reason behind these negotiations : they are intended to facilitate foreign investment in developed democratic countries and ensure that investment comes directly from multinationals or indirectly from the various mafia or dictatorships in the world .
But of the democratic countries being targeted , it is evident that the countries of the European Union are being targeted most , because they constitute a huge market that is gradually placing social issues high on the agenda and becoming a unique democratic force in the world , one that is capable of making human rights a priority .
But the fact remains that democracy is a lengthy process and we have still not completed the task of defining all our environmental or consumer protection regulations , or even our minimum social requirements .
Neither are we equipped with political institutions that are strong enough to ensure our choices are respected and to negotiate with one voice .
So it is understandable that some are keen to create the conditions which would destroy this democratic construction by imposing other laws , such as the law of money , or even that of the United States .
It is therefore a very bad project , one that has been carried out outside civil and democratic society , as Catherine Lalumi & # x010D ; re 's report so clearly highlighted , and that should be discarded .
Not because of a touchy reaction , Sir Brittan , but in order to start again at a later date , for example within the framework of the WTO .
Mr President , I should firstly like to thank Sir Leon Brittan for continuously helping to objectify the debate .
I believe that the most important thing is to go into what this agreement is actually concerned with .
I should like to thank Mr Kreissl-Dörfler for stating very clearly that an agreement is necessary .
I believe we can also say that increasing demands are being made on politics as a whole .
It is also repeatedly said that we must come to grips with globalisation .
Mr Kittelmann said today that we in the European Parliament must also determine the rules of the game for increasing world trade .
That is why I should like on this occasion to take up the cudgels for the Multilateral Agreement on Investment .
I believe the mystery should be removed from the whole project , because this is about nothing other than ensuring that foreign investors and investments do not enjoy less favourable treatment than domestic investors and investments .
This is the core issue , and I believe we must all declare our support for it .
We are seeking to ensure high standards , rational liberalisation of investment rules , and an effective disputes settlement procedure .
I believe it is essential that we settle conflicts satisfactorily in this area .
The current negotiations on the MAI have led to an increase in the information needs of the general public .
The importance of this issue was also recognised .
Cross-border investments have meanwhile become the most important driving force in the world economy .
Impressive figures support this statement .
In the last 13 years annual investment flows have increased 17-fold , from USD 25 billion to 424 billion .
In my country alone , Austria , 8 % of the gross domestic product is apportioned to investments from abroad .
This secures many jobs .
No less than 1 500 bilateral agreements are in force throughout the world for concluding such investments .
It goes without saying here that the need to create adequate legal frameworks has increased greatly ; a legal framework such as has existed for trade in goods since 1947 , in the form of the GATT , and since 1995 for cross-border trade in services .
The current draft agreement now secures equal national treatment as well as most-favoured nation treatment .
For instance , it guarantees the French employer that competitors in the market cannot draw any competitive advantages from discriminatory locational factors .
Mr President , the effects of the MAI would be felt around the world - which explains why it has met with such near-universal condemnation .
Some 560 organisations from 67 countries have come together and launched a joint plea for the right of scrutiny . They want greater transparency and openness , more free debate and the involvement of civil society .
I wish to congratulate all those - including my colleagues in the European Parliament - who have contributed towards uncovering the true face of the MAI .
What lessons have been learnt ?
What has this discussion taught the Commission , the negotiators , Sir Leon Brittan - and even Mr Burenstam Linder ?
Well , they have been made to understand that this is not the way to proceed .
An investment agreement should be facilitating , not restrictive , and should help us to meet our international environmental commitments .
We must state unequivocally that our environmental objectives are of paramount importance .
Priority should be given to fulfilling the agreements and commitments entered into at the major UN conferences ; international investment agreements are not exempt from these overarching criteria .
The MAI will not meet with general approval until human rights are given precedence over the rights of big business .
There is a wider degree of consensus on this issue than the protagonists would wish to admit .
The fact of the matter is that most people , but not all who have spoken , see the merits of an international agreement on investment , and they are right to do so .
They are right to do so , because it is an absurd caricature to present such an agreement , provided it is of the right kind , as being something that is simply for the benefit of multinational companies .
Not at all .
If we are concerned about those who are suffering from the Asian crisis , if we are concerned about the fact that there are in a country like Indonesia literally millions of people who are now below the poverty line because of that crisis , then we have to be interested in attracting investment to those countries , because that is one of the ways to recover .
It will not attract investment unless there is an adequate framework to enable people to invest safely .
That is the reality of the situation .
You cannot force investment to take place .
You can do what you like .
You can shout and you can scream slogans from the sky , but people will not invest unless they believe that there is a possibility to get a return .
That is why it is in the interests of the poorest people in the world that there should be a proper framework for investment .
That does not mean that there should be any agreement .
The question is what agreement should there be and where should the forum be .
I have to say , in particular to Mrs Moreau , that some people who have spoken in response to a Commission statement seems to have decided what to say before they heard what the statement was , and seem to have made comments which are completely unjustified by the statement .
In particular , I said right at the outset that , as far as we were concerned , the primary forum for such an agreement should be the WTO . The primary forum for such an agreement should be the WTO , because it is there that the developing countries are present in person and there that their concerns can most fully be met .
I said that quite clearly and I have said that many times before .
Of course one has to look at what has happened in the OECD in the context of that view .
I did not make any pejorative remarks about the French Government .
If that was heard by the honourable Member , she heard what was not said .
She should withdraw that , because nothing of the kind was said .
The fact of the matter that we now have to consider , coolly , if we now have to go to the WTO - which is likely and which I have always favoured , in any event - is indeed one of the lessons to be learnt from the negotiation that took place in the OECD .
I do not reject that negotiation as being one that was invalid or inappropriate .
The fact of the matter is that that negotiation was commenced on the basis of a mandate which was supported unanimously by the Member States , all of them democratic governments , after debates in this Parliament as well - not on the basis of some go-ahead of an irresponsible kind and abuse of power by the Commission .
It is nonsense .
Last year the Council of Ministers commended the progress that had been made and asked that further progress should continue to be made .
So it is not a frolic of our own that we have gone on , but a responsible negotiation in a responsible place .
It was legitimate for the Member States - including every single one of them - to believe that a negotiation in the OECD could provide a platform from which one could proceed to a negotiation in the WTO and it could provide lessons that could be drawn from it .
All of that is clear .
I have made it clear in this House time and time again - and most recently today , for those who are prepared to listen - that we , on behalf of the Member States of the European Union , were not prepared to complete a negotiation and to enter into an agreement which did not provide adequate protection for the concerns that have been expressed about the environment , for the concerns that have been expressed about audiovisual and other cultural matters and for the concerns that have been expressed about the observance of ILO labour standards .
We did not conclude the negotiation and were not going to conclude the negotiation without reflecting on the legitimate concerns of the Member States on those subjects , because that was the mandate .
The sole question was whether there was a reasonable chance of completing those negotiations with an acceptable agreement or not .
I believe that we will never know the answer to that question because the negotiations are likely not to be concluded in that way .
I do not know what the answer would be , but what I do know is that there is absolutely no basis for suggesting that the Commission would reach an agreement , when we have expressly said that we would not do so without meeting the legitimate and reasonable concerns that have been expressed !
Now it may well be that the scene shifts to the WTO .
I have said that we regard that , in any event , as the preferable forum and as the main place in which a negotiation should take place .
To achieve that we have to persuade everybody that there should be a new Millennium round and we have to persuade people that a negotiation on investment should take place in it .
We will be able to do so and we shall be accountable to the democratically-elected governments of the European Union and , as has been generously said by at least one distinguished speaker , the Commission accepts its responsibilities to the European Parliament as well .
One thing I must say , and one thing that is dangerous that has been said , is that there has been a lot of talk about sovereignty .
What does that mean ?
As far as sovereignty is concerned any international agreement on any subject is to an extent an acceptance of a limitation of sovereignty .
The agreement setting up the European Union is an expression limiting sovereignty .
The Treaty of Maastricht limits sovereignty , the Treaty of Amsterdam limits sovereignty , but it is being done by democratically elected governments with the support of democratically-elected parliaments , because they believe that internationally we can reach an agreement which is for our benefit and achieve thereby something that cannot be done just by individual governments acting on their own .
If you take this argument about sovereignty or au pied de la lettre in the way that has been argued today , you would never have an international agreement on anything .
Of course you may want to have provisions in agreements that allow you to withdraw from them at a certain time and on certain conditions .
That is reasonable and it may or may not be appropriate in this case .
But the argument about sovereignty is an appeal to the emotions and a contradiction of everything that we have achieved in the European Union over the last 40 years , because if that argument had prevailed , we would never have started and none of you would be here today .
I value your presence , I hope that we can work together to achieve the right results in the right place but we will only be able to do so if we speak with a clear head and shed some of the emotions which have wrongly entered a subject which is important but where it is necessary to have a little more light and a little less heat .
Mr President , I would like to come back to the remarks I made earlier , which were corrected by the Commissioner .
I heard a comment made that the French Government reacted touchily to the MAI .
In French , a touchy reaction means an unconsidered one , and this is why I think that this is a pejorative comment in relation to my government , which is democratically elected like the others .
Several speakers have also repeated this expression and this is why I am asking Mr Brittan to withdraw his remark .
Mr President , I am sorry the honourable Member has had a problem with the translation but as it happens I was following the text very closely and I will repeat what I said about the French Government and the only thing I said about the French Government . I said :
' I am aware , nonetheless , that the MAI negotiations continue to generate strong feelings in some quarters and in some Member States .
In particular , last Wednesday the Prime Minister of France announced in response to a parliamentary question that France would withdraw from the negotiations .
As a result , the planned meeting this week of the OECD negotiating group will not now take place .
Instead , consultations under the chairmanship of the Deputy Secretary-General of the OECD will take place in Paris today with the participation of the Commission and Member States ' .
That is what I said .
It is not what the honourable Member heard and I am sorry that either through her conviction or as a result of a problem of interpretation she thought she heard what she did not hear and what was not said .
I do not intend to reopen the discussion at this point .
I shall just briefly give the floor to two colleagues .
Mr President , Sir Leon Brittan , of course it is absolutely clear to everyone in the House that international treaties , including the Treaty on European Union , limit sovereignty in certain areas .
And we do not have anything at all against this .
But what Mr Jospin said , and what we are also saying , is really that this agreement on MAI limits the sovereignty of a state in a particular way that is no longer linked to the way in which an EU treaty limits sovereignty , for instance .
The issue here is preferential treatment in the area of investment : great .
But the EU is much more than purely an internal market .
This is a project for the whole of Europe , and that is really the crucial difference .
We will gladly give up sovereignty for this , but not for an MAI in this form .
I hope you can agree with me on this , as that would already be important progress .
Mr President , I do not know whether you share my opinion .
I sometimes have the impression at the moment that we are sitting in the French National Assembly and not in the European Parliament .
It will have been well received at home .
I should like to support you , Sir Leon Brittan , on one issue and pass on your conviction .
Without a Multilateral Agreement on Investment there will be no investment .
I urge all those on the Left , who are so vociferous in their views , to explain this to the Third World countries when there is no investment .
If you want to invest your own money , your personal money , in something , then you also require security .
The agreement will be amended , and further negotiations will take place .
However , if the Third World no longer receives aid in the form of investment , you have caused more damage than merely to prevent an agreement on ideological grounds .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.15 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Emissions from diesel engines
The next item is the report ( A4-0364 / 98 ) by Mr Lange , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directive 88 / 77 / EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the measures to be taken against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants from diesel engines for use in vehicles ( COM ( 97 ) 0627 - C4-0194 / 98-97 / 0350 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , almost exactly a month ago to the day , we adopted at third reading the legislation on passenger cars and light commercial vehicles .
With this legislation , emission limit values for these vehicles have become 95 % stricter in Europe over the last fifteen years .
Now we are turning our attention to trucks , lorries and buses , and here we find that the legislation has been very hesitant and quite different from that on passenger cars .
The result is that today 50 % of all nitrogen oxide and particulate emissions in Europe are from lorries and buses , and not from the far more numerous passenger cars .
Looking at the figures , there are about 200 million passenger cars on the roads , and lorries and buses add up to just a fraction of this number .
It seems as though something is not quite right here , which is indeed the case , because until now it has never been necessary to fit an exhaust purification device in lorries and buses .
The small changes to the limit values that have been made thus far could be dealt with by the manufacturer making a slight mechanical adjustment to the engine , changing the injection nozzle , adapting the engine , none of which involved any exhaust after treatment .
I ask myself whether we can continue to accept this when we have fixed strict limits on exhaust emissions for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles , which require a catalyst to be incorporated into the exhaust system .
The answer is no : we urgently need exhaust after treatment for lorries too .
That is why the proposal from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection says that alongside the stage for 2000 , which is still based on making changes to the engine only , we should lay down a second stage for 2005 , which would require an exhaust purification device to be fitted for reducing in particular nitrogen oxides and soot particles .
This is not cloud-cuckoo-land , this is state-of-the-art technology .
We now have vehicles with catalysts that reduce NOx emissions .
There are entire testing programmes , which incidentally are strongly supported by the Bavarian state government and by the Dutch TNO , and even Fiat Ivecco in Switzerland is working with the federal environment authorities there .
We have a combination of filters to reduce NOx and we also have particulate traps .
Tests have already been underway for six months in Paderborn , and the results show clearly that the limit values we are proposing are realistic and achievable .
So the central objective of this second stage for 2005 is that lorries , trucks and buses should also have built-in systems for exhaust after treatment .
This would also be economical in terms of price , because of course it will become cheaper with mass production ; at present it costs about ECU 3000 .
But , because until now attempts to comply with exhaust emission limit values involved only making technical adjustments to the engine , the most significant consequence was increased fuel consumption , due to the fact that we were only targeting NOx and not CO2 emissions .
By fitting a de NOx catalyst , to reduce NOx emissions by means of a catalyst , we can achieve a reduction of approximately 10 % in consumption in lorries .
I think that a 10 % drop in consumption , given rising lorry traffic in Europe , is certainly going to contribute to reducing CO2 here .
So a reduction in consumption is added to the effects of exhaust after treatment .
We also suggest of course that durability and monitoring should be increased , as with the passenger cars and light commercial vehicles .
Commissioner , I would therefore ask you to show a little courage here , and not resolve to do merely what is already out there .
In September there was a large fair for heavy goods vehicles , where the talk was of truck manufacturers being prepared for EURO III .
Visitors could see for themselves that lorry manufacturers were able to satisfy the legal requirements of EURO III two years ahead of time .
Surely we cannot say that we are adopting something that has been the state-of-the-art for two years already !
No , we have to be ambitious .
We must see to it that the lorries that we need are also as ecologically harmless as possible .
Mr President , I do not want to take up a great deal of the House 's time , but first I would very much like to congratulate Mr Lange on his continuation of work on these very technical and important matters .
As rapporteur on air quality , I simply want to highlight the importance for air quality of these issues .
This report probably has to take the prize for lengthy and difficult titles but it is a very important measure in the battle to improve air quality and , as a result , the health of our citizens .
The limit values which are being been laid down in the first daughter directive on air pollution which is currently between first and second readings in this House depend on the whole package of measures under Auto-oil of which this is really an intrinsic part .
The air quality directives have emission limits for 2005 and 2010 .
So the text that we are debating tonight is a very necessary piece of this jigsaw .
In Britain around 80 % of our goods are now moved by road compared to rail , waterways and other means .
Heavy lorries , therefore , have major implications for the health of our citizens .
Heavy lorries mostly run on diesel engines and these are responsible for a large amount of pollution from particulates and oxides of nitrogen .
They also contribute to the creation of ozone and summer smog .
We know all about those problems .
Several of the amendments supported by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection especially refer to particulates and Nox , recognising the difference between what pollutants are released in cities and what escape from long-range haulage .
The research studies which have been carried out on particulates , or black smoke , underline the necessity to specify 2005 under this proposal , precisely so that industry will have to create the necessary anti-pollution devices such as particulate traps , and have the lead-in time to be able to do so .
We have only recently pushed through the legislation demanding low-sulphur fuels by 2005 .
This is the logical other side of that equation .
We must not listen to the voices calling for delay .
I simply want to emphasise , in conclusion , how essential it is to maintain the toughest possible emission limits as we have demanded in other parts of the Auto-oil programme .
To ensure the health of our future generations is one of the most tangible parts of the work that we do here in the European Parliament to meet the needs and desires of our citizens .
I fully support Mr Lange 's amendments and his work on what is a very technical area .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am glad that in the last few months we have been able to discuss and approve a number of interesting reports in the House , some of them by means of the codecision procedure , which gives meaning to the single market in the areas of transport and mobility as well .
If we all realise that the single market is a success story , then it follows that we also want to have mobility .
I would very much like to see mobility , not only of persons but of goods and services too .
That is indeed the point of this single market .
It is the answer to the global challenge , and this is why we in Europe need to have calculable values for mobility and for the hauliers who will in future have to pay out a great deal of money to drive vehicles with purified exhaust gases , and will indeed wish to do so .
But before that , we need to have calculable and reliable values .
I am not quite sure whether it is the Commission or the Council that procrastinates and says to itself ' Oh God , no ! We cannot adopt such strict values ! '
I think that those guilty of procrastination come from both institutions .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for his presentation , which we will be glad to support .
Again , I would like to point out that I consider the on-board diagnostics system to be an important issue .
But it is equally important that this system does not automatically result in a bonnet crammed full of electronics , and that small and medium-sized companies continue to have access to these electronic steering devices .
Commissioner , I would be much obliged if you would continue the work on OBD in this paper , should you be offered and accept the task , to ensure that SMEs are able to carry out maintenance work .
All in all we have certainly made some progress .
I would like to say once again that the Auto-Oil programme was the breakthrough .
We had stubborn partners but Parliament provided some good reasons as to why responsibilities should be given to this House .
We were happy to assume them and we were also pleased to share them with you .
Mr President , Mr Lange has produced a first-rate report , which is no less than we would expect of him .
The amendments to the Commission proposal incorporated in the report are altogether consistent with the amendments which Parliament pushed through earlier through the conciliation procedure when we looked at the other part of the Auto-Oil programme , passenger cars and light commercial vehicles .
Now we are looking at heavy-duty vehicles .
The matters at issue are compulsory on-board diagnostics , the durability of emission purification systems and the standards which will be compulsory by 2005 .
Looking at the Lange report , the proposals - the standards for 2005 in respect of diesel fuel - would seem to be realistic .
But if we are in favour of the use of ' best available techniques ' , we can aim to improve air quality rather more .
The expectation is that fast developing technology will enable heavy-duty vehicles to meet the standards easily by the year 2005 , even without clean-up technology such as catalytic converters .
So Mrs Hautala 's amendment is more ambitious .
We have just discussed it in the Liberal Group , and the overwhelming majority of my group believe that we should support this Hautala amendment .
We have to be somewhat ambitious , to set our standards rather high , because then we shall have a good starting position for the conciliation procedure with the Council .
And I hope the Commission , having learned from experience with the Auto-Oil programme , will back us over these more ambitious targets for diesel emissions .
If we achieve that , we shall be on the way to getting environmental imperatives integrated into the transport sector .
Mr President , Mr Lange continues his splendidly competent work , this time in connection with heavy-duty vehicles .
Everybody must surely realise how important it is to clean up emissions from buses and lorries .
I would like to propose , however , that we should be a little more ambitious in one respect , namely the matter of particulate emissions .
My colleague , Mr Eisma , has just mentioned that if we make use of the best scientific know-how at our disposal we could propose a more stringent limit value for particulate emissions for the year 2005 .
It may interest all of you who are still sceptical that the ACEA , the trade association for the car industry , appears to regard this as technically feasible .
I have seen the documents with my own eyes .
The other side of the coin is that they want to avoid binding obligations in a way .
But we in Parliament have already stated in the Auto-Oil programme that we wish to give a clear signal to industry and , with that in mind , we want binding limit values , as Mr Lange proposes .
What we need to do now is to think seriously about the decisions reached in the Auto-Oil programme .
We are bringing onto the market cleaner , low-sulphur fuels , which are just what we need for a more progressive approach to vehicle technology .
We have given a signal that we want new generation catalysts and filters for particles that are a danger to health .
In fact , these technical solutions are already on the market .
For example , the United Kingdom 's largest supermarket chain , Tesco , has decided to fit all its vans and trucks with very effective particle filters that do much to lessen particulate emissions , while low-sulphur diesel fuels are still being used .
Mr President , Commissioner , Bernd Lange has produced a very good report on reducing emissions from heavy-duty vehicles .
I agree with him on most points and support his proposal , although there is one area where he is being over-ambitious in my view .
Mr Lange is calling for a limit value of 2.0 for emissions of nitrogen oxides , whereas I would suggest 3.0 .
The automobile manufacturers ' association ACEA believes that , by 2005 , it will be possible to reduce nitrogen emissions by 30 % , the reference value being 5.0 in the year 2000 .
This corresponds to 3.5 g per kWh , but brings with it a rise in fuel consumption , which is a problem from the point of view of the greenhouse effect .
Greenhouse gases have been the subject of discussion on many occasions in this House ; keeping them down is one of our main environmental objectives .
I still feel that we can afford to be a little more radical than ACEA suggests , dropping to 3.0 g per kWh .
Thanks to the efforts of Mr Lange and Mrs Hautala , we achieved good results in Parliament on the Auto-Oil proposal .
Research evidence has shown that our suggestions - for example on fuel quality - have solid underpinning .
As for diesel engines , comprehensive trials are still being carried out .
Before we submit proposals , we need to evaluate the results of this work
Lastly , I would like to support Mr Lange 's call for financial incentives to encourage changes in motoring behaviour .
If we are lucky , we might even manage to surpass his strict target values .
Mr President , the differences of opinion that I have from time to time with Mr Lange shall not prevent me from praising him on the quality of this report .
It is of interest to us too .
But it has already been mentioned in the discussion that , following preliminary consultations , the Commission - and also incidentally the Member States - started out from a different basic idea .
With passenger cars and light commercial vehicles , we managed to propose having a second stage with indicative values , but that was changed .
In this case though , we believe that because the necessary test procedures have not yet provided all the data , it would not be sensible , particularly in terms of making better use of the technical possibilities , to fix mandatory values at this early stage for 2005 .
And all the more so , Mr Lange , because we have committed ourselves to presenting values for a second stage by the end of 1999 .
That means that we - or industry - have another five years .
We would still have time to include the results of the Auto-Oil II Programme , we would have more data , and above all , we would have better international coordination by then .
We also want to implement these values internationally , so please understand that the Commission cannot accept this fundamentally different proposal .
I also presume that I am right in predicting that the Member States will be more inclined towards our approach .
I would therefore now like to talk briefly about the individual amendments .
We can accept Amendments Nos 11 and 12 fully , we can accept Amendments Nos 6 , 16 , 17 and 24 in principle , in other words we shall have to look at the wording again , but we still have time to do that .
We can accept in part Amendments Nos 3 , 5 , 7 , 8 and 20 , on the need for high quality fuel to achieve future emission standards ( No 3 , second part ) , and on the need to link future standards with durability requirements ( No 5 ) .
Mr Florenz , we wish in any case to put together a package which also includes the OBD requirements .
It is to be a coherent package because each element supports the other .
Because we are striving for international regulations , we can of course accept Amendments Nos 7 , 8 ( second part ) and 20 ( second part ) , supporting the idea of a worldwide harmonised test cycle .
We cannot accept the other amendments for the general reasons I have already cited .
I think that because we are at the first reading stage here , I do not need to go into each amendment and explain in detail why it cannot be accepted .
That is the present situation and now we shall see what the Council decides .
It is indeed possible that the common position will be approved at the next meeting , so that we shall be able to go on with consultations quite soon .
Then there will be the second reading and there we will see what the outcome of the subsequent wrestling match is .

The Commission is relatively calm about it , because we think that this proposal in any case represents a considerable improvement .
Mr Lange is right that the matter has simply been ignored for a long time , by all of us ; I cannot remember Parliament ever urging us to make progress in the area .
But that does not excuse us .
Now we are making progress , and I think that perhaps we are even moving faster .
If , as Mr Lange has said , technology develops equally quickly , then it may even be possible that in the course of 1999 we are able to make proposals which , when they become mandatory in 2005 , will come close to what Mr Lange is now proposing .
But as we do not want to do that until 1999 - not because we are lax but simply because we still have time and therefore we should use it - we do not need to have a big argument on the basics here .
Mr President , Commissioner , allow me to ask a supplementary question .
You are now a very experienced Commissioner and , in a manner of speaking , caught up in the European institutions .
Could you once again enlighten me as to the percentage of cases in which the Commission has submitted a proposal by the specified date ?
Secondly , if you put forward a proposal for the 2005 stage in autumn 1999 at the earliest then , in view of the experience with the first Auto-Oil programme , where it took over two years , and considering also that the time needed to develop the engines of heavy goods vehicles is about twice as long as that for passenger cars ( about five years ) , how much time are you estimating for legislation ?
Mr President , I believe that we comply quite closely with our deadlines .
I do not have an overview , and can only comment on my own area where I am very familiar with the situation .
It may occasionally be the case that a Commission proposal comes one or two months later than promised , but in my sector the deadlines are respected fully .
As the responsibility for this one is thankfully my own , I shall present the proposal before the end of 1999 .
Then it will be up to you how quickly you can deal with it .
I shall not criticise you of course , as I am not entitled to do that , but if I remember correctly , this proposal was presented by us in December 1997 and you are dealing with it now .
It has taken quite some time , but we had to tackle questions of detail , which we will not have to do with this new proposal , or so I would hope . I imagine therefore that this matter may be concluded within a year .
As industry also follows the debate when a proposal is submitted to see what is in store for them , the five-year period would have to be complied with approximately .
I do not consider this to be a decisive point .
We will be able to do it , above all when we have a standard with comprehensive worldwide validity .
That is naturally of great importance for industry , which does much more international business in this area than in any other .
I do think that we can try .
But I will take your comment as another request for us to be as punctual as possible .
Mr President , to set matters straight , the Commission did indeed adopt the proposal in December 1997 , but it only reached Parliament six months later .
So it took six months to cover the 200 metre distance between the Commission and Parliament !
Mr President , to clarify the matter I must point out that we passed the documents on to the Council , as is the usual practice , but after that it was no longer in our power to see whether the Council dealt with them with appropriate speed .
I must stress that we are not the guilty party here .
The Council cannot comment on this as it is not here , but that is just the way it is . Les absents ont toujours tort .
I agree with Mr Bangemann .
I do not think that now is the time for us to deal with the question of why it took several months to cover 200 metres .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12.15 p.m.
Volatile organic compounds
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0358 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0389 / 98-96 / 0276 ( SYN ) ) with a view to adopting a Council Directive on limitation of emissions of volatile organic compounds due to the use of organic solvents in certain activities and installations ( Rapporteur : Mr Cabrol ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this proposal for a Directive seeks to limit volatile organic compound emissions , or VOCs , emissions which occur due to the use of organic solvents - which are themselves volatile organic substances - in many industrial activities .
The aim is to reduce these emissions by 67 % in comparison to the 1990 rate .
The proposal for a Directive puts forward three different ways of achieving this aim .
The first involves respecting emission limit values which are mentioned in Annex II A. This means that thresholds or values are indicated for each industrial sector and undertakings must respect them .
Secondly , Member States could implement national plans giving the same results across all industrial sectors as those obtained through the first method .
The third method involves implementing reduction systems as defined in Annex II B , allowing each undertaking to use solvents containing fewer VOCs , either by changing processes or treatment materials or by using a combination of both to achieve the same results as those obtained through the first method .
The common position has kept some amendments , which is an improvement that Parliament wanted to see , but other amendments have not been kept and the Committee on the Environment calls on you to either vote in favour of those amendments which have not been retained , or rather put them to another vote .
The amendments are as follows ; Amendment No 1 , although slightly unrealistic , calls for the total elimination of emissions rather than attempting to reduce them as much as possible .
Amendments Nos 2 and 8 demonstrate our concern to safeguard the health of people who by virtue of their occupation are exposed to organic solvents .
Amendment No 3 calls for the best available techniques to be promoted in accordance with Directive 96 / 61 / EC .
Amendment No 4 calls for solvents used by painters in the building trade or for DIY to be included since these solvents account for 30 % of total emissions .
Amendment No 5 proposes to examine how installations operating below the thresholds laid down by the Directive can be brought within the scope of future rules .
Amendment No 6 is designed to enable certain Member States to impose more stringent restrictions .
Amendment No 7 calls for the time period in which regulations are implemented to bring existing installations up to standard , to be extended to two years .
Amendment No 9 aims to allow volatile organic compound emissions to be measured by any method equivalent to continuous measuring . This means that enterprises can select which method to use , providing the overall result produced is the same .
Amendment No 10 provides for wagons and trailers to be included under ' vehicle refinishing ' , a clause that will be easier for professionals to apply and is just as effective in terms of results .
Amendment No 12 provides that the solvent management plan should be done every three years , which appears far more understandable and more easily applicable than to request an annual management plan .
Lastly , Amendment No 13 , which mistakenly bears my name but was in fact tabled by the PPE , refers to the principle of the best available techniques , as already mentioned in Amendment No 3 .
However , despite the fact that some of these amendments have been accepted by the Committee on the Environment , I , for my part , and from a purely personal point of view , should like to remind you - because I have not always been understood in these cases - that I will oppose the second part of Amendment No 11 due to the fact that it might lead to difficulties in the leather industry because it limits the solvent consumption threshold .
I will also vote against Amendment No 14 which , incidentally , has already been rejected by the Committee on the Environment and retabled by the PPE , because it rejects national plans which are so useful .
I think Amendment No 15 has been withdrawn .
To conclude I would simply remind you , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , that this Directive concerns more than 400 000 undertakings and 10 million jobs across a broad range of industrial sectors .
It therefore merits our full attention , and we must consider all the potential threats it could pose to jobs in these companies if we implement measures that are either too stringent or do not take the reality of the situation into account .
Mr President , I should like firstly to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work .
His first report at first reading was very balanced and achieved a very high standard of protection for human health and the environment whilst , at the same time , recognising the needs of industry and the difficulties it has - certainly small and medium-sized enterprises - in achieving some of the standards laid down in this proposal .
We think that the common position is in large part acceptable .
It has for the most part taken in a large number of the amendments we tabled at first reading .
But we do not think it is perfect .
The rapporteur has quite correctly addressed some of the deficiencies of the common position and the Socialist Group will certainly support the amendments he has tabled .
We hope the Commission will do so also .
I and other colleagues have complemented his amendments with several others , seeking to plug the holes through which some of the VOCs might still continue to escape from the common position and cause problems for us .
Finally , I feel the Commission must support us and press for these amendments with the Council .
They will undoubtedly bring about a significant improvement in the technical proposals within the directive will continue to strengthen protection for human health and the environment and fully and properly establish a level playing field across the Union , in particular for small and medium-sized enterprises , in such a way that they can achieve the objectives of these proposals and at the same time remain viable , effective and functioning businesses .
I would urge the Commission and the Council to accept these amendments and give us a directive that we in the European Union can all be proud of .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this Council text on the common position is a considerable improvement to the original Commission proposal .
In the PPE 's view the common position constitutes a balanced regulation for restricting VOC emissions , from both an ecological and an economic point of view .
The proposed measures can achieve the goal of an EU-wide reduction in the emission of VOCs resulting from the use of organic solvents in the biggest industrial and commercial sectors by at least 50 % by the year 2010 , by comparison with 1990 .
This Directive is thus an important step towards reducing the precursors to ground level ozone and therefore to fighting Europe 's summer smog .
As Professor Cabrol has already said , we have here practicable regulations on authorisation and registration procedures for the approximately 400 000 predominantly small and medium-sized enterprises in Europe .
The numerous amendments that the European Parliament tabled at first reading have also contributed substantially to these improvements .
Where Parliament has only been partly successful is in restricting these national reduction plans , as they are known , to existing installations .
Unfortunately at second reading the Socialist Group withdrew its support for our amendment completely eliminating national reduction plans .
These plans are useless in protecting Europe 's environment .
Proof for me of the ineffectiveness of national action plans and reduction plans is the European Commission 's report on the implementation of the Nitrate Directive .
I cannot begin to understand why the Commission is holding on to the instrument of national plans in spite of all the negative experiences we have had .
We shall certainly have the opportunity to examine the results of these measures over the next few years .
The rapporteur , Professor Cabrol , has kindly included some of the amendments which neither the Commission nor the Council took into account , but which were particularly important to us , for example the request for additional rules on the marketing of products containing solvents . In the main , therefore , our Group can support the present amendments .
Mr President , the late hour stands in stark contrast to the importance of the proposal we are now debating .
It is indeed a question of a good or a bad life , or even death , for many people who work with or are exposed to VOCs .
We therefore have good reason to thank both the Commission and the Council for not bowing to the massive pressure from industry , which was in favour of getting the matter shelved .
These substances may be said to be doubly dangerous .
On the one hand they are carcinogenic and cause brain damage and many other forms of damage by their direct effects , i.e. on people who work with the substances .
That is a major risk in a large number of working environments .
On the other hand , if they are released into the natural environment , they can undergo chemical or physical changes and , amongst other things , create an ozone layer .
As good and necessary a thing as that may be 10 km above the earth , it is harmful at ground level .
It can harm both people and animals .
Raised ozone concentrations constitute a formidable health risk .
A number of studies have shown that peaks in ozone concentrations bring with them serious disorders , such as asthma , eye diseases , constant headaches and , in extreme cases , death .
With the directive and Mr Cabrol 's report we have moved a step further in the right direction .
The ELDR Group cannot support all the amendments , because we do not actually feel that they all represent improvements .
But there is one amendment I would mention in particular , which is Amendment No 1 , because it is the only solution to the problem .
We cannot protect ourselves against the problems arising from VOCs .
There is no use trying to do that .
We must quite simply be rid of them .
The aim is straightforward : VOCs must be replaced by a better product , and that is precisely what Amendment No 1 demands .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that Mrs Dybkjær has pointed out very strongly the dangers associated with these volatile organic substances . For my Group I can say that we are not very happy with the compromise that has been reached .
It is more than lax , and hardly constitutes an ambitious approach .
The common position merely stipulates that values which have been in force in the Federal Republic of Germany since 1987 should be implemented in the EU only by 2007 . That is absolutely ridiculous , because it means that standards that already apply in Germany would only need to come into force in the EU 20 years later .
I think that belies all claims that this proposal is revolutionary .
Nevertheless , I think that Parliament has taken two initiatives that are very worthy of support . The first is a Directive on paints , as we know that a third of all paints are also responsible for VOCs .
In the future we should be looking at developing and using more water-soluble paints , rather than those based on organic substances .
Secondly , and this is something which particularly concerns me , it is essential that we launch an initiative for people who have been harmed by solvents .
Mrs Dybkjær has just indicated once again the problem of carcinogenic substances , especially for people who come into contact with them in the workplace .
Considering that these people often suffer life-long damage we really should be doing everything possible to make sure they receive more rights . We must also be resolute in fighting for greater safety , particularly for employees , in order to drastically reduce the number of people harmed by solvents .
In this day and age we really should not be exposing people to this danger to their health by negligence .
Mr President , the present Directive is a further step towards a strategy to combat ozone , one which the European Union desperately needs .
We know that the Union area is permanently covered by a layer of tropospheric ozone . The slightest incident can cause this layer to become so concentrated that it may endanger health , and even in areas where the air is clean , plants may be damaged to a degree that has serious consequences for agriculture .
A number of Member States have shown that we could have been stricter , which is why it is no surprise that Parliament has once again tabled an amendment that states : ' Member States which have progressed further than the Community in substituting dangerous organic solvents must be permitted to impose more stringent restrictions ' .
I think that we will have to continue in this way , and if necessary look again at whether abandoning the use of VOCs cannot be done more quickly , perhaps even before 2007 , especially in the paint industry where many alternatives are already available . Or maybe we could move over to more closed systems in companies so that fewer harmful substances can leak out .
I also think that it is very important to worry not only about the health of the general population , but also to direct our attention to those people working in factories and workshops , and who come into contact with such substances .
We should introduce special programmes for them , to restore their health or to prevent it from being too seriously damaged .
Mr President , let me begin by congratulating Mr Cabrol on a well-drafted new report .
Some points are not fully developed , however , and I would underline what Mrs Dybkjær said just now , namely that the main purpose of this exercise should be to replace VOCs once and for all .
They belong to a bygone age .
New technical solutions will have to be found .
It is no good telling just the big companies to comply with the directive .
It may seem strange , but most operators in this sector are in fact small or medium-sized businesses . And they are now being offered exemptions .
We appear to be shooting ourselves in the foot .
We have a prime opportunity here to illustrate how the needs of the environment and the demand for jobs can be reconciled . This is something we have talked about on many occasions , and it is a real pity that the report fails to address the question adequately .
Everyone knows that substitutes for VOCs exist .
We could surely strike out a little more boldly with these directives that affect our future .
The solutions advocated take us backwards , not forwards and I regret that .
The environment makes no distinction between small and medium-sized companies .
It does not say ' Oh , those emissions are coming from a small plant , never mind . '
The consequences are the same , regardless of the size of the works concerned .
If I had a wish , it would be for a little bit more imagination to be shown . Let us find solutions for tomorrow 's world , and leave these symbols of the past behind .
Mr President , the Commission would like to thank the committee , and particularly the rapporteur , for the careful and detailed examination of the common position laid down by the Council .
We think that the common position clarifies and strengthens the original proposal , without changing its fundamental objectives or in particular its technical approach .
It holds to the high level of protection for the environment and health , and in doing so , also tries to take into account the effects on industry .
For this reason I should perhaps limit myself to talking in greater detail about the 15 amendments .
We can accept Nos 8 and 9 fully , Nos 10 and 13 in principle , and No 11 in part .
All these amendments make practical or drafting improvements ; passages which may be misleading are removed , additional information is provided , and reasonable requirements are added .
Unfortunately , we cannot accept the other amendments .
We do not wish to support Amendments Nos 14 and 15 , which undermine the option of national plans .
May I say to Mrs Schleicher that , in view of the objections raised by Parliament at first reading , we were able to persuade the Council to restrict the scope of these national plans and to introduce additional conditions under Article 6 .
I think that this flexible instrument is so clearly limited now that it can be accepted .
As for Amendments Nos 3 and 7 , we want to avoid incompatibilities between the instrument proposed and Directive 96 / 61 .
Amendment No 7 would in our opinion lead to an inappropriate discrepancy between the definitions of ' existing installation ' and No 3 would cause confusion with regard to the concept of ' best available techniques ' .
Amendment No 12 aims to reduce the frequency of solvent management plans , which we do not support because the usefulness of the plans is considerably affected when they are carried out over longer periods of time .
The Commission fully agrees with the comments made in the debate about health risks and the damage to health which has already occurred , particularly among people who work with these solvents .
But as this proposal does not deal with occupational health risks , we cannot accept Amendment No 2 .
However , in the context of Amendment No 8 , which we accept , we could exchange information with Parliament that will make it easier for us to take possible further steps .
In two new recitals , Amendments Nos 4 and 5 , the Commission is asked to take additional initiatives .


We have already begun work on the first , but we do not want to commit ourselves at this point to finishing it by any particular time , because at the moment it is impossible to guess when that might be .
As for what is requested in Amendment No 5 , we do not actually wish to take action here .
We are not presently planning to take new legislative measures for installations operating below the thresholds .
To Mrs Graenitz particularly , I would say that we do not support Amendment No 6 because the EC Treaty already contains the provisions which allow Member States to impose more stringent restrictions .
The Commission thinks then that the proposal for a directive , together with Parliament 's amendments which it has accepted today , offers an effective , enforceable and balanced basis for fighting ozone pollution in the troposphere , and that it will contribute to a high level of protection for the environment and for health .
And finally , in passing , I would like to say how glad I am that Mrs Breyer referred to the legal basis in force since 1987 in Germany , because it shows how progressive the government in office at the time was !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.15 p.m.
( The sitting was closed at 10 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr Schierhuber has the floor .
Mr President , my name is Schiedermeier !
Mr President , I only found the Minutes of 19 October , in other words Monday 's Minutes , in my pigeon hole yesterday afternoon , and although I was present and signed in , unfortunately my name is not on the list of attendance .
Could I ask you to correct that ?
Mr Schiedermeier , I must apologise to you on two counts .
Firstly because due to my age and the distance involved , I had not recognised you , and secondly because there is indeed an error in the Minutes , which will be corrected .
Thank you .
Mr President , my name does not appear on yesterday 's attendance list , although I was , of course , here .
I would like this to be corrected .
Thank you .
State of the Union - Meeting of heads of state and government of 24 / 25 October
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , this is the last debate on the state of the Union to be held before the end of the current parliamentary term , that is to say , before the elections due in June 1999 .
I will not , however , succumb to the temptation of summing up the current term .
It is too soon to do so , and much can be achieved in eight months .
Nor shall I anticipate Parliament 's position in the run-up to the informal meeting of heads of state and government .
I should like to express my gratitude to Chancellor Klima for convening it , and for extending an invitation for Parliament to take part in one of these informal summits for the first time .
It will provide an opportunity for us to express our initial thoughts on the future of our Union in the coming century . Today 's debate will help us to formulate Parliament 's contribution .
We are gathered here today at a time when the sunny outlook before us just a few months ago has been overshadowed by two crises - in Asia and Russia - and by the danger of these causing a domino effect which would affect other parts of the world .
In addition , there seemed to be a paucity of leadership at world level for a time .
Nevertheless , news received in the last few days does seem to suggest that the mechanisms for responding to the crisis have moved into action and that the danger of a widespread recession is receding .
Thanks to the launch of the euro and the process of restructuring and economic convergence leading up it , the Union has withstood the upheavals in the money markets well .
As a result of its union , this part of Europe has become a solid , stable and powerful trading and economic bloc .
Such an achievement should not be overlooked or undervalued ..
Nevertheless , our union has not made us invulnerable , nor could it .
An open economy , as ours in the Union already is , could not continue to expand if the rest of the world went into recession .
For our own sake , therefore , we must not remain passive but adopt an active stance , using all our influence to promote stability in those areas where the crisis could affect us most .
I have in mind first Russia , our nearest and most powerful neighbour .
We should offer every assistance to enable Russia to make a successful transition to democracy and the market economy . This transition is proving much longer , more painful and more complex than had been anticipated .
We should also give strong support to the processes of unification and liberalisation in Latin America , not only to develop an ever more attractive market , but also to consolidate the progress made along the road back to democracy .
For this active policy to be implemented , the Council must take the necessary measures to ensure the effective external representation of the eleven Member States in the euro area , as agreed at the Cardiff European Council .
There is no need to invent complicated structures or a new Mr Euro .
Many-headed giants are only frightening in fairy-tales .
Applying the institutional framework of the Treaty of Rome to this area also will suffice . After all , it has so far proved the best suited to the needs of a united Europe .
Certain weaknesses in this framework have of course become evident over the years .
Some of these can be remedied without calling another intergovernmental conference , and we have no time to lose .
There is an urgent need for the Union to define a political approach .
To start with our own response to the need to review with these weaknesses , Parliament is required to adapt its procedures to the new powers conferred on it by the Treaty of Amsterdam .
In this connection , work on the adjustment of its Rules of Procedure and administrative structures is fairly well advanced .
A proposal for a European electoral system based on common principles has been drafted . A draft common Statute for Members should be ready by the beginning of December .
Quite clearly , Parliament has not waited for the Treaty to enter into force before outlining the rules needed to make it more efficient and to strengthen the independence and democratic accountability of its Members .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I trust the Council and the Commission will respond to our cooperation and hard work by undertaking to study and discuss these documents as soon as possible .
This same desire to anticipate the entry into force of the Treaty has been evident in our Parliament 's relations with the national parliaments .
The positive attitude of the latter has facilitated ever closer and stronger cooperation over the past year . Such cooperation has extended to preparations for the planned reform of the Treaties , which will be the subject of an interparliamentary summit immediately prior to the Vienna European Council .
Clearly , this proactive attitude highlights the urgency of ratifying the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Parliament has organised its work so as to make it possible for Agenda 2000 to be debated and approved at second reading , in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Lastly , I must stress yet again that amendment of the Treaties is not a precondition for an interinstitutional agreement providing for the Parliament to be consulted prior to the major decisions to be taken by ECOFIN in the context of economic and monetary union .
The present situation is obviously undemocratic and unacceptable where such a sensitive issue is concerned .
It can only be remedied through the involvement of this House .
In 1958 , the Council was a directorate composed of six members .
By 1998 it has become a committee of 15 members , soon to be increased to 21 and later to 27 or 30 .
In other words , it is an amalgamation of committees whose number is also increasing .
For it to operate effectively , certain measures are called for which require the reform of the Treaties .
Such measures include a new procedure for taking majority decisions , and the creation of an efficient presidency . The present system of rotation every six months and spreading the presidency among a number of ministers does not seem appropriate .
Nevertheless , there is scope for improving the coordination of the Councils and the preparation of their decisions in advance of the reform .
The larger the political bodies , the greater the need for coordination .
A convoluted decision-making structure , involving the proliferation of specialised councils which fail to coordinate their activities , is inefficient by nature .
This was proved in sixteenth- century Spain , and we ought to learn from history .
The same could happen to our Union if coordination between the various memberships of the Council is not strengthened .
I am delighted that the current presidency has taken the initiative here . However , I do wonder whether it is appropriate for Foreign Ministers to continue coordinating Councils at which decisions with enormous implications for the internal affairs of Member States are being taken .
In practice , the tendency seems to be rather for the European Council to assume this role . Its members alone are empowered to carry out the necessary arbitration , at both internal and Union level .
Improvements to the Council 's operation are not all that is required .
Prior to the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , the Council must take some far-reaching decisions , on the integration of the Schengen package into the Union 's arrangements , for instance , and on the institutional and organisational aspects of the new framework .
Such decisions are essential to the creation of a European area of freedom , security and justice , and should be taken at the Vienna European Council . This should not be too much toask .
If they are postponed , it will probably be too late .
As regards the Commission , it must adopt the new role assigned to it under the Maastricht Treaty and the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Its role is now like that of parliamentary governments .
On the one hand , it is called upon to take the lead where the budget , legislative and political issues are concerned , and on the other it must , in a spirit of loyalty , fully accept Parliament 's control .
Expressed in the clearest possible terms , this amounts to the following .
Firstly , implementing , with no prevarication or delay , any corrective measures adopted as a result of control - in the case of mad cow disease , for instance . Secondly , unreserved acceptance of what is a prerequisite for any control procedure , namely that it is the body carrying out the control , in other words Parliament , which decides on the data and documents required to enable it to carry out its task .
The data and documents should be handed over without further ado .
It is equally important for the Commission to carry out its duties with the good of the Union as a whole in mind .
There has been a tendency of late for the Commissioners to act as representatives of national positions and interests . This duplicates the Council 's function , achieves nothing , and could indeed be very dangerous .
I think we should always remember that the Commission is fulfilling its role effectively when it presents European solutions to European problems , outlining a European policy which must not , by definition , favour one state or group of states .
Institutional reforms are not required here either , only a return to the original spirit of the Union .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the Union came into being because a group of outstanding Europeans realised the need to pool resources and policies in order to overcome the legacy of the war .
We have prospered over the last 40 years , through the creation firstly of a common trading area , and later a common currency . Agriculture and much of industry have been run jointly too .
We have shaped the future together , and not gained ground at the expense of others .
In this way , it has been possible to maintain and consolidate the European social and economic model , a model which is strongly cohesive , based on the concepts of social and territorial solidarity .
We are now called upon to rise to great challenges : the enlargement of the Union to Central and Eastern Europe , Cyprus and Malta , the strengthening of internal security to create that great area of freedom and justice , and the development of our external action .
If we depart from the approach which has proved so successful and let ourselves be guided by the demands of poorly understood national interests , allowing the mechanisms for solidarity to be downgraded and policies and resources to be renationalised , we shall be unable to rise to these challenges .
I sincerely hope that Parliament will continue to be the guardian of that philosophy of joint progress and that it will tackle the difficult issues of Agenda 2000 , the changed financial outlook and the fight against unemployment in a spirit of social and fiscal justice . We should work towards a Union financed by each and every one of its citizens , in proportion to their means .
That will enable enlargement to strengthen rather than loosen the links in the Community .
An effort of political will is required to offer Europeans a more clearly defined and better future .
This Parliament hopes that the will to do so will be displayed at the Pörtschach meeting .
It is my firm belief , however , that we can do a great deal , starting here and now , to ensure that the European Union takes a lead , as it should do , in world politics . We can also ensure that it remains an area of stability and economic development , whilst continuing to uphold the principles of solidarity and cohesion .
Thank you for your attention .
I now give the floor to the President-in-Office of the European Council , Mr Klima .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great pleasure and honour to address you for the first time in this House in the debate on the state of the Union , about the present and future state of our Union a few days before the informal meeting of the heads of state and government in Pörtschach .
Mr President , I am also pleased that you have accepted my invitation to discuss the European Parliament 's views with the EU heads of state and government , something I was very much in favour of , since I believe that good cooperation between the European institutions is most important to our common success .
And we have achieved important successes in recent years .
Allow me at this point , as President-in-Office of the European Council , also to thank Helmut Kohl for contributing so much to our common Europe .
They are successes we would never have thought possible only a few years ago : economic convergence and the participation of a broad group of states in economic and monetary union , the beginning of the accession process for new Member States , the first steps in implementing a common employment strategy .
This has given European integration a new quality , one which also presents our common policy with new challenges and means that we must redefine our future journey along the road to integration .
One thing is clear when we look at the final destination : the process of economic integration that is now nearing completion cannot be the end of the project of European unification .
From the outset this was a political project , a project to guarantee peace and to realise the values that are so characteristic of Europe : the values of democracy , social balance and cultural diversity .
So the road towards a new Europe is not a road into the unknown , for these European values act as clear signposts .
I am firmly convinced that the European economic and social model is the best basis for pursuing the further development of our continent .
However , this means that we must also muster the necessary resolve to innovate , and to adapt this model to the challenges of our time .
It is especially important , at a time when undertakings are operating on an international basis and the economy has become global , to act at supranational level in political terms too , so as to ensure that the harmonisation of social and environmental standards improves rather than worsens the human condition ; one instance would be for Europe to adopt common positions at the WTO negotiations .
The successes of the past show that we have good reason to be optimistic for the future .
They have shown that it is possible to achieve ambitious aims , provided the necessary political will is there .
We are not the victims of international economic events , even though we do of course all know that individual countries now have less political room for manoeuvre than in the past .
But by acting together , at national , European and global level , we can take effective measures , which we must indeed do for the sake of employment and our people .
Let me now address some of the main challenges .
We can rightly say that , even before its official introduction , the euro has already gone through its baptism of fire .
It has proved a pole of stability in the international monetary system in regard to the financial crises in Asia and Russia , and now also in Latin America .
However , we cannot simply assume that Europe will not be affected at all if the situation on the financial markets worsens .
So Europe will have to take on its international economic responsibility and make its contribution to combating the financial crisis and strengthening international economic growth .
That is also in our own interest and will ensure that we have the conditions for stability and growth in the Union .
To that end , we need to make the appropriate reforms to the international financial architecture .
Several proposals are now on the table and we should reach agreement on them quickly .
I am confident that the Finance Ministers will soon put recommendations on the matter before us .
But we also need an economic policy mix that is effective enough to fully exploit the potential for growth in Europe .
If the euro is to succeed , we will have to use the opportunities we have to carry out further economic reforms , coordinate economic policy more closely with all the players involved , hold a dialogue on monetary policy too - which I consider most important , although we must not , of course , call the independence of the European Central Bank into question - find a rapid solution to the external representation of the euro zone and , last but not least , of course , continue working towards stable exchange rates .
We will be discussing the questions and expectations of the heads of state and government in relation to this subject in detail in Pörtschach .
Without exaggeration , we can say that 1998 will enter into the history of the Union .
With the accession process that began under the UK Presidency in March , the citizens of the European Union and the citizens of the future Member States now have a chance for the first time to bring Europe together in peace and freedom , after all the countless conflicts .
Today , only a few years after the opening-up eastwards , it already seems a matter of course that democracy and the rule of law have been established in the Central and Eastern European countries .
There is no doubt that the people of these countries are primarily responsible for their democracy and stability .
But I believe that the prospect of joining our European Union has also played its part .
We must now promote this process rapidly and with the necessary care .
Austria is very proud that it will manage during its presidency - in fact as early as 10 November - to start practical negotiations on the first chapters with six applicant states .
We regard that as an important signal , a signal also called for by the European Parliament .
But we must also ensure that this process is an open one and obeys objective criteria : open for those states that satisfy the conditions of the Luxembourg decisions in the light of the Copenhagen criteria ; objective in relation to the extent to which the performance of the individual candidates satisfies the accession criteria .
In that context , the European Council in Vienna will also be looking into the progress made by all applicants for accession in fulfilling the accession criteria .
The applicant countries are our partners in the enlargement process and our colleagues in tomorrow 's Union .
They have already achieved a great deal but there remain difficult tasks to tackle , for which they need our common support .
Here we must always bear in mind that enlargement of the Union benefits both us and the applicant countries .
We must not disappoint the hopes of the citizens of the applicant countries , but at the same time we should remain honest and realistic in the aims we set .
Everyone must realise that enlargement of the European Union must be carefully planned , so that both the existing Member States and the applicant states can prepare for it .
I am assuming that the appropriate transitional periods will be fixed in sensitive areas , such as the free movement of workers and services , in the interests of the applicant countries but also in the Member States ' interests .
The Union of tomorrow which the applicants will join must and will look quite different from today 's Union .
The negotiations on the future of the common agricultural policy , on a balanced structural policy , on financial support for the applicant countries and on the efficient use of financial resources for the Union for the first seven years of the next century are without doubt a touchstone for the solidarity of our Community .
In Cardiff , we undertook to make considerable progress on the main components of the package by the next European Council in Vienna .
The Austrian Presidency is working very hard to carry forward the negotiations in order to achieve this objective .
Let me strongly emphasise , however , that this will require the necessary will and solidarity on the part of all the Member States .
I also know that you in this Parliament are taking a very close look at all the aspects of Agenda 2000 , to help ensure that it can be concluded in good time , and let me stress how important cooperation between the Council and Parliament is in this particular process if Agenda 2000 is to be achieved during the current parliamentary term .
Our citizens probably regard a successful employment policy as the biggest challenge on the road towards further integration .
Anyone who remembers how strongly some Member States resisted a common employment policy before the Luxembourg summit will , I hope , be glad to note the very definite swing in opinion today .
Employment policy has now become a fixed component of European economic policy .
( Applause ) And we are becoming ever more persuaded that we must pursue an employment policy at all levels , at global level just as at European and national level .
What we must do now , and what the citizens of Europe expect of us , is to show the same resolve and consistent approach we demonstrated when we the adopted the convergence criteria .
As you know , the structure and the problems of the national employment markets differ .
Accordingly , the draft report on employment which the Commission submitted last week shows that the Member States have prepared very different packages of measures , in each case adapted to their particular problems .
But in my view that still means that we must develop a monitoring system to clearly reflect how seriously we take the whole process ; here too the Commission 's report on employment offers very positive suggestions .
But I hope that in future we will embark on a road that takes us beyond what we have achieved so far .
As you know , in Luxembourg last year not all the Member States endorsed the practical definition of quantitative aims .
At the time , some states argued that one should not arouse unrealistic expectations and that employment policy did not lie only within the governments ' sphere of influence , but is also strongly influenced by the social partners .
I can understand these arguments , but would point out that clear aims can also be realistic aims .
The Member States have already demonstrated that with their national action plans for employment .
Clear aims can also be self-chosen aims that can relate to each Member State 's specific problems .
Clear aims must guarantee an efficient and transparent monitoring procedure , without restricting the Member States ' right to choose their specific package of measures .
Clear aims by no means preclude the need to include the social partners in the responsibility for employment policy .
On the contrary : in my view an effective employment policy also means an effective social dialogue , it means realising that cooperation offers both parties more than conflict does , which is why it will also become necessary ; it is our common intention to promote and strengthen this social dialogue in Europe .
( Applause ) You know that employment policy must be broadly based , that there are no longer any patent remedies and that we must therefore examine the impact on employment of all policy areas .
That includes , for instance , the key area of enhanced support for research and technology .
Europe has a great potential in research and technology .
We must simply make better use of that potential in future .
We must use it by creating the right conditions for translating the research findings of the universities into new products and processes , and hence into new jobs .
We must make better use of the dimensions and of the synergies of our common Europe , our common market .
That is why I hope we will soon manage to find a solution that enables us to conclude the fifth framework programme on research and technology , in which we emphasise this need .
It is not just a question of technology , it is a question of future jobs .
Mr President , I have listened to your statement with great interest .
When we meet you , the heads of state and government and the President of the Commission in Pörtschach in four days ' time , you will have a chance to take stock and to consider the improvements needed in order to make Europe more acceptable to the citizens of the Union .
We began to discuss the future of Europe in Cardiff ; this process should be intensified in Pörtschach and be continued at the Vienna European Council and during the forthcoming presidencies .
In my view - and all the heads of state and government I visited during my tour of the capitals in the last few days agree - Pörtschach will send out the signal that a single market and currency are not the be-all and end-all of European integration .
( Applause ) We will have to discuss a timetable for enhancing economic stability and employment , internal security and Europe 's political role in the world .
These are matters that directly affect the citizens , where they expect us to make progress .
That is what is meant by a policy close to the people .
And of course that means that we need viable institutions that promote policies that bring Europe closer to the interests of the people in an efficient and democratically credible manner .
That is my understanding of subsidiarity .
Let me now address two points that I am sure will not be raised at Pörtschach .
There will be no question of halting or even reversing the process of integration and attacking or weakening the institutions .
Nor can there be any question at this point of embarking on those institutional reforms on which no agreement could be reached in Amsterdam until all the Member States have ratified the Amsterdam Treaty .
What must be discussed at Pörtschach is our institutional future and , even more importantly , how to breathe life into the Amsterdam Treaty , which of course already contains a number of new measures to bring the Union closer to the people .
As President-in-Office of the European Council , I have invited you , Mr President , to Pörtschach because I am convinced that it is up to all of us together to determine this new road for Europe to follow , for I am sure that the European Parliament can and will make a significant contribution here .
In the next millennium Europe must acquire more political power alongside its economic power .
Of course we are still far from achieving a viable foreign and security policy today .
But we should remember that other major integration projects , such as the single currency , were also rejected as utopian in the early days .
I personally am convinced that in future the European Union will need a stronger common foreign and security policy .
That will serve as an important instrument for securing peace in the world .
Europe must be visible to the outside world and manage to speak with one voice if it is to be able to take common action with its partners .
That is why we have decided to take a first step in the right direction and if possible to appoint the official referred to in the Amsterdam Treaty , Herr or Frau GASP , Monsieur or Madame PESC or Mr or Mrs CFSP , during the Vienna Council .
This must and will be followed by further steps , because the development of a common foreign and security policy will determine the future quality of the Union .
Transatlantic relations will always play an important role here .
But we also need a European dimension , for only then can and will Europe be a strong partner for its friends .
The men and women of Europe expect us to view the challenges of the twenty-first century not so much as a risk but as an opportunity , and to tackle them openly on the basis of our European values .
Let us continue to work together on building our great European project , which offers us security and stability .
Let us continue to build on the foundations laid down by our founding fathers .
Let us jointly build on this opportunity .
There is still much work to be done !
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the European Council , ladies and gentlemen , this is the third time that we have met in order to examine the state of the Union together .
Today 's debate comes just ahead of the informal meeting in Pörtschach on the future of the Union .
I am well aware that there is an ongoing and lively debate on the subject in this House .
I think that this is a particularly appropriate time to be considering tomorrow 's Union : the single market is nearing completion ; the euro will be with us in less than 100 days from now , opening the way for a new stage in Community integration ; further enlargement is on the horizon ; and the reform of our spending policies and the financial perspective are on the agenda .
Looking back over 40 years of European integration , we have to acknowledge the success of the Community method .
But it is striking to see just how far the people of Europe , while appreciating the benefits the unification of Europe has provided , are still critical of certain aspects of the Union .
If politicians were more honest about what exactly is done in Brussels , Strasbourg and Luxembourg and who does what , political responsibilities would be much clearer .
They should not present the Member States and the Union as being always in conflict , they should stop using the Union and its institutions , and in the first instance the Commission , as a convenient scapegoat , and they should stop inventing ' euromyths ' .
It is time that national politicians assumed their responsibilities .
What is more , a lot of the causes of this unease have nothing to do with the Union , and our national democracies also come in for criticism .
Realities such as unemployment and insecurity undermine confidence and have an indirect effect on people 's attitudes towards the European Union .
But let us be honest : the Community venture is in need of a facelift .
This admission in no way detracts from its legitimacy . It means talking about it pragmatically , going beyond professions of faith and appeals to a sense of history on the one hand , and systematic opposition on the other .
We know the usual criticisms : democratic deficit and technocracy .
They are often ready-made slogans . They are what people want to hear .
They catch on easily , but they are no help in trying to understand the real nature of the unease .
Very often , in fact , they hide the real causes .
Let us consider the realities .
In some areas - employment , external relations , home affairs and justice - Europe needs to be doing more .
In others it should be doing less : less niggling interference , less encroachment on matters specific to a given culture , and finding different ways of operating that do not clash with national political cultures .
These are the real challenges I would like us to take up in Pörtschach on 24 and 25 October next .
Three questions need to be addressed .
How can we adapt our working methods to the high degree of integration the Union has achieved ?
How can we make real progress on the matters that directly affect individuals in our countries or where they quite rightly fail to understand our inability to act ?
How can we reform our institutions to make them more effective and prepare them for enlargement ?
The first challenge we must rise to is that of managing the high degree of integration achieved by the Union .
The most recent Treaties have extended the Union 's powers to most areas of public policy , and there can be no question today of asking for more powers at Community level .
What is more , we have now completed the bulk of the legislation required to establish the single market .
Most of the 300 or so proposals for directives and regulations that were contained in the 1985 White Paper have now been adopted .
Between 1995 and 1998 the number of new legislative proposals that the Commission put forward in its work programmes has fallen steadily .
The point I am trying to make here is that we should not use yesterday 's arguments to criticise today 's Union .
Instead we should look at the realities of today and tomorrow .
To begin with we must finish the jobs we have started .
Thanks to the European Commission 's action plan , we have made real progress in completing the single market .
The technical preparations for EMU are complete .
Now we must make it work in practice .
An agreement must be found on the financial perspective for Agenda 2000 .
Then we must make the most of the high level of integration achieved by our countries .
The euro will arrive on 1 January 1999 .
The Member States must convince themselves that monetary union has implications for taxation and labour market flexibility .
Having decided on monetary union we must now be consistent , including in matters of external representation , which I will be coming back to later .
Finally , we must look at ways of modernising the methods used for Community action .
Legislation is still possible and frequently necessary , but it is not the only option , nor the most effective in all cases .
Take the example of the European strategy for employment .
The European guidelines have generated momentum that no directive could have done .
Why ?
Because this is an area where powers are and will remain very much in the hands of the national authorities .
Because it is an area where situations vary greatly from one country to another , where a single , harmonised objective would make no sense .
Other areas of European action are similar to this , though to differing degrees .
Internal security , health and the environment will all , to a large extent , require new approaches .
In all these areas it will be necessary to define and to focus on the extra benefits that Europe can provide , not forgetting to make quite clear where everybody 's responsibility lies .
The Commission is , of course , and will continue to be the driving force on all important matters .
But the Commission does not work alone .
It works with the other institutions , including the European Parliament .
It works with the Member States , their government departments , their justice departments and their customs authorities , to name but a few . European governance involves all public players .
And this shared responsibility must be more visible , so that everyone assumes their share of the work and the responsibility , so that the whole set-up works better , so that the public derive maximum benefit , and so that they can see more clearly who is doing what .
The need for a clearer assignment of responsibility also applies to the origin of Commission proposals .
Here , too , the Commission does not work in an ivory tower .
It is true that it has to take the political responsibility for the use it makes of its right of initiative . But it is also subject to intense legislative pressure .
The figures we have published this week in the communication entitled ' Subsidiarity and proportionality ' show that 35 % of the Commission 's legislative proposals are the result of international commitments , and that at least 20 % are prompted by requests from other quarters : the other institutions , in particular the Council and Parliament , the Member States and business interests .
Asking the Commission to act and then going back home and denying all responsibility when the Union 's action comes in for criticism is not playing the game .
What we really need is more collective discipline and vigilance .
We cannot pick and choose when it comes to subsidiarity and proportionality in Community action .
Subsidiarity and proportionality are responsibilities to be shared , as is the provision of accurate and fair information .
I am making this particular point because there are still areas where what the Union does is , to put it bluntly , seen by people in Europe as falling short of the mark , where they want Europe to do more .
These are the areas where we must focus our efforts to build new policies . Let me cite three of them : jobs , external relations and internal security .
The first area concerns the economy and society .
For the last year , for the first time , we have had a genuine European strategy on employment , which is starting to prove its worth .
The fact is that there is now a genuine political will in Europe to work together to design a model for economic and social growth , a model that creates jobs while liberating entrepreneurship and that capitalises on the potential offered by the economic changes we are going through .
It is a model that states firmly that everyone has a part to play in the forward momentum , through training and through developing employability as the best guarantee of solidarity . This includes , of course , a safety net for those who find it hardest to get back into the labour market or to cope with the vicissitudes of life .
This kind of growth with solidarity is now emerging as the hallmark of the European economic and social model .
What we must do is modernise it in our own countries and promote it in international forums .
This prompts me to say a few words about the international crisis we are going through at the moment .
Is it linked to the way certain economies are behaving ?
Or is it a crisis of the system ?
More than likely it is a bit of both .
At any rate , let us agree that globalisation is a game that requires at least a basic level of training for the players , clear rules , a referee to enforce them and an emergency exit in case anything goes wrong .
These are the ideas we must keep in mind as we review the way the Bretton Woods system is structured .
I would like to look at a subject that has been widely discussed lately : capital movements , especially short-term ones .
Everyone seems to have forgotten that capital movements in Europe were only deregulated on 1 January 1990 .
Is it any surprise that where liberalisation has been introduced prematurely in emerging countries where there is no financial transparency , no strict prudential rules or good governance in the realm of public and financial affairs , it is unable to work perfectly in all circumstances ?
I would add that the European model could serve as an example of a high level of integration in economic and financial relations between states .
The reason why Europe is a haven of stability at the moment is that monitoring mechanisms and better practices have produced results .
There were very solid reasons why the Treaty of Amsterdam made them applicable to employment .
This brings me to the second area where Europeans have expectations of us : external relations .
I will say straight away that I often feel frustrated about this .
Here we have a Union that has radically transformed relations between its Member States and with its neighbours .
It is a Union that is the world 's largest trading power , and the world 's biggest aid donor .
It is a Union with a single market that is unique in the world .
It is a Union of states with unrivalled experience of diplomacy .
And yet , what we also have here is a Union that gropes its way forward , a Union that struggles to speak with one voice , a Union that waters down its message by engaging in obscure bureaucratic wrangling .
I ask for only one thing : for the Heads of State and Government to realise what enormous potential the European Union has and to take a collective decision to make it a key player on the international stage .
For that to happen there has to be the political will , of course .
There also has to be a willingness to develop a consistent external policy based on the instruments we have available to us .
And we must strengthen its political dimension through a common foreign and security policy worthy of the name .
We have to avoid what has unfortunately been going on since Maastricht , with national bureaucracies distorting the wishes of political leaders .
Everybody wants the Union to be active and effective .
But too often the Member States ' own government departments , de facto , stand in the way of progress in that direction .
If we want to be effective then we need to agree to genuine coordination and follow a commonly agreed line .
In Vienna I hope , Mr President-in-Office , we will be appointing a high representative for the common foreign and security policy .
That is the first step , but after that we will have to establish the new instruments we need in a new spirit .
This brings me to another consideration .
The advent of the euro adds a new dimension to the debate on Europe 's place in the world .
After the major effort we have all put into making the euro a reality , I am tempted to say : one more heave , ladies and gentlemen , because now that we have the euro , we must shoulder our responsibilities internationally , coordinate our positions and make sure the euro is represented externally .
We cannot possibly let the Union have no say in bodies such as the International Monetary Fund or the G7 Finance Group .
This applies to not only to monetary issues , but to economic matters too .
I sometimes have the impression that certain people forget that we have set up an economic and monetary Union .
This question of external representation is something I often return to ; I am sometimes accused of simply expressing the Commission 's desire to get its hands on it .
This is a misrepresentation .
I have no ready-made solution , but I am saying that we have got to find one , and quickly .
Justice and home affairs is the third area in which people in Europe want to see action taken by the Union as a matter of urgency .
It is an ever-present , growing worry for all our citizens . Here again it is felt that Europe should be doing more .
And this feeling is shared by those involved in the field : the police , the immigration services and the courts .
They are all calling on us to help develop our capacity for reacting quickly , shoulder-to-shoulder and at operational level .
Speaking for myself , I have always seen this as a priority , ever since my inauguration speech before you .
The new Treaty recognises how important this issue is .
The Community method is being extended to cover areas that until now were matters of national sovereignty .
The object is certainly not to harmonise these areas , as we had got into the habit of doing in the Community 's traditional areas of operation .
No-one is thinking of standardising the national police forces or setting up a single immigration department in Brussels .
So here is another classic example of an area where the Community 's new ways of operating need to be applied , particularly as it is vital that those involved trust each other .
The Commission and the Council will be submitting an action plan on justice and home affairs to the Vienna European Council .
There must be real political will behind it .
If it is a priority for ordinary citizens , then it must be a priority for the Heads of State or Government .
I propose that a special meeting of the Heads of State or Government be held in 1999 to discuss this crucial issue alone .
They will also have to make sure that their own government departments overcome the old national knee-jerk reactions and see beyond the futile partitions that divide the Member States from the Community .
I would now like to turn to the third area in which changes are needed for the Union 's future : institutional reform .
I am not going to re-state the obvious . The European Union cannot sweep the issue of how its institutions work under the carpet .
The institutions of 1997 are the same as those of 1957 .
But there are no longer six Member States at the Council table . There are 15 .
And soon there will be 20 - and more .
The prospect of enlargement means that we must reform the institutions as quickly as possible .
The Treaty of Amsterdam still has to be ratified by a number of Member States , but a number of measures that do not require any amendment to the Treaties can already be envisaged .
The Commission will therefore recommend that the Member States take action on two fronts .
The first involves improving the way the institutions work .
I am convinced that a great deal can and must be done without further ado .
Each institution must take a careful look at the way it works .
I am happy to say that there is a growing awareness of the need for much greater coordination , in both the European Council and the General Affairs Council .
As far as the Commission goes , we are keenly aware of our responsibilities .
Since 1995 , much has been done to improve internal management and budgetary discipline .
Since 1995 , as I have said , the number of proposals for new legislation has declined .
Since 1995 , there has been greater consultation before proposals are made at Community level .
And , before the Treaty of Amsterdam enters into force , the Commission will formally amend its guidelines on legislative policy .
With the ' Commission de demain ' initiative we have decided to go further , to set the task of modernisation within a perspective of comprehensive reform of the institution , adapting it to respond to new challenges .
We will be developing this reform throughout 1999 , through in-depth debate on the tasks and role of the Commission in tomorrow 's Union , through a detailed analysis of our internal structures so that we can reorganise them around new priorities , and finally through far-reaching efforts to modernise our management .
I fully intend to use the new powers that the Treaty of Amsterdam confers on the President of the Commission to see this work through .
I would suggest , too , that the other institutions should also undertake a thorough-going review of the way they work and prepare a programme for modernisation .
This is about shared responsibility .
Everyone must play their part , bearing in mind that many of the changes will come about through people changing their day-to-day behaviour rather than through decisions made at summit meetings .
The second point concerns the reform of the institutions themselves .
The enlargement now on the horizon calls for genuine institutional reforms , and the Amsterdam Protocol spells out the need for them .
The key elements have already been identified : reducing the number of Commissioners and re-weighting the votes in the Council , while also extending qualified majority voting to all areas .
However , we undoubtedly need to do even more than this if we want the Union to function more efficiently .
As the Commission has said in Agenda 2000 , it is probably premature to discuss the details before the process of ratifying the Treaty of Amsterdam has been completed .
But we do need to start thinking about the content and the timetable for these reforms and to set clear deadlines from 1999 onwards .
The Commission will make its thoughts on this known in due course .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , here , in a few words , you have the message that I intend to convey at Pörtschach and subsequently .
As always in the history of the Community , the main challenge is to translate ideas on Europe 's future into action .
This is what we will try to do between Pörtschach and Vienna .
I would like us to have clear objectives with precise deadlines set out for the Vienna European Council .
Mr President , when I see how far we have come in recent times , it gives me confidence in our shared determination and capacity to make the Union a true model for the world of the 21st century .
Mr President , it is with great pleasure that on behalf of my group I welcome to Parliament the first Chancellor of Austria to hold the presidency of the European Council .
I thank him very much for being here to take part in our annual debate on the state of the Union and listen to our views about the future of Europe .
It is , in my view , a sign of the times that our heads of state and government are meeting in informal session to discuss the direction in which Europe is travelling .
It is a sign of confidence - indeed of the growing confidence and maturity of our Union - that the meeting this coming weekend will focus on giving European citizens a sense of ownership of this Union , to make them feel that the partnership in which we are engaged is of value to them .
And of course it is .
We have spoken many times , but over the last year in particular , about the need to give Europe back to its people , to create a people 's Europe .
Fine words , but just what do they mean ?
I believe that a people 's Europe is about peace , prosperity and security .
If Pörtschach can breathe new life into the vision of a united Europe by pointing the way forward on these three concepts - peace , prosperity and security - then it will be setting a new and relevant agenda for the coming years .
This weekend we can continue the very excellent start that was made in Amsterdam last year .
Amsterdam gave some signals of just what a people 's Europe might be about , what it might look like , because we agreed a job creation role for the Union , endorsed the social dimension , created a broad anti-discrimination competence , strengthened environmental , consumer and health opportunities and insisted on stronger cooperation between enforcement officers on terrorism and drugs .
These are the issues that affect people 's lives . These are the issues we pursued in Amsterdam .
Now , in an increasingly unstable world , economically and politically , it is time to build on the strengths of Europe ; to look at those areas where people increasingly expect us to be active and creative .
For instance , the need , as has been much mentioned here already , for a dynamic common foreign and security policy , has never been so evident .
The European Union 's 15 economies , on the verge of the most exciting and innovative monetary venture of modern times - the launch of the euro - are calling out for greater economic coordination to manage global economic turbulence and to stimulate internal growth .
Europe is not an end in itself .
Europe is a tool to deal with the problems which confront us across the continent and globally .
In that sense as well the moment is right .
Over recent weeks and months we have seen a desperate need for political leadership in the world .
With economic turbulence continuing from the Far East to Russia , with increasing pressure on Latin American economies and currencies we have witnessed a paucity of political leadership .
Japanese politics has been reeling from crisis to crisis .
President Yeltsin has struggled to keep a government - any government - in the Kremlin and we have all been compelled to watch the personal and institutional trauma of the American presidency .
It is Europe which is promoting innovation in the global economic and monetary structures .
It is the euro which is creating a significantly new element in Europe 's favour in that economic turbulence .
And it is European leaders who are articulating the need for new globalised , appropriate regulation and reformed global structures to give shape , coherence and rationality in the global market .
But this is also a moment when confidence worldwide is at a low ebb and when many are confused about where and in which direction the global market is taking them .
It is a moment when we have the opportunity to demonstrate that we in Europe can provide leadership in an unstable world .
The questions which are crying out to be answered are the same throughout the Member States and the same issues that are demanding answers in the European discussions as well : how to create jobs in a global market ; how to reform the social welfare systems of Europe without denying help and support to those who truly need it ; how to save the environment for the future ; how to deal with the scourges of racism , drugs and terrorism ; how to train and retrain individuals to cope with the challenge of information technology ; in essence , how to create a dynamic , prosperous economy with social justice .
I believe in a strong European Union .
I believe that Europe 's institutions need to be effective and efficient .
We must continue to change , refine and democratise our institutions if we want to establish within the body politic and amongst the Union 's officials a culture of openness and a willingness to conform to the challenges of modern democracy .
But amongst the people in our Member States , the institutional debate is long past its sell-by date .
It is and remains important to us , as it should be .
We operate within the institutions .
We are bound by their rules of engagement and we are often trapped by a culture of political administrative involvement which is dated and often found wanting .
So inevitably and quite rightly we will pursue changes .
That is common to all parliaments , particularly to new ones , such as we are .
But it is time that we made clear that Europe must not be about building institutions .
It must be about securing a wider , more stable , peaceful European continent for us all ; not building institutions - building a Community of shared values ; not building institutions - building a future for our young .
We are often teased and criticised that we have no big idea .
Europe is a big idea whose genesis and motivation is no less powerful today than it was at its inception .
As John Hume said yesterday in his moving statement to this House , Europe is the greatest model of conflict resolution this world has ever seen .
But today the Union has even greater vocation .
Those who give more than a cursory glance at the global environment in which we are working cannot fail to see the significance of the European Union : its ability to act together for its 370 million citizens ; the potential power of its economy with a single currency ; its opportunity to offer a coherent chance to its young through coordinated action for employment for the future ; its traditions of tolerance and openness and its sophisticated social model .
If all of this can be harnessed with a greater and expanded model of cooperation in foreign and security affairs so that the Bosnias and Kosovos of this world can be prevented - not just stopped once they have begun , but prevented - then we are truly offering something new for the future .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , I think we can assume , Mr President-in-Office , that we all endorse your call for a European social market economy model .
We also endorse your belief in a European Union that is more than merely an internal market and a common European currency .
It needs a new European injection of energy .
In particular , the European Union needs to achieve credibility among its citizens .
On behalf of my group , I am very grateful to you for defining the Pörtschach objectives .
The Members of this Parliament were not always sure what this summit would be about .
They knew what it would not be about .
It will not be able to take any decisions , or to anticipate any institutional reforms , but it can define guidelines for the Vienna summit and of course also set signals , signals designed to make the European Union more credible .
At least that is what I hope .
There is a chance - and here of course we are dying to know what will happen - that you will receive the newly elected German chancellor in Pörtschach .
You have invited him , and of course we expect him to give us full details of his economic policy targets , of the aims towards which he will steer the most important and strongest European Union economy .
You have therefore invited Mr Schröder , and looking at recent events one might almost think it would have been a good idea to invite the super-minister , Oskar Lafontaine , because nobody is quite sure who will actually have the final say on Bonn 's economic policy , Gerhard Schröder or Oskar Lafontaine .
What interests our people here is , of course , the credibility of this economic policy , in particular the credibility of the European currency , to which you have also given priority .
At the Pörtschach summit we must ask - and I expect you to do this - what the new Bonn government 's views are on the independence of the European Central Bank .
Is it tempted to try to influence it from within ?
What does it think about easing the burden on the economy by easing the burden on the small and medium-sized enterprises that pay the highest taxes and can create most jobs ?
After all , Mr President-in-Office , we have to accept that the short-term economic forecasts have been revised worldwide . Europe is still in a good position here .
The euro has already proved to be a bulwark against financial turbulence . But we must strengthen the people 's trust in the euro .
Unless Pörtschach clearly supports sustainable stability , an independent European Central Bank and a careful budgetary policy , rather than confining itself to the aim of speaking with one voice on the euro at the WTO and other international bodies , then I fear our citizens might under certain circumstances have less confidence in this common currency , or even lose it entirely .
We must also give the European Union credibility with regard to security .
The people need to feel secure .
They need to feel secure against international crime , against uncontrolled migration .
The incorporation of visa , asylum and immigration policy into Community law provided for in the Amsterdam Treaty is a step in the right direction .
But more needs to be done .
We must coordinate our criminal justice systems more closely , even prior to ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty .
We must also regard the process of enlarging the European Union as a factor of security policy .
As you said , the beginning of practical negotiations on seven chapters under the Austrian Presidency of the Council is also a positive signal .
Mr President , we would be pleased if the Pörtschach summit also adopted a declaration on the objective of the enlargement process , namely to enlarge the area of freedom , security and the law in order to consolidate Europe from within .
This is an extremely important project , in view of the situation in Russia .
If we focus clearly on this objective of exporting security , our citizens will find it easier to identify with the process of enlargement .
The people of Europe , whom we represent here in Parliament , will also find it easier to identify with a common foreign and security policy .
The evidence of the European Union 's impotence in the Balkans and in the Middle East does not exactly enhance the people 's confidence in this Union .
But let me warn you against the illusion of believing that the problems can be resolved by appointing a CFSP representative .
This representative would have to be backed by a common political will .
Here I also appeal to you not just to look at this in terms of personnel , but also to look at the content .
After all , the citizen must be able to see that decisions are transparent and sustainable .
The original watchword of the Pörtschach summit , subsidiarity , has been short-changed to some extent , simply because European policy priorities change so quickly .
But the European Parliament has put forward some ideas on the question of subsidiarity .
In particular , as you said , it must not be used as an alibi for renationalisation .
The Council must take better decisions , based more often on a qualified majority .
They must be endorsed by the European Parliament .
The European Parliament must always cooperate with the national parliaments .
And , above all , we must restore the credibility of the EU as a whole and of its institutions .
This is a particularly urgent concern , given the irregularities that have emerged in the Commission and also in Parliament .
I would ask you to give priority to the question of the Statute for Members of the European Parliament .
Let us remember something that Lenin once said , which may seem rather odd for a conservative , Christian Democrat Member , but is still true in this context : confidence is good , control is better !
Mr President , ours is a Union that has shown itself capable of extraordinary achievement when it combines vision with political will .
Sadly , it is also capable of causing grave disappointment when such qualities are absent .
Vision and political will have brought us to the threshold of launching the euro in 71 days ' time .
Internally and externally our economic relations are set to reach a new plane .
As a zone dedicated to stability we can exert a major positive influence on the global stage especially at this time of crisis .
My group believes that to do this the presidency must develop proposals to ensure that the European Central Bank , together with the Euro 11 Council , assisted by the Commission and accountable to this Parliament , fully develops the external representation of the euro .
Having worked so hard to create this powerful federal monetary capacity , we must not dissipate its international effect by an absence of vision and will .
In seeking to enhance the international role of the Central Bank my group also expects from the bank itself greater transparency in its policy formulation .
Without that we fear tensions could arise between the political and the monetary authorities , especially if the pace of economic progress slows down .
The ELDR also strongly urges those Member States which meet the criteria , namely Denmark , Sweden and the United Kingdom , to join the euro .
There are few areas where our policy pretensions and our actual effort stand in starker contrast than in the area of common foreign and security policy .
Once again the Kosovo crisis exposes the gap between aspiration and outcome .
Kosovo , despite recent progress , remains dangerously poised on the edge of a humanitarian disaster .
Its ceasefire is fragile , its political prospects uncertain .
The ELDR believes that the Union and the international community must maintain pressure on Mr Milosevic and must be prepared , if necessary , to back this with the credible certainty of military intervention .
The reasonable , but unfulfilled , expectations of many of our citizens that we should never again witness on European soil what we see in Kosovo undermines the credibility of the European Union .
My group believes that foreign policy is an area where decidedly we need more Europe , including a Europe with a security and defence capacity .
Enlargement challenges all of us to rediscover Europe 's essential task .
The great prize which it offers is political and security stability across the wider continent .
The ELDR welcomes the decision to open the Conference on Accession at ministerial level next month .
As we face a difficult debate on the future financing of the Union and Agenda 2000 , we must not lapse into an arid , sectional and narrow debate on budgetary policy , to the exclusion of the wider vision .
Again , as we await the ratification of Amsterdam , the same logic applies to institutional reform .
This now assumes a new urgency by going to the heart of the kind of Union we wish the applicant states to join .
For the ELDR this is a Union both wider and deeper with a political and social as well as an economic mission , but also with the institutional capability to see it through .
We welcome the green light given to Cyprus but it now requires a deeper EU-led engagement to resolve that problem under the aegis of the United Nations .
This will require an even-handed capacity to deal with all the regional political powers .
In this regard , we deplore the continued failure of the Council to deliver the financial protocol for Turkey , and ask today how the presidency proposes to unblock this unhappy situation .
The Vienna Summit will review the claims of other applicant states .
My group commends in particular the progress made by the Baltic States , in the economic field in Lithuania and in human rights in Latvia .
We note also with satisfaction the evolving situation in Slovakia and the renewed interest of Malta .
The prospect of deepening cooperation in the field of immigration and asylum policy is to be applauded .
Concerted action can have a positive effect , provided it is not founded on the values of the lowest common denominator nor on any retreat from the 1951 Geneva Convention 's fundamental approach to asylum-seeking as an individual human right .
We welcome the breakthrough in a statute to establish an international criminal court as a permanent structure to bring to justice those charged with crimes against humanity and urge that the preparatory work proceed .
Finally , we remain concerned about the fight against fraud in the Union , an issue with serious potential to undermine the institutions . We believe it is important to maintain a sense of proportion , but also where there is wrongdoing to ensure full accountability which so far , regretfully , has either been unforthcoming or begrudging .
We need a more independent investigation process .
The state of the Union reflects that where we have the political vision and will , we succeed ; where we lack those qualities , we do not .
Let us learn and apply that lesson .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the informal meeting of the Heads of State or Government , due to take place in Pörtschach at the end of this week , should mark an important stage in the history of the construction of Europe .
In fact , at a time when Europe has undertaken a new process of enlargement greater than ever before , which will have unprecedented consequences , it is essential that we consider the political angle of the entire project of the construction of Europe .
It is no longer a question of merely adapting the working of the institutions to accommodate a new geographical region . We must redefine the very purpose of the construction of Europe so that it can be understood by all the citizens of the Union .
The basic question that our fellow-countrymen are asking today is : why do we need the Union ?
It is true that the method used firstly to pool the coal and steel resources of six countries , and then to build a large internal market of 15 countries that is soon to be a monetary union , has at least left us with a substantial acquis communautaire .
But this method has today reached its limits .
Today , the Union is nothing but an economic idol with feet of clay and a political dwarf , because it does not form part of a political project such as that conceived by General de Gaulle when he proposed what was known as the ' Fouchet Plan ' .
If we are not careful , the concept of solidarity or even of a political union is on its way to disintegrating rapidly under the pressure of national economic and financial interests . Unfortunately , this is clearly demonstrated by the renewed debate - in the context of Agenda 2000 - on net budget balances , which denies all notion of Community added value .
It is unfortunate , to say the least , that by proposing the partial renationalisation of CAP funding , the Commission - which should be the spearhead of the European spirit - is supporting what may turn out to be the unravelling of the tapestry that the European governments have had so many difficulties weaving over the last 40 years .
Reasserting that solidarity as the basis of the European Union is the only possible antidote to the prevailing fundamentalist economic thinking that undoubtedly threatens the acquis communautaire much more than the consequences of this enlargement . And it is an enlargement that some both desire and dread because they are unable to take a broad and coherent view of an expanded Europe .
With a single currency , which must undoubtedly be used to promote employment and growth , the European Union , enlarged towards the centre , the east and the south of our continent , must have the will , if it wants to survive , to play an international role that corresponds to its economic power and its historical and cultural heritage .
Throughout the world , in the Maghreb , in Africa , in the Middle East , in Asia , and in Latin America , there are high expectations of a Europe capable of defending the values of civilisation and humanism that have formed the basis of its influence over the centuries .
This is much more important for the people of today than widespread free trade.The European Europe , which was the wish of General de Gaulle 40 years ago , still remains to be built .
And it will only be built if Europe has the will to set up an autonomous defence and intervention force that can be deployed beyond its borders when required for the common interest and to preserve peace .
We must include the applicant countries of central and eastern Europe in this significant debate on the political emergence of a genuine Europe , for they have the most concerns about the security of the Union 's external borders , as Greece also has at the moment .
The European states will not be able to go on avoiding the following question : what immediate and effective action could they take if the borders or territorial integrity of a Member State were threatened by a third country ?
The response at the moment is clear : they could not do anything without the blessing and participation of the United States , as the Kosovo crisis has just demonstrated once again .
Ladies and gentlemen , these are the vital questions that the Heads of State or Government should consider if they truly hope , as we must assume , to relaunch the project of a political European Union .
If they were to abandon this , then it is difficult to see how , during the European elections in a few months ' time , we will be able to mobilise the enthusiasm and support of our fellow-countrymen .
Let us hope that our call is heard !
The guidelines that you have just set out , Mr President , are a step in the right direction , but they need to be clarified .
Viel Glück , Herr Präsident !
Mr President , Europe is entering a stage which will be crucial to its future . A new political impetus is urgently required .
Our group believes that the institutions of the European Union should focus their efforts on three main aims : to create a social model , to make progress towards institutional reform with a view to political union , and to strengthen internal solidarity , extending it to the countries included in enlargement .
The major features of the social model are full employment , the conservation of the environment and democratic control of the economy .
It encompasses the proposal for a 35-hour working week in France , and the prospect of a new energy policy in Germany . Both of these could have a European dimension greater than that of monetary union , some of the conditions of which run counter to our hopes for the social sector .
As regards institutional reform , we are hoping for something more than a rhetorical message from the forthcoming summit .
We strongly support transparency and participation .
We hope for compromises concerning the balance - a new balance - between the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament ; the strengthening of democratic accountability and the development of a genuine spirit of European citizenship , compatible of course with the existence of the Member States .
A proposal on institutional and political change should be available before the next elections , so that our citizens can express their views at the ballot box .
The European Union must strengthen its role in the world with a common foreign and security policy capable of promoting its own position and of ensuring peace and respect for human rights in Europe and in every continent . The world must be freed from the military and financial power structures dominating it at present .
Such a peace is already being achieved in Northern Ireland , following the end of terrorism and the political dialogue championed by our colleague and recent Nobel prize-winner John Hume .
It is also worth mentioning that the recent cessation of terrorist violence and crime has brought renewed hope to Spain , and particularly to the Basque Country .
If this cessation proves permanent , it will make it possible to move towards a normal democratic situation .
Elections are to be held in the Basque Country this coming weekend , in a peaceful atmosphere we totally support , and which the European Parliament must support .
Finally , we wish to stress that enlargement must not take place at the expense of internal solidarity .
That would be a serious error , threatening the Union 's very existence .
For that reason , we could not support the document on options for the own resources system presented by the Commission recently .
In our opinion , this proposal renationalises policies which are currently common ones , and would hinder social and economic cohesion in Europe .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , our group strongly supports your view of a European employment policy .
We venture to suggest however , that the main challenge for the Austrian Presidency is devising a plan for the future . The Austrian Presidency should not resign itself to going down in history as the forerunner to the German Presidency .
Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , nearly all the elections held during the past year clearly show that European voters want new political majorities which distance themselves from the myth that political governments must do as little as possible and that market forces will solve the problems of society through greater flexibility , liberalisation and deregulation .
After the United Kingdom and France , we in Germany now have the incoming government of Socialists and Greens .
The political authorities are responsible for ensuring that life in society remains tolerable for all its members , with the prospect of work , a healthy environment and emancipated rights of participation .
We want to see more women on the Union family photos when a summit is held in Europe .
It is impossible for isolated nation states to acquire sufficient room for political decision-making in a world economy over which there is virtually no control - and if there is one thing which recent months have made clear , it is that such control is absolutely necessary .
It is in this area that the political union must exercise its authority in order to also impose global political regulations .
We therefore welcome the fact that , thanks to the French Government , the Multilateral Agreement on Investment in its present form has been consigned to the waste-paper bin , and this is also stated in so many words in the new German coalition agreement .
In this respect , Mrs Stenzel , a majority in this European Parliament has clearly stated that it must be possible to enter into dialogue with the European Central Bank .
If that is also too much for the Conservatives , then I really do not know any more what age we are living in .
To conclude , our colleague Mr Voggenhuber will be speaking about the European summit in Pörtschach , but I would like to end on two points .
The drama of foreign policy which is once again being revealed over Kosovo is that there is not in fact any common foreign policy at all .
Also , we want the Commission - and I believe in this respect that Parliament has done some exemplary preparatory work - to be more transparent and better managed , ensuring that certain incidents of fraud are stopped .
In this respect , it is of the utmost importance for the Commission to have the courage to support an efficient and well-structured administration , subject to democratic control .
Only a well-managed administration can do this , one which does not permanently employ the services of hundreds of consultants and subcontractors of all kinds .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the European Council , Mr President of the Commission , on the eve of the informal summit in Pörtschach , the first summit under the Austrian Presidency , what state is the Union in ?
I would like to begin by welcoming the efforts of the Austrian Presidency in a certain number of areas that I would look at in more detail if I had time .
These include , for example , human rights .
Recently , in Vienna , a number of Members of the European Parliament attended the ceremonies commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in which Austria participated , and we can vouch for its efforts in this respect .
Similarly , in the fields of culture and audiovisual media , Austria is endeavouring to move several issues forward .
I could go on , but I would like , in particular , to highlight the issues that invariably reappear and that are becoming more and more worrying every day .
In Pörtschach , Chancellor , as you have just said , you are going to discuss the future of the Union , its objectives and its raison d 'être .
That is all very well .
Such basic reflection is essential , but we already know that one of the elements of this future is the forthcoming enlargement .
And indeed , among the decision-makers and the public in general , we can sense uneasiness and fears .
You yourself , Chancellor , said in Luxembourg last March that enlargement was certainly necessary , but that it was not exactly enthusiastically welcomed .
Without concealing the difficulties , is it not essential today to put more emphasis on the progress and positive aspects of enlargement ?
A statement from you in this direction would be very welcome .
You have already begun , this morning , to send out this optimistic message , without ignoring the reality of the situation .
As regards the necessary reform of the institutions as a result of enlargement , I know that you are waiting for the final ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam before you really tackle this issue .
But I do not think that it is premature to put forward innovative ideas concerning the operation of the Council of Ministers , not forgetting the necessary coordination of the various Councils of Ministers .
The President of the Commission has just talked about the operation of the European Parliament - and I would stress here the need for a Statute for Members of this Parliament - and the operation of the Commission .
He also spoke of greater coordination of economic policies , particularly within the euro area , and the institutional resources required for this cooperation and for the euro area to be represented beyond our borders .
In a third fundamental area , that of the Union 's finances , the Austrian Presidency can make a valuable contribution on resources and expenditure .
As far as expenditure is concerned , I would like to stress that solidarity must continue to be one of the main guidelines for the Union 's actions .
Solidarity must not , of course , lead to waste , but budgetary austerity must not serve to undermine solidarity or - and this is something that you all hold dear - social justice .
It is time to consider a possible change in the way we look at our resources .
Should we keep VAT or look for resources based on income ?
This is a good question that we are considering at the moment .
How can we avoid the mistake of renationalising common policies , particularly the CAP ?
Should we introduce a major system of European loans to encourage investment that generates employment , since employment is our priority ?
Finally , can we avoid reviewing the method for calculating the contributions of our different countries ?
These are important questions that must be considered in the very near future .
In conclusion , Mr President , I will say a brief word on the CFSP .
Once again , the Union has appeared hesitant and absent on the international scene in recent months .
We hope that in December , the appointment of someone with overall responsibility for the CFSP , a male or female politician - and I stress the word politician - will mean that we can give real impetus to this policy that is so vital for the Union 's future .
Mr President , the Pörtschach summit will find it hard to untangle the knot of institutional problems the Union has got itself into .
The single currency is going to come into force in the midst of financial turmoil , while a great many additional factors which were only to be expected , but which the states do not seem to have anticipated , have not been taken into consideration .
Enlargement will not be able to take place if we do not challenge the monolithic nature of Europe and the bulk of the acquis communautaire , which is , in fact , still increasing every day .
There is , in particular , one contradiction that sums up all the others : it seems as if the Union only wants to escape its problems by rushing headlong into a super-state , thereby increasing a democratic deficit that is not a ' euromyth ' or a ' ready-made slogan ' - as you said , Mr President of the Commission - but a reality experienced by all the peoples of Europe .
Given such a mass of institutional problems , the Treaty of Amsterdam takes the wrong route , that of the super-state that reduces the quality of democratic control in Europe .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations believes , on the contrary , that the most pressing matter is to restore the people 's control over the Union .
Unfortunately , this type of proposal always results in more Community procedures , more harmonised rules for our citizens and greater marginalisation of the nation states .
This is not the right method ; it only aggravates the problem .
We believe instead that we must rely more on national democracies , which are best at encouraging people 's involvement , and , on the basis of these national democracies , control the Union better .
Our belief is so very different from that held today in this House that we did not think there was any point in just amending the resolution by the Committee on Institutional Affairs which will be put to the vote at the end of this debate .
That is why our group has tabled a completely different resolution with detailed proposals , which is also , in fact , a programme for a Europe of nations , and for a Europe that is based on national democracies , which alone are capable of adequately representing our values in the world ahead of us .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are at least two ways of assessing the current state of the Union : the first is the one rejected by Mrs Spaak yesterday , the bureaucratic and formalistic way , namely to enumerate the legislative or other activities carried out during the period concerned ; the second is to evaluate the processes under way in the Union with reference to the international context and the economic and social situation of the Member States , so as to reflect on the political nature of the European venture and fine-tune its aims .
If we take this second approach , we must acknowledge with some disappointment that no progress whatsoever has been made .
The Amsterdam Treaty is one cause of this stagnation , this political paralysis , but not the only one : the other is bad will on the part of governments , and the intergovernmental method has proved unfit to overcome the institutional difficulties .
As we have stated before , Amsterdam is one of the most insipid fruits to have been borne by the low-profile UK Presidency , at a time when the Union 's aims need to be redefined and adjusted in the light of the profound changes being brought about by the single currency and enlargement .
If there is merely to be a mechanical listing of what has been done , then we must denounce clearly and firmly the comatose state of the operation , which is only making progress - alas - in the declarations made by those in power .
Yet again the Union has been unable to respond in unison , as it should have done , to the challenges of the crisis in Kosovo : no joint proposals for a solution to that problem have been forthcoming at diplomatic level , and no concrete initiatives have been put forward to throw the Union 's weight behind the negotiations .
Almost all the governments regard the UN as a precondition and NATO as a guarantee here , as if to shirk any direct responsibility of their own .
And what about Europe ?
And our foreign and security policy ?
Whatever became of the eagerly anticipated planning and evaluation unit , which was to ensure the coherence and effectiveness of our policy in a truly joint operation , making the Union 's foreign policy more visible to public opinion ?
Until such time as the political union is launched , we shall have cause to repeat year in , year out this tokenistic , meaningless ritual of discussing the state of the Union .
The state of the Union should at long last be tackled by pursuing common European policies .
Mr President , I believe that Pörtschach is a major opportunity for the resumption of an institutional political dialogue .
We are all aware that no decisions will be taken at Pörtschach , which is to be an informal summit , but this , in a sense , might make it easier to take stock of the political will to carry Europe forward .
In my opinion , it would be quite an achievement if , on the eve of enlargement and the adoption of the euro , Pörtschach were to contemplate the deepening of the Union and Europe 's new position in the world , because both the external representation of Europe and a means of balancing stability with growth will clearly have to be addressed .
If employment really is one of our aspirations , how can we establish a link between Europe and employment policies unless we create a relationship between stability and growth ?
I am thinking in terms of an area of freedom , security and justice where human beings - and not just goods - can move around freely , with all the associated problems concerning jobs , legislation , judicial guarantees , security and basic rights .
How can a new balance be established here between the national and the supranational dimensions , both of them necessary ?
That is the point .
Mrs Green referred to the need for our citizens to feel a sense of belonging to Europe : that sense of belonging can take shape most effectively in an area of freedom , security and justice .
It is therefore necessary to continue building a European democracy and to determine a new balance between the institutions of the Union .
We need to know who does what .
This is why , in accordance with the work programme drawn up at Cardiff , our resolution stresses the importance of subsidiarity to the shaping of democracy ; without demonising it , we place it within certain limits .
In the resolution to be put to the vote tomorrow , we reject subsidiarity as a pretext for the renationalisation of Community policies , we reject fears of over-centralisation in the Union , and we reject the idea of creating another institution or body to take responsibility for subsidiarity . We highlight the connection between subsidiarity and solidarity , as well as between subsidiarity and cohesion .
We have sent an important political message to national parliaments by drawing up this resolution together with some of their representatives .
This implies a change , since we must overcome the mutual diffidence of the past .
I do believe that it is vital to minimise the grey areas and emphasise fields for cooperation .
Finally , Mr President , Mr Santer among others spoke of taking a fresh look at institutional policy .
I agree with what he said : there is a need for both more and less Europe .
In my view , we also need a political Europe .
For example , our foreign policy has need of appropriate institutions , and in the field of employment it should be possible to take decisions at European level , but by the same token there should be more delegation of powers when it comes to implementing decisions , so as to create a fresh equilibrium between the Member States and the Union , because there really is a problem here .
Administration should therefore be less partial : all the institutions must become more democratic and more efficient , and it is no accident that we have insisted on proportionality .
Last of all , I believe that certain things can be done without amending the Treaties ; others cannot .
Amendment implies a new method of revising the Treaties , and we shall strive to ensure that , once Amsterdam has been ratified , the Commission takes the initiative of consulting all the institutions about Treaty reform .
Madam President , as we debate the state of the Union , I think it is appropriate to refer to the comparison made between our Union and a Gothic cathedral . The President-in-Office is very familiar with Gothic cathedrals , as he comes from a city with one of the best in Europe .
Gothic cathedrals were the work of many generations . They were started in one style and finished in another .
I think that , at present , the European Union is just like a Gothic cathedral .
It is only half finished . There are pillars which do not support anything , galleries leading nowhere and we even have areas which are not provided with any type of Community safety net .
Furthermore , it is often said at the moment that the European Union grows at times of crisis . That is to say , when everything is normal , it develops very slowly , and then , at times of crisis , development is accelerated and the Union becomes stronger .
I believe that in the speeches they have made here today , the President of the Parliament , the President of the Council , and the President of the Commission have all pointed out just how a structure created for another purpose , the euro , has enabled us to withstand the international financial crisis .
The euro came about for other reasons but , thanks to the euro , our stock exchanges and our currencies remain unaffected . I do therefore agree with the view that the Union matures at difficult times , for it has become stronger as a result of the financial crisis .
Of course , the main problem facing the Union is that , like a typical Gothic cathedral , it is still unfinished .
Completion will take another two or three generations , and at present we need to consider how best to enlarge it .
Gothic cathedrals began as little Romanesque churches which were enlarged time and again until some of them encompassed the whole of an old city , as Vienna Cathedral does , for instance . We are being called upon now to enlarge our cathedral to accommodate the countries which lie between the Baltic and the Mediterranean .
Over a hundred million people are involved . They have a right to be here , and we must find ways of providing for them .
Well , there is one very simplistic solution . You could say , ' seeing that all these people will not fit into our cathedral , let us knock it down and start from scratch ' .
In other words , ' Let us get rid of the common agricultural policy , Community funds , Community policies , and we can all start from scratch together ' .
To use a German expression which can be translated into Spanish , this would amount to throwing the baby out with the bathwater .
So , Mr President of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , we are genuinely concerned that if we go down this road , we will end up without a cathedral or even a storehouse .
Arguments are currently under way over tiny percentages of the Community budget .
Countries which , for example , have what used to be a national port and has now become a Community port are complaining that they have to contribute too much to the Community budget .
I do feel , Mr President , that this is not the time to argue over tiny percentages . What we should be doing is pressing ahead with our great project , so that we can build a real home for the whole of Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we have good reason today to take stock of the state of the European Union and also to consider the future and how to bring it closer to the citizens , because there is a strong sense of dissatisfaction at large .
In my view , it is not enough to hold big conferences at which the participants merely swap slogans , which may make for good sound bites on television but produce no results .
Mr President-in-Office , I therefore want to establish one thing quite clearly with a view to Pörtschach : the European Union 's objectives , timescales and practical projects are all there ; what is not there is the courage to take decisions , the courage of the national governments to take decisions .
The problem with the European Union is not the much-discussed Brussels centralism ; it is the weakness in decision-making , the poor capacity to resolve problems on the part of the national governments and therefore of the Council .
What I hope Pörtschach will do is give clear political signals on the main problems .
A clear ' yes ' to enlargement of the European Union , and under the same conditions we ourselves set in Europe , at a point when the countries concerned are able to fulfil these conditions , even at some political and financial cost .
A clear endorsement of institutional reform , the improvement of our decision-making structures , so that we remain capable of taking decisions , and a clear ' yes ' to a common foreign and security policy that is really worthy of the name , in the interest of peace on this continent and in the world .
The focus of power in the European Union lies in the Council , the heads of government and the national governments .
They must act , they must decide , and therein lies the weakness in our present situation .
Hence my appeal to you to shed light on these fundamental weaknesses during your term of the presidency .
We in the European Parliament , the Members and the Commission will gladly help to promote the project of European integration in the interest of all our citizens .
But without doubt it is primarily up to you , up to the national governments to do so .
Madam President , the outcome of the debate now under way on the financing of the European Union 's annual budget is of fundamental importance to the future direction of the Union over the coming years .
The recent direction which this debate has taken is profoundly depressing for those of us who want to see a European Union which is capable of having a positive impact on the development not just of the present 15 Member States but also on the new democracies in Central and Eastern Europe which have applied for membership of our Union .
The re-emergence of the old Thatcher approach of looking for the money back - even if this approach is now coming from different national capitals than in Mrs Thatcher 's era - still risks undermining the basic foundations of the Union , just as it did back in the 1980s .
The one outstanding common policy success of the Union has been , and continues to be , the common agricultural policy .
This policy is being reviewed and reformed as part of the overall Agenda 2000 proposals .
However , yet again , efforts are now being made to dismantle the common agricultural policy , and this at a time when farmers in all our countries are experiencing unprecedented difficulties .
The proposal to renationalise 25 % of the CAP budget is nothing less than a partial dismantling of the common policy in agriculture .
To represent it as anything else is disingenuous and misleading .
Such a fundamental change in the direction of one of the real common policies which exists in the Union should be resisted , not just by those who support the development of European agriculture but also by those who support the basic principles underlying the existence of the European Union.The Agenda 2000 proposals have launched a major review both of the structural funds and the CAP .
This review should lead to a reform of both the CAP and the structural policies in order to prepare for enlargement but , equally , in order better to serve the interests of the people concerned by these policies in each of our Member States .
The continued viability of family farms in all our countries is under threat because of a number of serious factors , such as the BSE crisis and often unfair competition from third countries .
The CAP and other instruments available to the Union should now be mobilised to protect the interests of our farmers and food producers .
At a time when rural development policy and the protection of the national environment are being given higher priority , it is worth asking if there will be anybody left living in our rural areas to implement these policies .
Farming and food production are the essential elements in the economies of rural areas in all parts of the Union .
Finally , the CAP is essential for survival of the family farm , and efforts to dismantle or renationalise this policy must be resisted .
Madam President , we appreciate the desire of the President-in-Office of the Council to make progress towards a genuine political union , in order to promote employment and the development of the social model .
Yet we cannot help but point out the discrepancy between his intentions and the behaviour of our institutions in the face of current problems .
We believe that it is particularly essential for the European institutions to assume their responsibilities in the face of the international financial crisis and the very real slowing down in growth that is bound to ensue .
The Member States have been guilty of maintaining a feeling of euphoria by saying that the euro marks the end of all the hard work and will give us permanent protection .
This is a totally false assessment and we face some very painful days ahead .
It is therefore the responsibility of the European Parliament to shake up the Council and the Commission .
The present circumstances force us to review the effects of the budgetary stability pact and the EU 's monetary policy on the different national situations .
The Community is going to have to take initiatives to support economic activity and , in particular , to create plans for sustainable development .
What we need is genuine coordination of economic policies , with democratic controls .
We must get the instruments of solidarity working and the Union must , as a matter of urgency , define its views on how to regulate the global economy .
In order to pursue these objectives , we recommend a form of joint responsibility between the Council , the Commission and our parliamentary bodies .
The resolution by the Committee on Institutional Affairs is right to recommend qualified majority voting and to balance subsidiarity with solidarity .
But , in our opinion , it goes in the wrong direction by trying to confer the majority of executive power on the Commission .
The Commission cannot move forward without a Council that assumes its political responsibilities .
The European Parliament itself has a duty to promote public debate on the basic choices in economic , financial and social policy , in cooperation with the national parliaments and the civil society .
The House has failed in this task .
It must therefore reconsider its duties towards citizens , employers and trades union bodies , with a view to allowing them to become more involved in our institutional system .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , you said that the special Pörtschach summit should consider the future of Europe .
But the list of subjects on the agenda tells us that it is more likely to discuss everything and anything .
Many of us fear this meeting will turn out to be the most expensive boat trip in the history of the Union .
Mr President-in-Office , when politicians consider the future they should remember the promises they have made to the people and the tasks to be tackled in the present .
There is indeed no lack of broken promises and unfinished tasks in the Union .
We have been promised since Maastricht that the serious democratic deficits in the Union would be dealt with , that parliamentary and constitutional principles would be underpinned .
The people are still waiting , while the Council is not even able to make its legislation visible .
The democratic deficit of the European Union still goes by the same name - the Council .
It has promised us since Amsterdam to remove the internal barriers to EU enlargement .
We know that this requires a comprehensive reform of the EU institutions .
But so far the Council has not even managed to produce a binding timetable .
Instead , it tends to fuel fears about enlargement towards the east .
Since the decision on monetary union , we have been promised that European integration would be given a social dimension , that instead of a market and money-based Europe , we would have a political union , a social area .
But so far the political statements about fighting mass unemployment have not been followed by deeds .
No sign so far of a coordinated economic policy , of an end to fiscal and social dumping throughout Europe !
Council summits are increasingly turning into a bazaar of conflicting nationalist interests .
Mr President-in-Office , there are some things we do know about the future of Europe .
We know that it can only succeed as a democracy , that it must overcome the division of Europe , that it can only flourish in a climate of social peace .
The Pörtschach summit will be measured by whether it takes practical steps to open the door to this future a little wider .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , from one year to the next , the report on the state of the Union sends out the same message of self-satisfaction .
We are led to believe that ' euroland ' would keep France safe from the chaos of the world , from the threat of an international recession , and from the fluctuations on the foreign exchange markets .
In reality , all the forecasts of economic growth are currently being revised downwards , not only in France but also in Germany , and we might wonder whether the 3 % government deficit target will be met in 1999 .
On the subject of international economic relations , we should remember the statements made at the Uruguay Round , that $ 100 billion or $ 200 billion of additional wealth would be created in 10 years , particularly in South-East Asia and in the emerging countries , from which Europe would undoubtedly profit .
We should remember , too , the assurances given by Mr Delors , who , in 1994 , in response to a question I put to him , promised that the preparatory phase of the euro would not involve any form of recession , and the ode to joy on 2 May this year , which only Mr Trichet spoiled , and which , at 3.00 p.m. precisely , should have announced the long-term prosperity ahead .

But , fortunately , we are protected by the Maastricht Treaty and the Treaty of Amsterdam , which will in future enable the people of Europe to do together whatever they no longer want to do alone .
In any case , with or without a legal pretext , you know that France 's leaders will give you what you dare not even ask for , without asking for anything in return , and once you have it , you will hear these so-called leaders claim the fact that they have not asked for anything in return as a success for France .
Mr President of the Commission , your message appears to me to convey a certain weariness , because we are all aware of the artificial nature of the construction of Europe .
One day you will not be able to avoid the real question : what is all this for ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , when Chancellor Kohl and Jacques Chirac wrote to Tony Blair a few months ago calling for Europe to be brought closer to the people , they were speaking from the hearts of many .
The people are aware that the list of the Union 's shortcomings is a long one .
Let me just list the most recent headlines .
A Union of fraud cases and secret Council meetings , a Union unable to speak with one voice in foreign policy and take action in a common foreign and security policy ; a Union that puts forward a best practice model while unemployment stands at 18 million .
The expectations of a political declaration on the subject raised by the subsidiarity letter have accompanied us right up to the special Pörtschach summit .
What signals will this special summit send out ?
Pörtschach is no longer concerned with closeness to the citizens .
Any debate on the meaning of subsidiarity has been buried prematurely with the lethal argument of renationalisation .
Pörtschach is concerned with the future of the Union , or so I have read .
But it does not want any quarrels about Agenda 2000 or net contributors .
Yet these questions that are to be excluded from the discussion are in fact questions of the future .
We are told that the institutional reform of the Union cannot be discussed at Pörtschach because Amsterdam has not yet been ratified .
The truth is , in my opinion , that the presidency of the Council is rather relieved to have this as an argument for not opening up a Pandora 's box .
I fear that in Pörtschach nobody will be keen to burn their fingers on difficult issues .
So they are to be left out of the discussion .
Yet many areas need reform , even without amending the Treaties .
This could have been a chance to show a little more courage and send out a signal for Europe .
If Pörtschach is to become a summit of missed opportunities , then I would ask you to consider , Mr President-in-Office , that the loss of credibility and sense of disappointment may lead people to ask : ' what for ? ' .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , what does the future of the Union depend on ?
It undoubtedly depends on two major advances .
The first is related to the need to define , codify and validate , through democratic consultation , the nature of the contract between the Union and its citizens , on the basis of the European social model and the values we hold dear .
We need to define this contract and establish goals which will allow us to regain the support of the people of Europe , to legitimize the action we take , to establish a sound basis for the courage needed , and to verify the accession requirements for new members .
We must also provide ourselves with the tools to exercise our responsibility and to assume our dynamic role , in the midst of global chaos , in order to contribute to better regulation .
Given this long-term perspective , what do we expect in the medium term from Pörtschach ?
We do not want any grand declarations .
It is an informal European Council .
Bravo !
Make sure it remains an informal European Council , Mr President ; that is what we expect of you .
The agenda is already very crowded .
This informal European Council is welcome , and we will certainly need more of them .
It is only the start : you must then also make a success of Vienna , whose timetable is very full with the national action plans on employment and the question of the external representation of the euro .
Do not overload the timetable .
Beyond this informal European Council , you will also have to discuss broad guidelines with the new Commission and the next European Parliament .
You must remember that .
So what are we hoping for from Pörtschach ?
We must start discussing these questions about our future and the institutional issue .
And do not tell us that you are going to wait until everyone has ratified the Treaty of Amsterdam , because , as you well know , for certain countries - and particularly my own - it is not enough to say : ratify first , then we will negotiate .
We know full well that the issues at stake are very complex , that the deadlines are short , and that the process of enlargement is already under way .
In order to ratify the Treaty of Amsterdam , some countries , including my own , need guarantees in terms of the timetable and method to be used for this reform of the institutions , for what is contained in the Treaty of Amsterdam today is not enough for us .
Let us now look briefly at the broad institutional guidelines as we would like to see them , on the basis of the proposals made by the chairman of our Committee on Institutional Affairs .
Yes , the General Affairs Council needs to be reformed . And you have begun deliberations on this issue .
Well done !
You need to follow these deliberations through , transform the General Affairs Council into a purely Foreign Affairs and Defence Council , and set up a body to coordinate with senior ministers meeting once a week .
Great emphasis must be laid on this , while the importance of the Ecofin Council must be balanced out .
I have nothing against the Ministers for Economic Affairs and Finance , but they are not the most important generator of social transformation .
Next , as far as the Council-Commission balance is concerned , we must insist on the balance initially provided for by the authors of the Treaty , which is a fair one .
We must not over-interpret this or that provision of the Treaties to the benefit of one or other of the institutions .
That is not the way the Heads of State or Government have chosen to act up until now , and that is only fair .
We simply need a strong Commission and a strong Council .
In this respect , we need the Commission to rediscover its sense of collective responsibility and to drop the ' non-aggression pact ' which it sometimes seems only too happy to hide behind .
I will not say anything on the Euro Council , despite the fact that there is a great deal that could be said , particularly as regards the dialogue that we will have to enter into with it .
I would like to make a last comment on subsidiarity .
This principle must not serve as a pretext for renationalisation .
It must promote effectiveness and cohesion , but we will not achieve this by defining groups of responsibilities .
There are numerous examples that demonstrate that we must act on all levels , with each of us doing what we are responsible for .
Madam President , two questions spring to mind in the context of this debate on the state of the Union and the Pörtschach informal summit .
First , what is the true state of the Union , and second , what can we hope for from the Pörtschach informal summit to help us out of the state we are in ?
I believe , following the recent elections in a number of Member States - and the declarations by the Prime Minister of a certain small but rich Member State which is part of the European Union , threatening to veto the whole of Agenda 2000 if he does not receive a cheque like the British one - that what we are witnessing is , at the very least , a renationalisation of the Community debate .
I feel that we are placing far too much emphasis on a particular , though nevertheless valid vision of Europe . We are concentrating on the Europe of the net balance , the taxpayer and the beneficiary , a Europe of the cash register and material goods .
Europe , Madam President , is more than this . To use a phrase of Madariaga 's , it is more than coal and steel .
As a result of placing too much emphasis on this vision of Europe which is , I would stress , a valid one , we are becoming blinkered and forgetting the basics : the Europe of values , of peace , of understanding , of harmony and of solidarity , yes , especially the Europe of solidarity , Mr Santer .
As you have heard in the House this morning , Mr Santer , many of us believe that the Commission 's report on the future of own resources is in fact a break with the line of solidarity , a backward step for the Commission , and a muddled exercise in which income and expenditure are confused and in which you threaten the powers of this Parliament as you refer to Community policies .
Europe has to wake up and get back on the right track . How can this be achieved ?
By strengthening its internal operations through the provisions of the internal market and of economic and monetary union , and by making its presence felt in the world , because the European Union has to be more than the body which pays up and signs the cheques to sort out all the major disasters in today 's world .
What can we hope for from the Pörtschach summit ?
There is no point in being too optimistic .
There will be no operational conclusions , as it is an informal summit .
What this Parliament is requesting is , in fact , the introduction of the Community method .
The President of Parliament has explained what duties lie with Parliament as of right .
For its part , the Commission must overcome its internal differences - it should be remembered that the ECHO case has shown up the differences between four Commissioners - and resolve to work in tandem with our Parliament , setting a course for the project of European integration .
The Council has to prioritise its objectives , and bring coherence and rigour to its work . It must understand too , once and for all , that if each Member State does not seek its own advantage within the common advantage , we shall have to relinquish some degree of sovereignty to other powers which are perfectly well aware of the benefits to be derived from union and integration .
I agree entirely with the majority of the objectives put forward by the President-in-Office of the Council , but I should just like to make a small correction concerning myths . Myths are a basic ingredient of human life , but what we have to do is to replace false myths with true ones .
True myths respect reality and yet are not content with it , they do not bring violence to bear on the present situation , but are not satisfied with it and aim higher , grafting our hopes and aspirations onto the present . Madam President , what we hope is that , as Mr Martens has said , Europe will not fail to live up to its aspirations to be a world leader in the twenty-first century .
Madam President , let me say a few words about this motion for a resolution from Mr De Giovanni and the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
It is a very federalist resolution .
Were it to be implemented , the countries of the Union would effectively be on the road towards a ' United States of Europe ' .
What is the problem , you might ask .
The problem is that there is no demand for any such thing in the Member States .
I come from northern Sweden and the calls for a stronger Commission , or for the integration of the WEU , are few and far between .
Opinion polls even show that only a fraction of those Swedes who are in favour of EU membership endorse these further developments .
The real problem with the EU is its lack of proper democracy and the absence of adequate scrutiny of legislation .
That is why we should now be demanding across-the-board democratisation .
If we are to have a sound basis upon which to build , national parliaments must , in the foreseeable future , exercise oversight where the real legislative work is being done .
Madam President , the motion for a resolution by Mr De Giovanni on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs makes a series of assertions in the run-up to the Pörtschach meeting of heads of state and government .
Paragraph 22 states , for example , that we should lay the groundwork for the integration of the WEU 's areas of competence into the EU sphere . This is effectively a call for militarisation of the Union and runs totally counter to the goal pursued by a majority of Green Group members , who seek to build a peace-loving , demilitarised Europe .
The Swedish Greens will be among those voting in favour of the alternative resolution put down by the Danish ' June Movement ' . The Cardiff summit sent out a plea for greater democratic legitimacy and proper application of the subsidiarity principle .
This alternative resolution better reflects that view .
My colleagues and I will sadly have to vote against several amendments from our own group , in particular the one seeking to grant the European Court of Justice jurisdiction in the field of justice and home affairs .
Since judicial powers are invested in the Member States , we cannot support such calls .
Mr President , I should first like to remind you , and this is important in this debate on the state of affairs in the Union , that there is such a thing as the decision of the Karlsruhe Court , which specifies that the European Union is a union of states and not in any way a European superstate in the making .
I believe that this fact and this decision cannot be repeated and confirmed often enough in this House .
Secondly , I should like to draw the attention of the President-in-Office of the Council to the fact that many areas of European decision-making are not only unclear and untransparent , but also fundamentally undemocratic .
This applies , for example , to the excessive power of senior civil servants appointed on a party political basis , namely the European Commission , and also to a great many European directives .
In my country , Flanders , there are still a great many problems connected with the transposition into Belgian law of the European directive of 19 December 1994 on voting rights for European citizens .
Both the Maastricht Treaty and this binding directive itself were approved with a simple majority in Flanders , despite the fact that under Belgian law a constitutional change to voting rights should only have been possible on the basis of a two-thirds parliamentary majority .
This supremacy in practice of a European directive over the Belgian Constitution means that Europe can override the constitutions of the Member States , which to my mind cannot be in line with a correct interpretation of the Union as a union of states in the sense of the binding Karlsruhe decision .
Flanders is facing the problem that granting voting rights to EU citizens in Brussels and Flemish Brabant will in practice mean an ethnic cleansing at the expense of Dutch-speaking Flemings .
Nobody in this House should therefore be surprised if , at the time of next year 's elections for example , Europe proves extremely unpopular in Flanders .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , what some Members see as a summit that will weaken the European Union can , should , indeed must turn out to be a summit that strengthens the European Union .
That does not mean the European Union should take on everything and anything ; no , in fact we should distinguish clearly between national and regional tasks .
But in what the Union can and should take on , it must show greater commitment and efficiency .
One example is the foreign and security policy , about which there has already been some discussion today .
We have seen from a number of recent examples that if the European Union pursues a common , clear and definite line it can be successful .
On the question of Kosovo , as we have said often enough : when the European Union took a united stand and when it coordinated with NATO , it managed to make Milosevic bow to its will .
And if we continue to take a united stand then , I believe , Milosevic and also the KLA will bow to it and begin peace talks .
On enlargement , we told the people of Slovakia and Latvia that we do indeed want to negotiate with them , but they must take a few more steps towards democracy , respect for human rights and the rights of minorities .
Both countries have now done so , which shows how successful we were .
It also shows , however , that we must now send out signals to the effect that we have understood , respect and support their efforts .
Mr President-in-Office , you spoke of the important decision to appoint a Mr or Mrs CFSP .
I too believe that this is an important decision .
But we must be clear that this has to be a strong personality , someone who can coordinate and negotiate with the members of the Commission and the individual countries .
In this area , uncoordinated action would do more harm than good .
Mr or Mrs CFSP must realise that too .
You made it plain that the social market economy is a model , a model that we have not just adopted in Europe .
I came back from Russia yesterday , where I noticed how ultra-liberal advisers , mostly of American origin , have put the wind up and misled the Russians , but also Europe , which means that there is much that we must now put right again together .
Of course Russia itself must also put matters right , since it is partly responsible for producing the entirely free market economy , especially given the conditions that have prevailed in Russia over the last few years .
My last comment , Mr President-in-Office , concerns Mr Medina 's description of the European Union as rather like a Gothic cathedral .
But sometimes it looks more like a post-modern building with Greek columns , Italian piazzas all around , patios from Spain and Portugal , English and French gardens , bits of German Gothic and Austrian Baroque .
Even a structure like this can be attractive , but in the end it has to be based on a uniform plan .
I hope it will prove possible in Pörtschach to convince all the builders we have here in Europe - sadly there are not enough women builders - to apply all their different styles and nonetheless build a uniform , common structure .
To that end , I wish you much success in Pörtschach !
Madam President , it seemed to me - particularly in what the President-in-Office of the Council said - that I detected a new slant on the very important , high-profile issue of unemployment , which is hitting all developed societies very hard .
This is something new , because it has been said until now , both within and outside this House , that unemployment is a national problem , affecting the individual Member States and not the Union , which clearly has other matters to deal with .
At last we are discovering - or rather , rediscovering - that the Union too has a role to play .
In other words , politics is seeking to return to the arena from which ideology - in this instance a laissez-faire attitude - had sought to expel it .
Of course , we are only just taking stock of the problem - solutions are a long way off - but at least this is something , or rather it would be something if we could sweep away the ideological conviction that public institutions are nothing other than guardians of whatever the market is able to do by itself , as though economic policy were not an essential component of the introduction of the single currency .
The Council , however - and I congratulate it - has seen the need to follow up the euro with a harmonisation of economic policy , aiming not only for stability but also to fight unemployment , which degrades those affected by it but also reflects badly on those , both institutions and people , who perhaps shed a tear but do not engage their brains in respect of this problem .
As the Gospel puts it , ' Not every one that saith unto me , Lord , Lord , shall enter into the kingdom of heaven ; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven ' .
All this re-opens the question of properly functioning institutions , one linked not so much to reforms of what already exists , but to the creation of what does not .
EU foreign policy , thus far confined to mere aspirations , proves the point well : for as long as the institutions remain bogged down - and unfortunately there seems to be very little movement here - we cannot have high hopes .
A foreign policy without a proper government , without a common army , is at the very most an exercise in rhetoric which smacks of irksome and inevitable impotence .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful for this detailed debate , which gives us an opportunity to incorporate your views , your policy line , in the discussions of the heads of state and government on a specific subject area , prior to the Pörtschach summit .
It is widely accepted that this subject must not and cannot be renationalisation but , as stated in Cardiff , that we must focus on the future of Europe .
There is also a large majority in the European Parliament that believes we must discuss the key political aspects of a more closely coordinated economic policy aimed at stability and employment in Europe , while also considering what responsible contribution Europe can make to the stability of the financial and global economic markets and the question of internal security . In this context , I am not satisfied with the rate of progress towards achieving this area of freedom , justice and security in Europe .
We must also address the frequently raised question of a self-confident Europe in the framework of a stronger common foreign and security policy .
I am aware that it is not enough simply to appoint a political figure , who must be a good coordinator but also a doer , as the high commissioner for common foreign and security policy .
But we must take this process seriously , and it must be followed by further steps towards genuinely enhancing Europe 's role in the world .
Mr Frischenschlager , I do not share your view that we have already determined the common direction precisely and laid down precise timetables .
For example , I certainly believe it is important , if I may make this observation , to ask the Finance Ministers to study the prospects and possible time-frames for the progressive harmonisation of tax policy - not because I believe we should aim at some sort of levelling-down of tax rates in Europe , but because I believe we should set up a system under which in future it is not just those who cannot defend themselves , the consumers and the workers , who contribute to financing government tasks ; instead , we must find a system under which something which is now very mobile , in other words capital , also makes a fair contribution to financing our common national and European tasks .
I believe that in Pörtschach we will , of course , have to address the question of improving our relations , improving coordination , but also the question of greater efficiency , together with initiating a process of greater democratic legitimacy . But , and let me make this quite clear , we must also address the question of subsidiarity , which has still not been resolved .
It was never our intention that subsidiarity should imply a move towards renationalisation .
Subsidiarity means strengthening common policies in areas where the citizens of Europe would derive advantages , derive European added value , from common decisions .
And it also means that in cultural policy , for instance , where we do indeed have these post-modern cathedrals constructed out of a variety of cultural building blocks , a sense of European nationality , a European spirit can represent a plus but does not mean that regional or national cultural identity should or must be destroyed .
It will be our common task , in line with this Amsterdam protocol on subsidiarity , to breathe life into it , to look at each decision in terms of whether it will produce European added value for the people .
This is one task the Commission has set itself .
It would certainly be possible for the national parliaments to discuss an annual subsidiarity report by the Commission in order to counter the at times unjustified sense that too many decisions are taken at European level which it would be more reasonable to take at another level .
I think we must prepare ourselves carefully for the Vienna summit , and let me promise you again that the Austrian Presidency will do its utmost to achieve substantial progress on Agenda 2000 . I appeal to the common resolve of the Member States to make this progress possible .
I believe that it would also be very good for the Members of the European Parliament if this question were resolved jointly by the European elections ; this would act as a positive sign of the capacity to solve problems , rather than a sign of weakness , a sign that we are not prepared and not able to implement the necessary internal reforms .
I also believe that if we give this sign that we are taking a positive attitude to the enlargement process at the beginning of the negotiations , we will also be able to hold a very open and honest debate on the Commission 's progress report in Vienna in September .
Without wanting to interfere in Slovakia 's domestic policy , I must say that I very much welcome the fact that at the elections , the people of Slovakia expressed strong approval for pursuing the road to democracy , the road to a constitutional state . They thereby endorsed the European Parliament 's position , namely that Slovakia must not be isolated , as a reasonable political position for the future too .
I also believe that , if we have a Statute for Members by then , we will discuss and consider it in Vienna .
We will get a discussion going , because it makes sense to determine rules for Members before the elections to the European Parliament .
Thank you for this debate .
We have many common tasks .
I wish us the success that the European idea deserves and I look forward to a second discussion with you after the conclusion of the Pörtschach and Vienna summits .
Many thanks !
( Applause )
Thank you very much for that speech , Mr President-in-Office , and I believe the President of the Commission would also like to say a few words .
I shall gladly give him the floor .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I will confine myself to answering a number of points in order to clear up certain misunderstandings that emerged from what certain Members said .
Firstly , the report that the Commission presented for the purposes of the decision on own resources does not contain any Commission proposals or guidelines on future own resources .
However , the Cardiff European Council instructed the Commission to examine several lines of thought , precisely in order to facilitate negotiations relating to the Agenda 2000 proposals for reform .
The Commission has not therefore put forward any own-initiative proposals for the renationalisation of the common agricultural policy .
Nor did it propose taking net balances into account when establishing net contributions .
The Commission has done its duty simply by indicating the possible lines of thought in order to make the negotiations in the various Member States easier .
If it should happen that agreements were reached within the Member States on the entire package and on the financial perspective , the Commission would then , and only then , take the initiative to make specific proposals .
However , at this stage , the Commission has only made the negotiators aware of the possible lines of thought in one direction or another .
It is now up to the Member States and the Council to give their opinions .
This was intended to clear up any misunderstandings .
As for the rest , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with all those who have told me that , in order to ensure its future , the European Union must be closer to its citizens .
You know that this was , in fact , the leitmotiv of my investiture speech before the European Parliament , and I support all the efforts of the Austrian Presidency in this direction .
Europe is not just a market and the euro is not an end in itself , but they are important instruments for defining and promoting a European model of society , a model of growth based on the spirit of solidarity , where economic and social cohesion must remain one of the fundamental pillars of the construction of Europe .
This must be the spirit behind the debate on subsidiarity : in my opinion , subsidiarity and solidarity are two sides of the same coin , two sides that cannot be separated if we truly want to build a Europe that is closer to its people .
As for the rest , I am convinced that Europe can fulfill its responsibilities on the international stage , within the framework you mentioned , Mr President-in-Office .
However , I fear that , once again , Europe might not be able to seize this opportunity and that the projects most of you support are becoming bogged down in bureaucracy .
This is the great danger , the great risk , and I know what I am talking about , having heard what has been said at various Council of Ministers meetings .
That is where the European Council must intervene , and where the deliberations of the Heads of State or Government can give fresh impetus so that Europe can face up to its responsibilities to its own citizens and its partners , as well as its responsibilities on the international stage .
If this is the path taken in Pörtschach , then Europe will certainly increase its credibility in the eyes of its citizens !
Thank you , Mr Santer .
I have received two motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) .
Madam President , hopefully the speeches that come after the keynote speeches of the Commission and the Council will not be of any less value than those that preceded them .
It is very important to mention that we are not living in a ready-made Europe , but one that is continually changing .
Our success will be determined according to how well we are able to meet the challenges of the future .
It is thus vital that we continue the debate on whether the policy we have chosen to follow , and the one that is in place here and now , is a feasible one .
Europe has clearly coped better than other continents with the growing economic problems that exist worldwide .
In a world ravaged by one crisis after another , European stability is regarded highly even by those , who , for various reasons , have opposed European cooperation .
This is seen , for example , in opinion polls , which show that the single currency is growing in popularity while , at the same time , support for the European Union , which gave birth to the euro , is diminishing among our citizens .
A common economic and monetary policy requires greater coordination on economic policy between the Member States than ever before , in order to guarantee effective development in the future .
In economic policy we have to pay special attention to those areas of European cooperation which our citizens judge to be important .
We have to promote a European model of society , with greater compatibility in social , ecological and economic action .
The central tenet of our economic policy must be to try to improve the employment situation .
For this we can thank the United Kingdom , which held the previous presidency , and the current holder , Austria ; we have got to grips with issues much more so than before .
The international economic crisis is unfortunately creating pressures for Europe too .
We especially hope that , in our neighbouring regions , Russia will solve its present economic and political crisis as speedily as possible .
The initiative still to be discussed this year on the EU 's northern dimension will create much-needed sustained and systematic cooperation between Russia and the EU .
In economic cooperation with Russia we have to stress the absolute necessity of making genuine structural changes , such as in the banking and administration sectors , and for this we need to redirect the TACIS cooperation programme for Russia .
It is now time to develop the TACIS programme so that it reflects current requirements .
The right policy is not to freeze TACIS resources but , as I said , redirect them more efficiently than before .
Thank you , Mrs Myller . I should like to say , for the benefit of those Members who are due to speak in this debate , that the President-in-Office and the President of the Commission were obliged to leave us .
That is why they wished to speak when they did , but the Minister for Foreign Affairs is here and is listening with great attention to everything Members may have to say , as is Commissioner Fischler .
Madam President , you are asking us to talk in the desert , but we are used to it here in Parliament , and this desert is actually highly populated since the Minister is here .
I would like to use the two or three minutes I have to simply send out a message .
We have the feeling today that something quite strange is happening in the European Union at institutional level .
We are seeing a certain increase in consensus on the idea that institutional reforms are necessary , but at the same time , this consensus tends to relate to very subtle aspects .
To tell the truth , the further we progress in the institutional debate , the more we have the impression that the elements to be reformed are fading away , disappearing before our eyes , so much so that the process has now been reduced to a ' nominal reform ' of the weighting of votes , a tiny extension of qualified majority voting and improvements to the Commission 's organigramme .
I believe that these twin developments are worrying and that we cannot accept reforms on the cheap .
Indeed , what is at issue in the European Union is not simply incidental adjustments to three institutions , but the overall concept of the Union itself .
How can we operate , what must we do together , and with what resources , and , at the end of the day , what policies do we want to have in common ?
This lack of fundamental thinking is what is causing the drift I was just referring to , a minimal drift towards reforms that are almost non-existent .
I think that it is time to show concern about this drift and to protest against this worrying development , for enlargement requires a fundamental reform , not only of the Treaties , but also of our customs , our administration and our political will .
As the former French Prime Minister , Raymond Barre , put it , in the European Union , the more we are , the greater the problems .
Madam President , the informal summit next weekend and the one due to be held in December will be of major importance for political life in Europe .
Moreover , the European elections in June 1999 and the reappointment of the Commission are approaching .
The political debate in Europe is therefore gathering speed .
As far as the content is concerned , I think that recent election results in the Member States have clearly demonstrated people 's desire for proactive policies , such as on employment , their refusal to allow the market to determine most political decisions and their demand that the social model that workers struggled so hard to achieve through this century should be maintained and developed .
We must therefore offer the citizens genuine choices in society , both at national and European level .
For that purpose , we also need to have political instruments at our disposal and I agree with President Santer when he says that European governance involves all public players , national and European .
I would like to look at four aspects of this European governance .
Firstly , there are still no European political parties worthy of the name .
Article 138a of the Maastricht Treaty is more or less a dead letter .
We know that , in national politics , it is the parties that give structure and dynamism to political life .
There is nothing of this sort at European level .
Who is to blame for this ?
The responsibility comes down to the national parties .
They should be aware of the need to build strong European parties , able to take majority decisions and with efficient mechanisms and democratic structures .
Secondly , fleshing out the concept of European citizenship , another aspect of European democracy , is proving very difficult .
Not enough non-national Community citizens take part in European and local elections in every country of the European Union .
This is a genuine flaw in European democracy .
Thirdly , some people believe that we can improve democracy by increasing the number of assemblies , such as by adding to the assemblies we already have an assembly made up of members of the national parliaments responsible for ensuring respect for subsidiarity .
This is absurd .
The only thing this would do would be to make the process less transparent .
Fourthly , how can we make European political life more interesting , with a little imagination , but without amending the Treaties ?
Madam President , the ' Notre Europe ' association , chaired by Jacques Delors , has proposed that , during the next European elections , the European parties should each choose a candidate for the position of the future president of the Commission .
Neither Jacques Delors , nor the members of his association , myself included , are exactly frivolous people .
If they have made this proposal , it is because there has been a clear drop in the number of people voting .
So , in the spirit of the age , we would be well-advised to add a personal touch to European politics , and the most politically prominent European figure is and will continue to be the President of the Commission .
Moreover , I believe that it creates a very bad image democratically to keep the allocation of this role out of the democratic process .
Madam President , I am happy to follow on from what Mr Bourlanges said and point out that the minimalist approach of the European Union runs counter to the rising expectations our citizens certainly now have of the European Union .
Europe is increasingly being seen as a single area .
The internal borders have disappeared , and accordingly the citizens expect a comparable degree of internal security in their national states , of protection against organised crime and also of protection against illegal immigration .
For a long time now , we have been living in a Europe that is a successful , uniform economic area , but so far we have not had a corresponding legal area to regulate and protect economic activity on the basis of social justice .
That is what our citizens are looking towards .
We see enlargement eastwards as an enormous historic opportunity to give Europe a new order . But at the same time , we must expect the applicant states to adopt our standards of security , justice and democracy , rather than simply seeing the eastern mafia managing to extend their field of operations .
The Amsterdam Treaty is certainly a huge step forward , but it also represents a major programme of work for the European Union .
We must finally realise that it has not just brought more rights for Parliament , but is also accompanied by a perceptible loss of democratic legitimacy .
This treaty transfers major domestic policy responsibilities to the Community and withdraws them from the national parliaments ' direct legislative competence . Supranational competence in these areas is conferred on the Council , which only has indirect democratic legitimacy , while the European Parliament does not acquire any significant powers of codecision .
This is a democratic deficit that needs to be tackled .
Under the new treaty , the Commission acquires a broader right of initiative ; after five years it even has a monopoly here , and it will have to consider how to apply this monopoly in the interests of all , and not just the few .
The temporary protection of refugees , for example , must not just be a generous measure to help bring families together but must also ensure a fair distribution of the burden .
Consequently , in an area of freedom , security and justice , that freedom must be based on greater solidarity , greater security for the citizens ; it must not founder on the persistent defence of national sovereignty !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the future of Europe presents us with some major questions , to which we must not give trivial answers .
In today 's debate we are discussing real issues , and quite rightly not fighting mock battles .
To make the EU fit for the twenty-first century , we must gradually continue the integration process we have begun by also embarking on institutional reforms ; that does not mean adhering only to what has been achieved and certainly does not mean renationalisation .
The crux of the debate on subsidiarity lies in the fact that the Maastricht and Amsterdam Treaties have shifted the EU power structure more towards common policies , and that this fact has simply not yet been recognised in national policy-making .
Most European questions have now become internal policy questions that have to be resolved jointly with the EU .
It is important for the governments to say quite openly to their citizens at home : yes , we will and must decide on a common European basis , because that is good for our country and because our country can no longer resolve central issues on its own .
The Euroscepticism we see among some sections of the population stems from a certain attitude : if the sun shines in the morning , it is thanks to our country ; but if we wake up to snow and mud , then it is the EU 's fault !
Europe must assert itself !
Globalisation and a growing international division of labour can only be established and influenced by a Community with strong instruments at its disposal .
There are many areas in which we must reverse our policies , since we believed too much in deregulation and purely market solutions in the 1980s and 1990s .
The European model still remains a state-based model .
The euro was one milestone , the common employment policy must be another .
I wish the Austrian Presidency great success along this road and warmly salute it : as we say at home in the Ruhr , ' Glück auf ' , good luck !
Madam President , economic union will change Europe , it will create an orderly political framework for the internal European financial market and it will also pave the way to political union .
Without it , the European Union will not manage to achieve Agenda 2000 and enlargement eastwards .
But we also need to develop a stronger Community spirit .
The German writer Peter Schneider is constantly being disappointed in his hope for a perfect Europe because the dynamic of a strong and viable internal market created by a single currency is not being reflected in other policy areas .
But every market needs a regulatory framework if society is not to be damaged , and I would remind you that the money for the people does exist .
That is why monetary union offers the European Union an historic opportunity to successfully master the consequences of globalisation .
The crises in Russia and other parts of the world on the one hand and the progress in price stability on the other show how very important the euro is to European and international monetary stability .
The euro-11 zone is like a lighthouse in the stormy waters of economic and financial turbulence .
We in the Union must not sit back ; we must organise social stability alongside monetary stability .
It is not just markets , people too need to have confidence in this Europe .
That is why it is now important to formulate and coordinate the economic , employment and social policy aspects of monetary union .
Here I would appeal to the presidency of the Council and also to the Commission finally to give Parliament an equal say in coordinating economic and employment policy and finally to conclude the interinstitutional agreement with us , so that we can play our part in promoting this important and necessary progress in the Union .
We in Parliament organised the democratic dialogue with the European Central Bank ; the first monetary dialogue has taken place , but now we also need to see progress at political level , as also at international level .
The European Union , and in particular the euro-11 zone , must speak with one voice both on Central Bank and political matters , and it must do so with the participation also of the Council and the Commission .
We must take measures against fiscal , social and environmental dumping , against tax havens and for a minimum company tax .
The euro will prove to have its own dynamic and establish itself on the markets and among the people .
We also need to organise measures for the real economy , so that as from 1 January 1999 this euro-11 zone can contribute to constantly improving the state of the Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I share many of the views already expressed in this debate .
I would nevertheless stress that 1998 has undoubtedly been a landmark year in the history of the European Union : it has seen the establishment of the single currency , a crucial push towards closer integration among our countries going well beyond its face value .
The credit for this obviously goes to Mr Santer who , together with Mr de Silguy , has met the deadlines set out in the Maastricht Treaty .
Thanks likewise go to the governments , which have ceded part of their own sovereignty for the purpose of attaining a major , historic common goal and , first and foremost among them , the government of Chancellor Kohl , who has left the leadership of his country after 16 years but has ensured himself a place in the history of the Union .
Last of all , particular thanks are due to the EU citizens , who in certain Member States have had to make yet more difficult sacrifices to enable these countries to meet the convergence criteria .
However , this success should not distract our attention from the fact that the Union needs to rest on a more solid foundation if it is to play a more important , determining role .
The much-discussed pillars , which cannot yet be said to carry the entire institutional load , are what will make the Union a political - not just an economic - force to be reckoned with worldwide .
The serious problem of unemployment , the inadequacy of the common foreign and security policy , as well as the long-awaited reform of our institutions , in my view constitute the real challenges which still require an appropriate response .
These then are the tasks which must be placed at the very top of the Union 's agenda , not least because we owe it to our own citizens and those of third countries to do so .
I would stress here my view that the Union has still not devoted sufficient attention to the Mediterranean basin , and would recall that international relations should not be motivated solely by commercial interests .
There are in fact well-founded reasons of a social , ethnic , cultural and strategic nature which must be translated into a more sensitive policy aiming to solve the problems which have been affecting the Mediterranean region for much too long .
Madam President , allow me just a couple of seconds to welcome , in this regard , both the establishment of the Euro-Mediterranean Forum and Malta 's return to the process of European integration .
I should like to see Malta in our midst as soon as possible to make up for lost time .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the main aspects of this debate are Agenda 2000 , the stubbornly high levels of unemployment and the early warning signs of an economic recession .
On Agenda 2000 , I have to say that it only makes sense if it helps to strengthen the economic and social cohesion of the European Union .
The proposals on the table raise our fears that we might be heading in the opposite direction .
The CAP must be balanced so as to treat all European farming systems fairly , especially peripheral or less-favoured ones or those most at threat from the World Trade Organisation .
Otherwise , we run the risk of reforming for the most efficient farmers while putting the European farming model at risk .
Funding the enlargement to the east should not be at the expense of the Structural Funds or , in other words , the poorest regions and citizens of the European Union .
Here too , the proposals on the table do nothing to quell our fears .
The Commission 's recent funding proposal will probably renationalise Community policies . There seems to be a current trend in Europe to do as little as possible to strengthen and deepen the Union , which is what is required .
As far as unemployment is concerned , I have to say that this proposal contains nothing of any significance or on a big enough scale to tackle this tragedy .
We must stop vacillating between Keynesian and monetarist solutions and find a policy mix to overcome this crisis.Thirdly , the economic recession .
Unlike the last recession , this one has not , so far , hit the European Union as hard as it has its main competitors .
Nonetheless , with such an uncertain future the European Union should focus its attention and not be taken by surprise .
The governments of the Member States , including my own country , should stop making rosy statements about the economic situation .
On all of these points we have high hopes of the Austrian Presidency and the summit of Heads of State and Government due to take place next week .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow morning .
VOTES
Voting time will be quite short today because owing to the flood of requests from the political groups for separate votes on the resolution concerning the Extraordinary Summit Conference , we have had to postpone the vote on that issue until tomorrow .
That should be of some concern to the political groups , and I think that we ought perhaps to set a shorter deadline for tabling requests for separate votes .
Mr President , you will note of course that I am in the Chamber .
My point is directed to you because I know the matter is of great concern to you .
It is on communications .
I recently sent an e-mail from Parliament 's new computer in Brussels to my office on Thursday .
After involving a number of the administration staff , the e-mail finally arrived in my office today .
I do not think it is a good example of progress in the Union for an e-mail to take almost 5 days to go from Brussels to my constituency office .
I understand it is the fault of the Groupwise server which Parliament employs for this task .
As Vice-President Haarder is already looking at these matters , perhaps he could look further into this and advise us if we are receiving value for money and if there have been other complaints of this nature .
This proposal forms part of the EU 's overall policy in the field of air pollution .
It concerns stationary installations using organic solvents .
The main burden of the proposal relates to air pollution and the consequences for public health .
However , aspects which may have to do with the internal environment of the workplace , the working environment , are not included .
The Danish Social Democrats have therefore supported the committee 's amendments on the possible effects on human health in general and occupational exposure in particular .
I support the thrust of this report .
We need more stringent requirements for organic solvents , particularly when they are being used intensively for industrial cleaning purposes , as straight solvents or as preserving agents .
I shall be voting in favour , on condition that the individual Member States are given the right to maintain or introduce stricter requirements - in other words , only if Amendment No 6 is carried . The precautionary and substitution principles must be followed .
Chemical substances should not be used unless they are compatible with the interests of human health and the environment and pose no risk . And less dangerous substances should be used where they are available .
The proposal for a directive to reduce exhaust emissions from heavy-duty vehicles is part of an overall Community strategy and follows on from the directives reducing emissions from passenger cars and light commercial vehicles recently adopted by Parliament and the Council by conciliation procedure .
This new legislation is a success for cleaner air in Europe .
The new set of agreed proposals goes far beyond the original text included in the European Commission recommendations and will certainly guarantee that new passenger cars and light commercial vehicles will in the future be less polluting than in the past .
The European Parliament has also succeeded in imposing better fuel qualities in this new revised arrangement .
Low sulphur fuels are an integral element in these sets of proposals which seek to reduce the amount of emissions from diesel engines .
Sulphur content in fuel will be substantially reduced and this new fuel will easily adapt to the new emission reduction technologies for commercial vehicles as well as for exhaust purification systems .
We must remember that the Kyoto conference set down a strict global timetable for the reduction of CO2 emissions and related hazardous pollutants so as to help redress the effects on the depletion of the ozone layer and climate change .
The legalisation before us today is an intrinsic part of the programme of reform being implemented by the European Union to comply with the guidelines laid down by the participants at the Kyoto conference .
CO2 emissions from heavy-duty vehicles are a continually rising percentage of total road traffic emissions .
These vehicles must therefore be covered by the Community strategy for reducing CO2 emissions as soon as possible .
Moreover , tax incentives to ensure that commercial vehicles meet the new requirements and that older vehicles are re-equipped must be brought forward so that the strict deadlines are met under this new legislation .
The report by Mrs Spaak on the progress achieved by the Union in 1997 asks that the forthcoming adjustment of the European Treaties for enlargement be used to try out a more Community-based method of decision-making led by committees of experts .
It calls on the Commission , which it would thus seem to include among the experts , to draw up a preliminary reform plan before the end of the year .
In the opinion of my group , this method involving committees of experts seems extremely questionable .
As a general rule , it will simply be an attempt to present people with a fait accompli dressed up as some sort of God-given truth .
In addition , I cannot understand why this idea is not taken up in the De Giovanni resolution on the political future of the Union .
Perhaps chairman De Giovanni also has his doubts .
As regards the European Parliament , it has no legitimate codecision role to play in this review , where it would simply be supporting the most federalist pressure groups , as usual .
On the contrary , this is a matter for the nations .
National parliaments must put forward proposals and give their opinions , according to each country 's system , before the final Council in the negotiating mandate they vote to give their governments .
Finally , the Commission should only have an implementing role here , not an initiating one , but since , in this particular case , the present Commission seems to have drawn up draft reforms for the post-Amsterdam period , it should publish them . At least the French , who are soon going to have to debate the ratification of the Treaty , will be enlightened as to its genuine aims , as they are interpreted in Brussels .
We are not willing to depart from the principle of enhanced cooperation , as described in the Amsterdam Treaty .
We cannot therefore support paragraph 11 .
The coordination of defence policy should also be carried out in the way indicated in the Treaty . Nothing else is acceptable .
We believe that the Union should be primarily involved in coordinating peacekeeping efforts , with the aid of the WEU .
The fact that some countries are members of NATO should not prevent the EU from acting independently here , no more than the non-aligned status of other Member States should be an obstacle .
We cannot therefore support what is said in paragraph 20 , indent 4 .
It has already been some months since we began the enlargement negotiations , and we are going to have to organise ourselves in future with 13 new Member States .
It is therefore becoming increasingly essential to establish precise rules in order to ensure a new balance .
Of all the risks we face , the most serious , in my view , are the fact that the decision-making bodies are so widely scattered and the watering down of both the European Union 's decisions and its common policies .
That is why I support the comments made in the Spaak report , particularly where it underlines the need to carry out an institutional reform of the European Union as soon as possible before the next enlargement .
A tight schedule must therefore be established in order to make up for the negative impression given to the people of Europe by the IGC .
This should also make us consider who should be leading these types of negotiations : all the Member States together or , directly , a body that is democratically elected at European level ?
The negotiations that have been held up until now have shown that they are incapable of achieving the desired objective .
We now need real progress , or else there is no chance of stepping up the preparations .
It is vital that the accession negotiations should run alongside the institutional reforms .
The slightest hint that the IGC had failed would spell disaster for the negotiations already under way and would bring all the applicants ' efforts to a standstill .
I will therefore vote in favour of the Spaak report , while highlighting the importance of trying to find an institutional balance .
The Danish Social Democrats today abstained from voting on Mrs Spaak 's report .
In certain areas , we disagree with the wishes being expressed .
We think that the Amsterdam Treaty is good , and we want to see how it works in practice .
Institutional reforms must not hold up the enlargement process .
In this report before the European Parliament today , the rapporteur , Mrs Spaak , calls for institutional reform to take place before any prospective enlargement of the European Union .
We know that negotiations between the European Union and the six prospective members from Eastern and Central Europe who are set to accede to the European Union in the early part of the next century is due to commence in November next .
The President of the European Commission , Jacques Santer , has already gone on the record that another intergovernmental conference will be held to reform existing European Treaties so as to ensure that the enlargement process can take place in a structured manner .
What he is primarily saying is that decision-making procedures within the European Union will have to be changed if the European Union is to operate effectively when Poland , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Slovenia , Estonia and Cyprus accede to the EU .
I fully agree with the general principle that decision-making procedures within the European Union must be reformed but any reform must take place in a balanced and open manner .
Certainly the Single European Act introduced the cooperation procedure and the Amsterdam Treaty has extended the power of codecision for the European Parliament in many fields of political , economic and social activities .
I support the continuation of this process .
However , it has been suggested in reports from the European Parliament in prior years that the size of the European Commission should be reduced .
I remember the Bourlanges report before the 1996 Intergovernmental Conference which suggested that the European Commission should be reduced in size to only ten members .
As a consequence of the discussions relating to the Amsterdam Treaty , it has been agreed that the five larger Member States of the European Union will lose one of their two nominees to the European Commission when the next round of enlargement negotiations take place .
I believe that this is very important particularly from the perspective of smaller Member States like Ireland who recognise the importance of maintaining a nominee to the European Commission .
Since 1973 , Irish Commissioners have held such wide-ranging and important portfolios as the Directorate of Social Affairs , the Agricultural Directorate , the Competition Directorate and the Transport Directorate , and it be wholly inequitable if Ireland were to lose out from nominating its Commissioner at a future date .
What I am saying here on the record of the House is that any future intergovernmental conference must maintain the right of smaller Member States to nominate a member to the European Commission at all times .
Lindqvist ( ELDR ) , Eriksson , Seppänen and Sjöstedt ( GUE / NGL ) , Gahrton , Holm , Lindholm and Schörling ( V ) , Krarup and Sandbæk ( I-EDN ) , in writing .
( DA ) Among the events that took place in 1997 , the Amsterdam Treaty was signed and over 50 000 people protested against the EU in Amsterdam , while the negotiators - behind closed doors - thought that they were looking after the interests of the population .
We think that 1997 was a year of retrograde development , not progress , in the areas covered by the report , i.e. the Amsterdam Treaty , the euro , the CFSP and EU powers in the field of legal and other matters , to mention only a few . We cannot therefore support the Spaak report in any way at all .
The Amsterdam Treaty is not a project of the peoples , as has already been stated ; neither is EMU .
In 1997 there was widespread opposition to the euro , opposition which still flourishes now towards the close of 1998 , just a few months before the introduction of the currency .
Legislative power must be transferred back to the national parliaments and not vested in an EU Court of Justice , which in many respects is more of a legislative than a judicial instance .
We are opposed to the implementation of certain provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty before it has been ratified .
We think that shows a lack of respect for the parliaments and hence the populations of those countries in which the Treaty has not yet been ratified .
How can the European Parliament claim to represent the ' European ' people if it will not respect their democratic processes ?
We believe that EU cooperation should be intergovernmental in nature . We cannot go along with the report 's express advocacy of moving towards a ' United States of Europe ' .
The rapporteur calls for more decisions in the Council of Ministers to be taken on a qualified majority basis , with the European Parliament exercising greater influence . This would mean confusion in all Member States as to who is responsible for policy-making .
The report also goes further than the Amsterdam Treaty requires with regard to foreign and security policy .
We agree with cooperating in pursuit of the Petersberg tasks of peacekeeping , conflict resolution and humanitarian intervention . We do not , however , support military defence or the establishment of military or civilian rapid deployment corps .
The meagre report submitted to us for our consideration and its sparse content lead us to wonder about the usefulness of a procedure that requires Parliament to give its opinion in plenary on the ' progress ' achieved by the Union , six months after the presentation by the Council of a report that is no less meagre and that itself relates to the previous year .
This assessment of the ' progress achieved by the European Union ' in 1997 naturally includes a chapter on the common foreign and security policy .
We find there , of course , the usual regrets at the inherent impotence of the CFSP and the formulas to cure it : its Viagra will be the future institutional reforms and the fact that ' the provisions laid down in the Treaty of Amsterdam will be implemented prior to its ratification ' .
Does that mean that the ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam by our citizens would be superfluous ?
In fact , Mr Santer has just announced to us this morning that the Vienna European Council would be called upon to give its opinion on the appointment of someone with overall responsibility for the CFSP , before our citizens have given their opinion on the treaty that creates this role .
Does the European Union thus mean to create a new legal category : to paraphrase Hayek , the legitimate anticipation of a treaty that is not ratified , a category that is exempt from any sanctions by the people .
Let us be clear about this : such shifts lead to a situation where the rule of law no longer applies .
In desperation , the Spaak report states ultimately that ' the Member States will have to demonstrate firmer political resolve ' .
And that is all .
But it is not exactly all .
The finishing touches are still needed and we must therefore ' set up European civil and military intervention corps ' - although the House did not want this - and establish - which the House certainly does want - ' diplomatic representation at Union level in non-member countries where fewer than four Member States have diplomatic posts ' .
That is the quota fixed by Mrs Spaak .
What can this sort of repetitive , conventional and unreal language contribute to the debate ?
Diplomacy is not a matter of arithmetics .
Those who claimed , with disarmingly simplistic arguments , that through its sheer size and the accumulated influence of its constituent powers , the European Union would go beyond the diplomatic capacities of the individual Member States , were wrong .
What the non-existence of the European Union on the international stage demonstrates is quite simply its lack of political existence , which is inherent in its nature .
We should not therefore expect the CFSP to give us what it cannot .
We must not overestimate its potential .
Both now and undoubtedly for a long time to come it will only be a modest addition to national diplomatic actions .
If it tries to go beyond this role to become a restrictive mechanism , then it is going to provoke harmful self-censorship and transform itself into a system characterised by self-intimidation , mutual neutralisation , self-blocking , paralysis in terms of initiative and impetus , and idle , self-satisfied talk that encourages a lack of political will .
It will dissuade those who could act effectively on its behalf from taking any action .
We must therefore be careful to ensure that the CFSP does not become a sort of quicksand into which the failing determination of the Member States is dragged down . They would only wish then to be freed from the duties of sovereignty , to enjoy their common impotence and lack of responsibility , and to leave the burden of preserving their interests to others .
That will not make a good common foreign policy .
Although the European Union is silent on the international stage , the Member States are more vociferous than ever .
They are the living entities , the only real elements that the diplomatic game recognises as true players , because they represent what is at stake .
What do recent crises show us ?
They show us that when Europe is not present through its major national diplomatic figures , it is not present at all .
One very clear example of this was the second Iraq crisis where , contrary to what happened during the first crisis , Europe played a significant role of its own in preventing an imminent conflict .
It was the two oldest nation states of Europe in diplomatic terms , France and the United Kingdom , which took action in accordance with their national traditions and interests - traditions and interests which are admittedly different , but which together are powerful enough not to need to fit in with the Community 's low profile , as Christophe Réveillard rightly pointed out .
These countries ensured a strong presence for Europe and played a real and important role in managing the crisis .
And all things considered , it was not a bad result for the international community .
It is illogical to work relentlessly to take sovereignty away from the Member States and to condemn Europe 's diplomatic weakness .
One causes the other .
Strong , motivated and active diplomacy is the expression of the independence that embodies the will to exist and the cohesion of people who are anxious to preserve their identity , promote their interests and contribute to the international balance .
Denying the will of nations to be independent through the procedure of majority voting is even more dangerous for foreign policy than for any other field .
The countries of Europe are having a tough time with economic , financial and cultural globalisation , they see whole chunks of their sovereignty being whittled away , and they are being made to suffer a mutilating process of economic and monetary integration . The field of foreign policy is just about the only area they have left where they can still exercise their freedom .
A certain number of them , at least , would not tolerate having their desire for independence denied , which we see most of all in their diplomatic initiatives . By trying to deprive them of these initiatives , Europe itself would lose all possibility of independent external action .
As far as foreign policy is concerned , the only way at the moment of conceiving and implementing European actions is to rely on the national democracies .
The more we try desperately to deprive them of power , the more we weaken the foundations that allow us to take joint measures .
These are the real questions that the Spaak report should have looked at in connection with the CFSP .
We are a long way short of the target , so no-one will be surprised that our group has rejected this report .
The European Parliamentary Labour Party supported the Spaak report but with serious reservations .
We did not support paragraph 8 which calls for the extension of qualified majority voting to all decisions except those of a constitutional nature .
The EPLP also has concerns about the paragraphs on the CFSP in Mrs Spaak 's report .
We supported Amendments Nos 1 to 3 , by Gary Titley , on behalf of the Socialist Group .
Parliament 's rejection of Amendment No 2 was surprising .
This made the obvious point that any failures in the EU 's efforts to resolve the crisis in Kosovo result far more from an absence of political will than from institutional considerations .
Paragraph 20 , as voted by Parliament , suggests that the European Union is a member of NATO .
It is not .

The future of the European Union is of direct concern to the citizens of its Member States and , more generally , to all European citizens , especially those who are the first victims of the EU 's anti-populist , anti- labour and neo-liberal policy : the millions of people who are unemployed , poor and wretched , women , the young , and the hundreds of millions of working people who are facing a head-on attack by the EU , an attack aimed at abolishing their fundamental and basic rights .
The European Council , however , despite its much-advertised social-democrat majority , remains faithfully fixated upon monetarist , neo-liberal attitudes and persists with the same policy as its predecessor .
The central reference point for this Council too will be the completion of the single internal market and Economic and Monetary Union , the faithful implementation of the stability pact , and commitment to the nominal pointers established in Maastricht .
The EU 's leaders have not only failed to wake up to the popular reaction and resistance of working people , not only failed to draw appropriate conclusions from the crisis affecting the world 's economy and from the increasingly acute problems in a series of countries and regions such as Russia , South-East Asia and Latin America , but they are trying to defend monopolies and large companies both against their enemy within , in other words popular movements and the workers , and against the Member States themselves , which in exercising their sovereign rights could try to prevent them from doing what they want .
That is why the central issues for the European Council are to be internal security matters , with further progress on Schengen as decided upon in the Treaty of Amsterdam , reinforcement of the forces of oppression and persecution at European level , strengthening of the CFSP and promotion of the requisite statutory changes which will establish the abolition of the veto and unanimity , and the generalisation of the majority-vote rule .
The enlargement of the EU and the Agenda 2000 choices are an attempt to kill two birds with one stone .
On the one hand , the aim is to acquire new markets for European capital , while reducing the Union 's ' cost ' , making drastic cuts in the contributions from the more developed countries and further reducing the already grossly inadequate resources earmarked by the EU for development and agriculture . Responsibility for the consequences of economic policy is being transferred to the Member States and this , together with the financial discipline imposed , will mean restricted expenditure on services such as education , health and social policy , while resources are made available for major monopolistic enterprises .
On the other hand there is an attempt to disarm popular movements and the Member States , depriving them of the means to resist at national and international level , and to promote new anti-populist international agreements such as the multipartite agreement on investments , which advocates the immunity of foreign investments from state control and safeguards the interests of ' investors ' against the claims of the labour and popular movement .
The people in the countries which have applied to join the EU will also fall victim to those attempts , since a prerequisite for accession is acceptance by their governments of the acquis communautaire , in other words the institutional , legal and operational framework of the European Union .
Working people in all the Union 's Member States but also in the countries about to join have only one way to resist those choices and that policy .
The struggle of the workers will provide a response to the choices made by the monopolies and will open the way towards another Europe , the real Europe of the future , which will serve their interests , the interests of human beings and not those of capital .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking as rapporteur on inland waterway vessels and wish to make the following statement in this context .
Evidently a change has occurred in the drafting of the press releases issued by the House .
For example , there was no press mention at all of the inland waterway vessels report in the Monday afternoon German-language edition of the press release .
In fact , German-speaking journalists have already protested about this in the House .
I wish to join in this protest and make it known to the public , on behalf of the German-speaking Members .
Clearly the Secretary-General , Mr Priestley , unilaterally decided to change the rules , which is not acceptable .
We in the House decide on press releases !
So I would strongly urge the Bureau to ensure that this is remedied as quickly as possible so that it can never happen again !
Mr Konrad , I have taken careful note of your comments and , of course , we will look into the matter and see what must be done to avoid the problems you have referred to in future .
Mr President , I wish to endorse what Mr Konrad has just said .
I have had the same experience .
The German press releases cover the budget , rapporteurs and external economic relations .
Here too there is no trace of this report .
I would urge you to ensure that press releases in the German as well as the English and French-language editions are published in full and reflect what the rapporteur actually said .
I consider it an intolerable procedure suddenly just to leave out this press release without a word .
We will not tolerate this !
Mr Schwaiger , I have already told Mr Konrad that I have noted what he said .
Personally speaking , since I am responsible for information in the Bureau , I have always thought that this is an area in which we unfortunately still have many problems .
I have always said as much , both to the Bureau and in reports to the Members which you have all received .
I am very well aware that we still have many problems in that area .
It is one of the major issues for us , though we have unfortunately not yet been able to do anything about it , and we will look into that aspect very carefully .
I am sorry that our German colleagues are experiencing these problems .
They are not the only ones , but in any case it is very distressing that Members who devote so much time to presenting excellent reports or other work here are not accorded even rudimentary recognition .
Mr President , thank you for your statement .
I also want to thank you because you are known to be a Vice-President who tries to ensure that we create transparency , that we work closely with the public , to stop them from looking only at questions such as travel expenses , scandals and so forth .
The journalists must receive prompt information from us , and you as Vice-President have done much to ensure this ; the statement you have just made to us is encouraging .
We will be happy to take the opportunity to pass on the personal statement you have just made to the journalists .
I see that as a good and encouraging sign and hope you will continue along precisely these lines .
That is why I am especially glad that you have presided over the debate on this question today , and I believe we had good reason to address you in this regard .
Thank you very much !
( The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Situation in Kosovo
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Kosovo .
I give the floor to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , President-in-Office of the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since we last discussed Kosovo here in the European Parliament exactly two weeks ago , the sequence of events has given at least some grounds for hope .
The resolute stand taken by the European Union and the international community as a whole , as reflected in the results of the Balkan Contact Group 's discussions and in particular what are known as the ' act ' decisions of 13 and 16 October , has made it clear to Belgrade that the international community has finally run out of patience with its Kosovo policy , as I had suggested during the last debate we held here .
Yugoslavia is facing serious consequences if it does not fulfil the undertakings it has entered into .
We see the agreement that President Milosevic concluded with the US special envoy Richard Holbrooke on 13 October as a basis for a political solution to the Kosovo problem , no more and no less .
The NATO decision on 16 October to extend the deadline for the withdrawal of army units and the special police to 27 October shows that we will not countenance any Yugoslav departure from its undertakings .
The main provisions of the agreement that was approved by the OSCE Permanent Council on 15 October and signed by Foreign Ministers Geremek and Jovanovic on 16 October are as follows .
Firstly , within the next few weeks an unarmed group of about 2 000 observers will be stationed in Kosovo , what is called the Kosovo Verification Mission , led by the OSCE in close cooperation with NATO .
This mission is to monitor respect for UN Security Council Resolution 1199 , adopted on 23 September .
The EU will make a substantial and clearly visible contribution to the Kosovo Verification Mission , and in particular to alleviating the humanitarian situation .
The European Union is actively involved in the preparations for implementing the agreement and has immediately taken the necessary first steps to ensure its smooth operation .
The Council 's Political Committee is meeting at this moment to consider further European Union measures .
The EU will provide the bulk of the mission , with 1 000 observers or even more .
Particular importance will be given to the safety of the observers on the ground .
For the OSCE based in Vienna , the Kosovo Verification Mission represents a huge challenge .
A large number of EU Member States have already agreed to provide contingents , Austria about 50 troops .
The hard core of the mission will be provided by the KDOM , the Kosovo Diplomatic Observer Mission .
As you know , the European Union is taking part in this , in the form of the ECMM , the European Community Monitoring Mission .
This monitoring on the ground will be supplemented by NATO airspace monitoring which is already under way .
Secondly , we have a precise timetable for concluding an interim agreement between the Belgrade central government and the representatives of the Kosovo Albanians .
An agreement on the basic aspects of a political solution is to be concluded by 2 November .
The basis for it is the document on the status of Kosovo endorsed by the EU Balkan Contact Group and the OSCE presidency .
Thirdly , it is planned to determine by 3 November the procedure and rules for holding general elections for a provincial parliament and local self-governing bodies , including the courts , monitored by the OSCE , within the next nine months .
Fourthly , Serbia will guarantee the Kosovo Albanians and other ethnic groups in Kosovo full equal rights , covering all national and religious rights , within a Yugoslav legal system .
What is most important , not least in terms of confidence-building among the Albanian population and viable self-government , is the creation of local police units , which will come under the local authorities and reflect ethnic proportions .
The humanitarian situation in Kosovo was one of the main factors that impelled the international community to take rapid and vigorous action .
One of the priorities of Austria 's presidency is to avert the worst .
In Vienna yesterday Austria set out the ongoing and planned future EU activities on the return of the refugees .
We hope these measures will also gain broad support from the next General Affairs Council .
One of the current priorities is the return of the homeless refugees , making provision for the approaching winter , providing assistance for people who have found temporary shelter with relatives and basic aid for the coming winter months .
But in the end all these activities will succeed only if it proves possible to ensure the safety of those who are willing to return .
We will do all we can to achieve that .
The European Union has long been calling for an early end to the bloodshed .
We believe a negotiated political settlement is the only viable solution .
But first , of course , the violence really must come to a halt , in other words both sides must declare and fully observe a cease-fire , even if only informally for the time being .
At the same time , the humanitarian situation must be improved rapidly and radically .
Only when these two conditions have been satisfied can we hope to achieve the third priority , the start of meaningful negotiations between the two sides .
On the first priority : on 23 September the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 1199 which calls on Belgrade in so many words to put a stop to the hostilities in Kosovo and to withdraw the army units and special police .
In any event , NATO is now prepared for armed intervention if President Milosevic does not comply by 27 October with the concessions he has made on paper .
On the second priority , the humanitarian situation : the main task of the EU special envoy for Kosovo , presidency ambassador Wolfgang Petritsch , is to coordinate the European Union 's humanitarian activities with those of the international humanitarian organisations , while also acting as a contact both for the Belgrade government and between it and the Kosovar political leadership .
The presidency has set up working parties in Belgrade and Geneva to coordinate the international activities .
The aim is to take concerted and locally coordinated action to identify villages and areas to which the refugees currently living in the open can return safely and with dignity .
This would make it considerably easier to provide humanitarian aid .
I have already told you of the presidency 's ' Project Home ' , which is aimed at helping the refugees to return .
Practical project activities have now begun .
What has been achieved in recent weeks ?
In view of the repeated accusations - by both sides , in fact - of serious war crimes , from mass shootings to humanitarian crimes against women and children , the presidency had been calling for months for a team of experienced international forensic experts to be sent out to Kosovo to investigate these serious accusations .
I would say that the invitation issued by the Yugoslavs to a forensic team from Helsinki University shows that the presidency has had some success here .
The advance team arrived in Belgrade yesterday and is holding preliminary information talks today with the presidency 's ambassador .
He is to begin his work in Kosovo the day after tomorrow .
Let me turn now to another point I consider important , the gagging of the independent media in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
A few days ago , the government closed down several independent radio stations and daily newspapers on the pretext of an external military threat .
The presidency responded at once with a declaration on 15 October and a protest by the presidency 's ambassador to the Belgrade Foreign Ministry on 16 October .
The representatives of independent media are now in constant contact with the presidency , various embassies , NATO , the UN and the OSCE .
We must make it clear to Belgrade that such measures are incompatible with membership of international organisations such as the Council of Europe and the OSCE and are strictly condemned by them .
The new media law which the Serb parliament passed yesterday contains a range of provisions that restrict media freedom .
That is a cause for concern .
The international 's community 's resolute and coordinated approach has finally produced results .
Now , however , it is up to President Milosevic to respect the agreements and to comply with the requirements set out in Security Council Resolution 1199 .
If not , military attacks on Serbian targets will remain a constant threat .
The responsibility for whether that happens , together with all the consequences that implies for the people of Yugoslavia , lies with Milosevic .
We have made that quite plain to him .
The international community , and in particular the European Union , which backs the various decisions on sanctions , is no longer prepared to stand by and watch while refugees freeze and are threatened with starvation and the civilian population is driven out or even subjected to massacres and other atrocities .
We hope we shall be able to report concrete progress at the next Kosovo debate here in the European Parliament .
In order for this progress to be made , the European Union , the Council , Commission and Parliament , the OSCE , NATO and the UN , together with other international players concerned with the stability and fate of the people in this region , will have to continue to take a common approach .
Mr President , I shall be brief after the elaborate exposé of the presidency and confine myself to saying that the Commission also , in close cooperation with the presidency , is working hard to see what further contribution can be made to the humanitarian situation which has , of course , the highest priority .
We have funds available for that , it is a matter of coordination .
As the presidency has just said , we are in close contact not only with it but also with the High Commissioner for Refugees to ensure that the return of displaced persons and refugees can get under way .
It is a slow and difficult process because it also requires a secure environment .
Although we may be content that the worst violence and clashes have subsided since the agreement between Mr Holbrook and President Milosevic , we cannot be certain that the situation will continue - vigilance is absolutely necessary .
We believe that the SACEUR , General Clark , has made quite clear to President Milosevic exactly what is required in military terms , notably as far as the withdrawals which , up till now , have not been completed , are concerned . As long as that is not the case , there is still a danger of the hostilities flaring up again , with all the human suffering that may entail .
In the meantime , the Commission continues to prepare proposals for the Council , as requested , to sharpen up the sanctions policy and package which has been in place for quite some time but which contained some loopholes that needed to be closed .
We will continue our work on that .
With the presidency we abhor and condemn the law adopted by the Yugoslav parliament yesterday which bars a number of independent papers from publishing their views and radio stations from transmitting Serbian language programmes from foreign radio stations .
It is clearly an expression of the entire political climate in Yugoslavia these days where fundamental rights and freedoms - and notably the freedom of the press - have been the subject of constant oppression , and that continues .
I can only hope , along with the presidency , that the situation will stabilise , that the withdrawals will actually take place .
That is not only a prerequisite for the peaceful return of refugees and displaced persons , but it is also absolutely necessary to allow aid workers to do their work without personal danger .
It is extremely important that the large verification mission of 2 000 people is able to work in safe conditions .
Last but not least , the absence of violence and the fulfilment of the obligations of President Milosevic will also determine the political climate in which a political solution will have in the end to be negotiated .
With the presidency , I repeat that we see no other ultimate solution to the Kosovo problem other than a political one .
The only question is whether that also goes for President Milosevic .
That remains to be seen .
Mr President , it goes almost without saying that we in the Socialist Group are delighted by the progress that the President-in-Office of the Council has been able to report .
We congratulate the presidency on all its efforts in the last couple of weeks .
We are clearly delighted that we seem to be edging towards a solution in Kosovo and that President Milosevic appears to have accepted , at long last , the principle of self-government for Kosovo and , therefore , we have a basis for moving forward .
Clearly we are all concerned to ensure that the message that goes out of this Chamber is that the cease-fire has to apply to all sides in Kosovo .
The murder of four Serbian policemen over the weekend , supposedly by the KLA , only helps those who wish to undermine this process .
So we must make clear that all sides must abide by the cease-fire .
We also have to be aware of what might be called the CNN factor , i.e. once we stop seeing this on our TV screens we think the problem has been resolved .
We should be clear again today that we are seeing the beginning , not the end , of a process .
It is going to require a major effort to keep Milosevic on board to this agreement and , as we have seen , and as the President-in-Office and Commissioner van den Broek have mentioned , one of his first acts has been to ban the independent media in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , clearly a sign that he is still up to his old tricks .
We must not forget that it was only the credible threat of military force which forced Milosevic to the negotiating table , and we must maintain that threat .
That is why it is important that deadlines are kept , particularly 2 November .
We must bear in mind that going for the solution of over-the-horizon military force puts us at risk of Milosevic playing cat-and-mouse games .
At what point do you release your military force ?
So we must be determined to maintain the deadlines .
It is also a beginning in the sense that what we now need - and we have seen it all before in Bosnia - is the full commitment of the international community to the stability and security and reconstruction of Kosovo .
Countries cannot go away thinking the job is done : the job has not even started to be done , and we have to build upon that .
I would like to see , as Commissioner van den Broek has indicated , us tightening the sanctions and looking to work on a further UN resolution that goes beyond 1199 and makes it very clear that military force could be used if Milosevic does not adhere in every aspect to this agreement .
If we do not , then we will find that in six months time we are back to playing games again .
I really do not want us to go back to the tragedies , particularly of the last three or four weeks , when the entire situation went beyond anything that any humane person would be prepared to listen to and be prepared to watch .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , I am not as quick as the previous speaker to see progress where there is none .
So let me say this : I see no signs of an all-clear , and I see no change in regard to the misery of Kosovo .
The western politicians have all been taken in by Milosevic again .
What has come of Holbrooke 's negotiations ?
They should have brought results no sooner or later than in spring this year .
At a time when villages are still being shelled in Kosovo , when people are still being turned into refugees , we are sending 2 000 OSCE observers out there .
What are they supposed to do , what can they do ?
After all , they cannot really monitor the promised eventual withdrawal of Serbian forces .
Who could make us believe that ?
How can they prove it ?
They cannot identify troops that remain there out of uniform .
And the Serbian police units who have been carrying on their murderous business for years remain in the region .
The OSCE observers are unarmed .
We cannot even ensure their protection , let alone that of the Albanians they are observing .
It seems to me that the recruitment of these observers is a very parlous affair .
Who are they ?
What are their qualifications ?
I checked it up in Germany .
There they are being signed up at a salary of DM 6 000 a month plus USD 100 a day , which comes to DM 10 000 per observer .
Many people are tempted by this kind of thing and set out into the unknown .
I said to many people who questioned me : don 't do it .
Does anyone really think the NATO planes flying over Kosovo offer any protection whatsoever ?
It is another of those damned déja vu situations .
Remember what happened to the UN soldiers in Bosnia and Herzegovina , who were at least armed for their own protection - while the OSCE observers are not armed , not even for their own protection .
But let us assume this observer mission runs smoothly , as I described , and of course without producing results , as we all now know .
Elections have been promised nine months hence , but what or who are these people supposed to vote for ?
Does any reasonable individual here or elsewhere believe there can be an acceptable outcome to the negotiations between Milosevic and the Albanians before the deadline expires ?
The negotiations are a tactical ploy by Milosevic , they are his survival strategy .
He will go on and on negotiating until we eventually get fed up with the stubborn Albanians not letting him take them to the cleaners .
Our threats will have less impact and the Serbian soldiers will be back in Kosovo six hours later , if Milosevic so wishes .
And it will take NATO another six months to get round to doing anything at all .
How blind must the western politicians actually be to believe Milosevic 's assurances that he will give way on Kosovo while at the same time , as you both noted , he has banned all the independent media in his country and forced a law through parliament that even makes it a crime to broadcast CNN and Deutsche Welle reports on radio and television ?
Nobody with any respect for the human rights of the Albanians would behave like that .
He does not even respect the human rights of his own Serb compatriots .
He treads them all underfoot .
Madam President-in-Office , your belief that anything can be guaranteed within the Yugoslav legal system , in a Yugoslavia that is further removed from democracy than anyone could ever imagine , miles away , aeons away even , really is rather naive , and is irresponsible vis-à-vis the Albanians .
You may say here that you hope you can give us a better report next time .
Hope may spring eternal , but it is unfounded , because as we have seen in Kosovo : Milosevic is the problem and not the solution .
Mr President , Mrs Pack is unfortunately quite right .
There was a mood of despair in this Chamber when we debated these matters , and with good reason .
Posterity will remember our impotence in Bosnia and Kosovo in the same way that our parents remember Hitler 's first years in power , when he exploited the weakness of the western powers .
Picasso gave form to that tragedy in his depiction of Guernica .
Perhaps in a few years a painter will create a similar work which he will call ' Srebrenica ' .
However hard it may be to imagine , Srebrenica is worse than Guernica , and it happened in our lifetime , in a time when we were elected to look after our part of the world .
And it was our troops who failed , and were failed .
If it is unleashed all over again because of the weakness of the West in Kosovo , we shall once again ask : how many bodies does it take before help comes ?
I know that it is NATO and not the EU which holds the means of exerting military pressure .
But nearly all our countries belong to NATO , and we have something we call a political union , we have a vision of speaking with one voice .
What have our countries done to get NATO to act more promptly ?
We cannot lay the blame on NATO , and certainly not on the USA .
On the contrary , we must praise and thank the USA which fortunately - unlike ourselves - is able to step in when we disintegrate because of our divisions and national special interests .
I hope that the Council of Ministers will get its act together and learn from the tragic consequences of these divisions .
One Member State would not even uphold the sanctions on air traffic , which had been agreed , and another Member State curiously maintained reservations and acted as a brake .
Yes , Mr President , I am thinking of Britain and France , but my own country , Denmark , is no better .
Because of the negative outcome of the referendum in 1992 , Denmark has limped along with a dismal reservation which even prevents our government from taking decisions on mine clearance , evacuation and humanitarian actions , so we are not the slightest bit better .
What is inconceivable is that there are still some who fear that the cooperation will go too far .
Anyone can see that the risk is exactly the opposite , that it will come to nothing - and that the best we shall manage is to sweep up and count the bodies after the accident has happened , and to receive huge flows of refugees , by which we shall be doing Milosevic the greatest service of all .
Commissioner , can we now be sure that everything is being done to help as many as possible , in the mountains too , even if the KLA and the Serbs start shooting at one another ?
Can we be sure that it will not end with a new Srebrenica , in which those who should help merely leave their positions at the slightest threat and consign the people to their fate .
I go to Kosovo on Saturday , Commissioner . I know that some excellent work is being done down there , but are they also getting the back-up they need ?
I would really like to have an answer to that .
Mr President , the debates on what has happened since the break-up of Yugoslavia often adopt a rather high tone .
Kosovo is now the most acute problem .
It constitutes a risk to the stability and security of the entire region , and threatens to affect the European Union itself if the disturbances spread to the south .
We therefore need to be as objective as possible , because very often the loudest voices are heard from those who do not themselves face any direct danger .
There is a ten-day extension of the NATO ultimatum and a fragile agreement has been reached which may not be perfect and may be being violated by both sides , but it is a positive first step , as the Presidency too has stressed .
We must give it our backing and demand respect for it .
We are only too aware that fanatics will always react against such agreements and try to sabotage them , but this is all the more reason to persist .
The savage Serbian attacks on civilians are beyond doubt , as are the human rights violations and Belgrade 's efforts to muzzle the press .
But there is also no doubt about the intransigence of the so-called Albanian liberation army which is restricting the options of the moderate Rugova .
We must also consider whether the systematic marginalisation of the entire Serbian nation promoted by the west may not simply have lent strength to the fanatics and the nationalists , and whether what the non-nationalist Serbian opposition says about Milosevic might be true , namely that he is fostering the conviction that everyone is against the Serbs and that they have to fight in order to survive .
The European Union must exert every possible diplomatic pressure to back the agreement achieved and demand respect for democratic principles and human rights , together with the reforms mentioned in connection with Kosovo .
Everyone agrees , and the UK Foreign Minister said the same thing again yesterday , that there is no question of independence .
However , NATO military intervention in an independent state outside its jurisdiction and without the agreement of all the permanent members of the Security Council is also no simple matter .
There are other ways of intervening , which the Presidency has spelled out very carefully .
If we hold our line political agreement will be achieved , the people of Kosovo will be settled under the new agreements , and the Serbian people will more easily put the ghosts of the past , which they too find oppressive , behind them .
Mr President , this is an agreement which contains a number of elements and has a certain timetable .
It is a very welcome development , even if it is only temporary , to stop the bloodshed and the violence , even if the agreement is sometimes violated by irresponsible and fanatical elements on both sides .
However , the agreement also has a number of shortcomings and disadvantages .
It was imposed by pressure from outside , by threatening the use of excessive force , even going as far as military intervention .
Secondly , it shows a certain bias , because whenever there is talk of conflict , we only think - even here in the House - about imposing obligations on one side while ignoring the other .
As if there were not two sides which , rightly or wrongly , each feel that they have right on their side .
And finally , this agreement will have to prove itself in practice if we are to welcome it as we welcomed the agreement in Ireland a short while ago : the whole of Parliament gave that agreement a standing ovation for ten minutes .
An agreement of this type needs to be sincere and to look towards peaceful , political solutions which are fair and even-handed to all sides .
Mr President , as I stated in this House just a month ago , now that some sort of an agreement is in place , what is still plain is the lack of action on the part of the European Union .
What is more , no real action has been taken for over ten years in support of peace and the non-violent protests of the Albanian population under the leadership of President Rugova .
So it has to be said that , once the Albanian population had been making non-violent efforts for ten years to obtain their inalienable rights , the clashes which occurred were virtually inevitable .
And here the EU 's blatant lack of involvement in solving this crisis is self-evident ; in fact we have delegated our role to the United States and to NATO .
This of course fits into the broader context of the absence of a common foreign and security policy in the EU , but we are duty-bound to highlight the Union 's lack of involvement here .
As at other times , our potential powers have not been fully exploited during the current phase : why , for example , has the European negotiator , Mr González , not stood alongside the US negotiator , Mr Holbrooke ?
Could it be that the Union was concerned not about the plight of the refugees , but solely about the risk that the Albanian refugees from Kosovo might enter Europe ?
Is this our only concern ?
This certainly reveals that scant attention is being paid to what is happening in the Balkans , as well as the absence of any real policy to involve the whole Balkan region in the future eastwards enlargement of the European Union .
These , to my mind , are the real problems .
But having said this , we must of course welcome the fact that an initial agreement was reached on 14 October , entailing an immediate cease-fire , the withdrawal of Yugoslav troops from the region and the presence of 2 000 observers .
Of course , two thousand would seem a rather small number of observers for this purpose .
Regrettably , this was not the outcome of real negotiations but merely resulted from the threat of bombing by NATO , which only reveals Milosevic 's true spirit and disinclination to negotiate .
We believe that an immediate and full withdrawal must be guaranteed , in an attempt to avoid any confrontation ; not only Milosevic but the KLA too is responsible here .
We are concerned that the cessation of hostilities should not merely be an end in itself , but a real starting-point for a dialogue leading to a definitive solution of the Kosovo problem , beginning with its autonomy . We must aim to solve all the problems of the Balkan region , bearing in mind what is now happening in Serbia - the closure of certain independent newspapers - and in Macedonia , from where the signs reaching us are anything but encouraging .
Mr President , Madam President of the Council , Commissioner , I would first like to say to Mr Titley that you would really have to be very brave to say that in the last few days a solution for Kosovo has been found and that progress has been made .
I think that after all the attempts made by some of us during recent months , we have to give in to the evidence and perhaps make the Council and the Commission face reality .
The reality is the constant denial on the part of the European Union today in the face of the serious and tragic situation in Kosovo and Serbia , which is the same denial that was shown by Europe towards what was happening in Czechoslovakia and then in Austria and everywhere else in the 1930s .
I find it truly scandalous that it should be the Americans who have been putting in the hard work in Kosovo while the European Union seems to be abandoning any sort of intervention , any sort of policy and any sort of political objective .
As long as Mr Milosevic is in Belgrade , there will be no peace , either for Albanians , Serbs , Hungarians , the gypsies , or for anyone in the small republic of Yugoslavia .
We need to face up to this problem now and get down to fighting this nationalist-communist regime .
With all due respect to our socialist friends who are rightly celebrating the legal action that has been brought against Mr Pinochet , they need to finally have the courage to start working towards bringing Mr Milosevic before the court in The Hague as soon as possible .
This will enable the Serbs and the Albanians together to rebuild a democracy and solve their problems , which involve living peacefully together , while our problem , and I repeat , involves whether or not we support a nationalist-communist regime .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in Kosovo is still problematical and confused , and Milosevic remains utterly unreliable .
Despite NATO vigilance and the presence of a few OSCE observers on the ground , according to the press the bombing in Kosovo has resumed over the past few days .
So the tragedy continues : more people are being forced to leave their homes and take refuge in the forests .
Furthermore , because of the resumption of hostilities , the UN has even been forced to delay sending humanitarian assistance to the region .
Albanian sources report that , instead of withdrawing their troops , the Serbs are actually sending reinforcements to Kosovo , in total contravention of the conditions laid down in the UN Security Council resolution .
Meanwhile , the crisis is deepening even further for the 60 000 or so people who have fled to the woods and for all the others , including large numbers of children , who are seeking safety and peace through a mass exodus to the countries of Central Europe and onwards to Italy .
Indeed , in Italy alone , over 1 500 Kosovars have landed on the coast of Puglia in recent weeks , creating obvious difficulties in terms of receiving and assisting them .
Once again , by devolving its powers to other international organisations , the Union has lacked the courage and ability to thrash out even a basic strategy under the common foreign and security policy , proving itself unable to adopt a coherent and clear-cut stance on this crisis .
Everything is left to the UN and NATO .
One of today 's Italian newspapers carries an interview with Tony Blair in which , perhaps under slight provocation , he stressed the urgency of appointing a European Union representative to NATO , a sort of EU Foreign Minister .
And yet the EU 's sole practical contribution to date is the OSCE observer mission , whose establishment in Kosovo is proving painfully slow .
There was talk of 2 000 observers , but as far as I can tell there are 200 or 300 , so even they are not fulfilling their role .
Thus Europe is in effect absent , while the Serbian forces are delaying their withdrawal , playing on the misunderstandings and invective within NATO . Meanwhile Mladic and Karadzic are still on the run , evading international justice , and the Serbian authorities are being allowed to muzzle the press , closing down on a flimsy pretext all newspapers which disagree with the regime .
We wonder why the European Union , so attentive to human rights issues , is not drawing up a more effective and hard-hitting policy .
While an entire people is enduring unspeakable injustice and suffering , we press on with our interminable , sterile discussions , memorandums of protest , verbal censure and study groups .
I would end by asserting that we must promote much tougher initiatives .
I agree with Mr Dupuis in calling for an international arrest warrant to be issued at long last against Milosevic , so as to put an end to his war-mongering and , I believe , criminal actions .
Mr President , I find the atmosphere so far of the discussion here today rather surprising .
It all seems rather downcast with regard to what Mr Holbrooke and also our intervention have achieved , as if there had been no progress over recent weeks .
I reject this idea .
Despite all the doubts which you may have , I think that we are now seeing a form of progress , and I would certainly not have described dropping bombs as progress .
I am pleased that it has not come to that .
Two weeks ago , I stood here fearing that NATO would be intervening in the Kosovo conflict .
We then also expressed support for taking a hard line against the government in Belgrade , but at the same time we hoped that this would not result in a rift within the United Nations and that a political solution was perhaps still possible .
I want to stress this point once again .
We have always said : above all else , continue to strive for a political solution .
That has been our position and it is still our position .
Violence must only be used to combat violence as the very last resort .
Two weeks later , we can be cautiously optimistic .
The threat of military intervention and Mr Holbrooke 's negotiating skills have caused Milosevic to back down at the very last moment , despite the fact that , as usual , he himself presented it as a victory while at the same time taking a swipe at the independent media .
By next week , Serbian troops must have left Kosovo .
It is proving a laborious process , we are seeing that , and there remains the risk that interested groups will once again try to inflame the conflict .
NATO 's military threat must therefore remain in place , while pressure must also be put on the KLA not to violate the peace .
Both parties are responsible for implementing the agreements .
We reject provocation from either side .
The Serbs must allow an autonomous Kosovo , but it must again be made clear to the Albanians that , as far as we are concerned , independence is out of the question .
On this basis , and after full implementation of UN Resolution 1199 , we can begin negotiations on the future of Kosovo , without preconditions .
It is now important for the OSCE to be present as quickly as possible .
Observers must be in place without delay in order to reduce the risk of incidents .
I agree with those who have expressed their concerns at the risks the observers themselves are facing .
I believe that over the coming weeks we must take a good look at how these people can be protected as effectively as possible .
We are also pleased that the Union has allocated funds for humanitarian support .
We hope that the General Affairs Council can provide the necessary legal basis as soon as possible , but this aid must also be made available as quickly as possible .
The solution which has now been achieved could be described as the least worst solution , but it is nevertheless a solution which could mark the beginning of a process in which the problems concerning Kosovo can be resolved .
In any event , it is a solution .
I did not hear my colleagues who expressed their criticisms say what would have been a workable solution .
It is a fragile solution , and vigilance is therefore required and its implementation cannot simply be left to the parties to the conflict .
The continued involvement of the international community and above all of the European Union is therefore both necessary and desirable .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , I hope you will not take it amiss if I do not endorse your cautious optimism , because I find that rather difficult .
The events of recent years and in particular Mr Milosevic 's behaviour in recent years have taught us quite a lot .
In fact our own behaviour in the last few months should also teach us some lessons .
If when the situation in Kosovo worsened we had taken it more seriously , perhaps we would now find it much easier to join in the general optimism .
But in fact we let things slide for a long time , for a long time we reacted very little , if at all .
We waited till the house had actually burned down before calling the fire brigade .
Thank God the fire is now gradually beginning to burn out by itself .
But there is no doubt it is still there , and it really ought to be up to us to remind people again and again that the fire in this house is still burning and has not yet been extinguished .
In this connection , I am really very sorry that I have not heard a single word in this debate about the concept of the people 's right to self-determination .
I think we should always uphold that concept and reiterate it as a principle - for it is enshrined as such in the OSCE and not just in the EU .
We failed to apply the principles of the right of the people to self-determination during the war that originally broke out following the disintegration of the former Yugoslavia , and we are failing to do so again .
Mr Wiersma , I am very sorry to have to tell you that some of the words you use are quite simply neo-colonialist , because you are setting preconditions for the people of Kosovo which they should in fact determine for themselves .
You set preconditions and say that you cannot conceive of autonomy in independence . But it is not up to us to decide that , it is up to those concerned .
We should be very careful about anticipating what will actually happen .
Let me make one more comment . We should now look at the factors of stability in this region and support them .
At the elections in Macedonia last Sunday , the old Communist regime was voted out .
There will be a second ballot in two weeks ' time , when it is very probable that a new government will get in which said right at the beginning of the campaign that it definitely wanted to build up entirely different relations with the Albanian population in Macedonia .
Many of the constituencies were won by Macedonian candidates - especially by the Democratic Alternative - and I hope that in future we shall see a region of stability here right next to Kosovo .
We in Europe should provide the necessary support .
Allow me in conclusion briefly to touch on the ceterum censeo that we desperately need . We must not forget that the source of all evil is in fact called Milosevic and that we cannot negotiate with him , but only about him , and we must do that in The Hague !
Mr President , at last the resolute action taken by the international community has borne fruit , and we Europeans once again have the United States to thank .
I would like to express the Liberal Group 's appreciation of the agreement between Mr Holbrooke and Milosevic , with its provision for observers and so on .
Commissioner van den Broek did however say that military withdrawal is not yet complete , and referred to Belgrade 's imposition of tighter restrictions on the media and free speech .
I am pleased to hear that NATO is now ready to intervene militarily if Milosevic fails to honour his undertakings by 27 October at the latest .
Can the President-in-Office assure me that action really will follow , or is there a risk of still more procrastination ?
The plan is for negotiations between Milosevic and the Kosovar leadership .
Yet surely , Madam President-in-Office , the Kosovans will be attending these talks with their hands tied behind their backs .
Will they be free to claim liberty and independence as their goal ?
The answer is a resounding ' no ' .
They will be allowed to negotiate a greater degree of self-government , but the EU and NATO are forcing them from the outset to accept Mr Milosevic as their head of state .
I am right , am I not , Madam ?
The European Liberals would have liked to see negotiations without preconditions , and we very much regret the fact that this is not to be the case .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the scene has shifted slightly in these two weeks : yet again it has been decided to negotiate with Milosevic , and to regard him as part of the solution to the Balkan problem , this time Kosovo , like Bosnia before it and Croatia before that .
In my view we have yet again set out in the wrong direction , first and foremost because Europe is yet again bringing up the rear , standing on the sidelines and waiting for our American daddy to come along and solve our problems .
Yet again Europe has shown itself to be a political dwarf , incapable of taking any political initiative in our own backyard .
Secondly , I cannot imagine that this agreement , wrung out of Milosevic at the eleventh hour , will make him adopt a responsible attitude .
Milosevic has already perpetrated ethnic cleansing in Kosovo ; he has already attacked the Kosovars , chased them from their homes and razed to the ground at least 700 villages in that region .
I ask myself and I ask you how the clock can possibly be turned back ; I ask myself and I ask you how we can trust a man who has proved yet again , in these latest events , that he is a criminal , a murderer of women and children , confirming that he is not part of the solution but is in reality the problem , the real problem of the Balkans , of Kosovo and of Yugoslavia .
There will be no peace , either in Kosovo or elsewhere , for as long as Milosevic remains in charge of the Yugoslav regime .
Yet again I urge absolute firmness in respect of Milosevic . I call on Europe to propose that he be tried for war crimes and hauled before the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia , in The Hague .
Mr President , I very much doubt if there is much to rejoice about in what the international community has achieved over the last few weeks . I think the sentence ' Milosevic has been forced to negotiate ' ought to be turned round the other way .
Is it not rather that Milosevic has forced the international community to negotiate ? Implementation of Security Council resolution 1199 has not even been negotiated with Milosevic , only the points he wanted to discuss were dealt with .
In fact , nothing has changed following the agreements .
For example , might not the verifiers sent to Kosovo end up as hostages ?
Suppose Belgrade fails to honour the agreement , will the international community , will NATO risk a military intervention with 2 000 verifiers on the ground ?
That would be sheer madness .
It is a trick , a trick which could prove fatal .
Does the Council still remember the aim of democratising Yugoslavia ?
Will any notice ever be taken of Mr González ?
Or are we to remain lost forever in Mr Holbrooke 's maze ?
For once , Mr Dupuis , I can actually agree with you : Milosevic is an international criminal and must be brought to trial at The Hague .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on two occasions I have already expressed my opinion and that of my colleagues on Kosovo , recalling on the one hand the overwhelming responsibility that lies with Milosevic but also with the European and French authorities - Mr Delors , Mr Santer , Mr Mitterand - who in the past , with their federalist ideology , had encouraged him against the wishes of the Slovenian and Croatian people .
On the other hand , I have highlighted the illegitimacy of NATO 's intervention , which in the past steered well clear of supporting people who were fighting against communism ; this intervention would undoubtedly only aggravate the situation and make the crisis in the Balkans even more inextricable .
Yesterday I listened carefully to the eulogies that were bestowed on our colleague Mr Hume , winner of the Nobel Peace Prize , for his work towards an agreement in Northern Ireland .
In his moving response , which was unanimously applauded - including by us , aside from our differences on other issues - , he said that anywhere in the world , instead of sending troops or bombers , it was infinitely more preferable to adhere to his philosophy of respect for differences and in all cases to reach settlements similar to that achieved in the Irish situation .
I am well aware of how difficult this is . That is all the more reason for us to get down to work .
I therefore propose that peace missions , supervised or directly led by Mr Hume himself , should be set up with a view to finding a solution to the situation in the Middle East , as we in Europe have effective links with Israel and the Palestinians and therefore cannot distance ourselves from this issue .
We must naturally work to ensure the implementation of the UN resolutions on Lebanon .
We also have to work for peace in Sudan , where real genocide is taking place , with the Christians and the Animists in the south doomed to famine and the civil war that is raging in the north .
However , the closest conflict to us is indeed Kosovo .
A Hume mission must go there , and quickly .
I have no doubt that our Parliament is determined to put pressure on the Council , as shown by its applause yesterday , in order to avoid not only destruction and death among the Serbian people , but also a real outbreak of violence in the whole region .
Mr President , I endorse my colleagues ' assessment of the agreement and their denunciation of the crimes committed , and I hope that we shall not have to wait 25 years to bring that criminal to justice .
Where I disagree with them is in analysing the situation and looking to the future .
Here we are found wanting : the Council , the Commission and Parliament too .
To my mind , such important institutions cannot simply issue denunciations and sign the agreement reached - above all thanks to US intervention - and then , as you quite rightly said , undertake to implement the agreements .
We are contributing money and men as usual , but in my opinion the problem is our piecemeal approach to the Balkan problem .
And here we are making a mistake .
If we claim that this problem is a duel between two parties , Milosevic and Kosovo , we are confusing the issue .
We know full well that the problem , an intractable one , is how - or how not - to give a people the freedom to express all their human , political , civil and social rights , and not least the basic rights of culture and language .
What I find unconvincing is the belief that once Milosevic has been done away with , as it were , the problem will have been solved .
No !
The Balkan question will still be there in the form of a clash between conflicting nationalisms , still smouldering beneath the ashes , one being the Communist nationalism of Milosevic , and the other the nationalism of a greater Albania .
After all , we saw what happened in Bosnia .
So the question is what alternative strategy the European Union can adopt to tackle the issue of peace and stability in the Balkans .
We must reflect on the need to address this question as a whole , while undertaking to implement these hard-won agreements and ensuring that there is a real cease-fire and a complete withdrawal of Milosevic 's special forces .
Why not investigate the idea of an international conference on the Balkan issue as a whole , attended by all concerned , in other words several different European countries - Serbia , Albania , Macedonia , Montenegro and Bosnia - as well as their internal minorities ?
This is how we can begin to make a contribution , in my opinion .
We cannot call on the European Union to do more , and then persist with a narrow , blinkered approach .
Thank you , Mr President . Ladies and gentlemen , it has been said here repeatedly that the agreement with Milosevic is not an ideal one .
That is certainly true .
But we must accept that although Milosevic has very often broken his promises in the past , he has sometimes kept them - under pressure of course .
Think for example of the Dayton Accord provisions .
So it is difficult to decide how to judge his present concessions in the Kosovo conflict .
I believe it is up to the entire international community to be resolute and simply to take the appropriate steps if he does not respect the agreement .
After all , the threat of a NATO military attack remains , and in fact that alone led to the agreement . I believe we must keep up this political pressure .
And the Kosovo Verification Mission is surely very important .
It has not been mentioned much during this debate .
But after all , 2 000 observers in Kosovo is quite a lot of people .
Let me say in response to the suggestion by various Members that the EU is not making its presence visible enough that the European Union will provide more than 1 000 members of this Verification Mission , while the Americans will only be contributing around 200 .
So that assertion is not true either .
Secondly , it was frequently said during the debate that the Americans were the only ones to take action .
It was indeed Mr Holbrooke who negotiated this agreement , but he acted on the basis of our instructions and , as you know , within the Contact Group .
The Contact Group held its last meeting at London Airport , and this last attempt was very much a joint EU and American venture .
Why ?
So as to take the Russian Federation on board too , for of course that is also of some political significance .
We now have that political agreement , but of course I think it is most important to continue exerting military pressure .
Let me also briefly respond to the criticism that this Kosovo Verification Mission is not visible enough .
There are continual complaints that the EU is not being visible enough here .
Let me also point out that the question of who is to head this mission has not been settled finally .
The head of mission will be an American , but the Political Committee in Brussels is still considering whether there should not also be a deputy head from the EU .
I also want to address the question of the safety of these observers .
That too was raised during the debate .
I believe it is a most important and delicate aspect of the Kosovo Verification Mission .
Of course the observers will be unarmed .
That is why I consider it so very important for the OSCE and NATO to work together very closely .
But we must take on board that Milosevic has after all accepted a restriction of sovereignty .
That is at least a first step .
Apart from monitoring on the ground , NATO will also be carrying out air surveillance ; so here too there will be joint action .
For the rest , as the UK Member said , the United Kingdom is putting another draft resolution before the Security Council . It was discussed last night and there is a chance that the Security Council will adopt that resolution tonight , so that it can offer us all a certain basis for further action .
In summary , Mr President , let me repeat : we all know this is not a perfect agreement , but in the circumstances it offers some kind of a solution which allows one thing in particular : the return of the refugees .
Surely we all regard that as important , and the fact that it will continue to be underpinned by the military threat .
We hope - although we are none of us sure - that Milosevic will recognise the seriousness of the situation and use the time to negotiate and not to break this agreement again .
Ladies and gentlemen , I wish to protest because the President-in-Office of the Council is leaving .
I see no point in continuing with my speech , since neither the relevant Commissioner nor the Council is present .
Consequently , to make things easier for other colleagues too , I am protesting because we are being deprived of the right , those among us who happen to be last in line , to have at least an answer either from the Council or from the Commission , since neither Commissioner van den Broek nor the President-in-Office are here . The latter of course spoke at great length , even though there were only two speakers from Parliament .
I thank you , and in protest , I am giving up my chance to speak .
Mr President , I cannot follow the debate in the way it is taking place , with platitudes and ravings and with each country expressing its views separately as if they were the views of the entire European Union .
What has happened in Kosovo may be a positive step , or it may not amount to much at all .
It may even be a mistake .
And the same question applies to Bosnia now and will apply tomorrow to Tetovo and the day after tomorrow to other regions which speakers here who like to solve all our problems at a stroke will hear about for the first time .
What I feel is missing is an overall cohesive framework policy for south-eastern Europe or , as we call it otherwise , the Balkans .
Neither the Council nor the Commission have one .
They should develop one as soon as possible , having done the same thing for much more remote areas , and of course it will have to be a policy with a long-term European and Community perspective .
It must prove itself in the long term , otherwise we will for ever be reacting spasmodically .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Sarlis , we cannot overlook the presence of the Commissioner who is here and who represents the Commission .
Ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by fully endorsing the position of the Council and its presidency .
I do so not because it is an Austrian position , and certainly not for party-political reasons , but because I really do believe that it is based on the right considerations .
I have been saying for some time that we will not achieve a peaceful settlement in Kosovo without the threat of military attack .
However , I do not accept the view expressed by some Members here that we must take military action under all circumstances .
Nobody knows what the consequences would be of an air raid .
Everything we have to do now , we would also have to do after an air raid , with the many , many disadvantages which that would entail and which we would have to take on board if no other solution is found .
One disadvantage - and let me emphasise this , because I was in Moscow on Monday and talked with members of the Duma , with the chairman of the foreign policy committee and others - is that with the fall of the Iron Curtain and Communism we must do all we can to incorporate Russia into a European security system .
But I also said that even if Russia vetoes it , we must be present and , if the worst comes to the worst , launch a military attack .
Nonetheless , it is naive not to say dangerous , it is playing with fire to believe that we could certainly find some way to leave Russia out of it and even that we should provoke Russia .
After all , the nationalist forces in Russia are just waiting for this kind of attack to change the climate in Russia accordingly .
To take the example of the bear , we all know that an injured or weak bear is often more dangerous than a strong bear .
I think it would be a totally wrong approach deliberately to annoy Russia .
I think the right approach would be , as the President-in-Office said , to involve Russia as far as possible in a peaceful solution , without however abandoning our objectives .
That is the Council 's position .
That is why I think we should adhere to this position .
It must be made clear that the observers sent to Kosovo will of course be protected .
If any problems arise there , these units , these monitors , must receive adequate military and police protection .
We cannot gamble with the lives of these helpers .
But it must be made clear that the less we seek to achieve that aim with armed forces , the more we can achieve it with civilian forces , the better for us all .
After all , we must not forget what happens to a country , to a people that is being shelled .
As I said , this would not just engender corresponding support for the forces of nationalism , for example in Russia , but perhaps also keep Milosevic even more firmly in the saddle .
We must remember that if we follow this road .
That is why we should not play with fire , Mr President , but keep to a sensible but hard line , as we have done in the past .
We should continue to take this common approach !
Mr President , I hope that some Council staff are also present to witness what we have said in the presence of the President-in-Office of the Council himself .
The Commissioner has just correctly stressed that he has no confidence at all in agreements with Milosevic .
He has already seen a good many of Milosevic 's signatures , and knows better .
He is also right in saying that aid workers do extremely dangerous work .
I am increasingly wondering who they are in fact , this group at present described as verifiers ?
To my surprise , my administrative trainee , a girl of 22 , told me that on a visit to NATO she was invited to join them .
Just come along as a verifier , she was told .
It seems to me highly irresponsible to just allow people to engage in such dangerous work for which they have received no military training whatsoever , in addition to being unarmed and also , as we have heard , with an appeal to the Serbs to help evacuate them in an emergency .
You are then calling on those who are themselves playing an exceptionally dangerous role to evacuate unarmed young people , who are untrained and so forth .
They are simply hostages .
I saw a wonderful cartoon in a Dutch newspaper in which Saddam Hussein with his feet up on his desk was cheerfully telephoning Milosevic to warmly congratulate him on his 2 000 unarmed hostages and relishing all the fun in store .
This is the situation we are facing .
In the past we sent blue helmets .
They were at least soldiers , but were sent under such conditions that they could easily be taken hostage .
Now we are making an even more serious mistake .
I wonder whether this is really a good policy , and whether Mr Holbrooke , who - as I have understood it - was acting in part on behalf of the European Union , could not have achieved a better result .
Unfortunately , I believe that we must realise that Milosevic and his kind can only be convinced by a much clearer forceful stance , although I am not at all in favour of using violence if it can be avoided .
But we must understand that money and fine words do not help much in the Balkans .
I also find it a pity that this House remains so divided .
The same was true in the past over Bosnia .
The Social Democrats , supported by the far left , have always pursued a policy which more or less failed to take account of Milosevic .
I simply cannot understand this .
There is an anti-militaristic tendency behind it , but I would say that defending the rule of law demands rather more .
I hope that the time will come when this House overcomes its divisions on this question .
The President-in-Office of the Council certainly has an unpleasant task .
Please note what she had to say here : patience has run out , just like two weeks ago .
She has given dates , 27 October and 3 November , by which time things must have changed .
She is not going to come back with 4 November , I hope ?
Our patience has run out , just like two weeks , four weeks and six weeks ago .
This really is losing all credibility .
I must say I find it a great pity to hear Mr Wiersma say that the Kosovars cannot have independence .
I find that too patronising .
You should not have to live under a criminal dictator , even if we do want Kosovo to remain part of Yugoslavia .
This really cannot be ignored .
Mr President , I have a number of comments .
First , it has been proved that diplomacy has potential , provided that it is accompanied by patience and persistence .
It has potential in Yugoslavia , Palestine and Ireland , and there is no need to rush to resort to arms .
Secondly , it was unfortunately again the United States and not the European Union , even though Yugoslavia is our neighbour , which led the persistent and difficult negotiations and pressure that produced this peaceful resolution .
The third point I want to stress is that there are certainly forces which want to undermine the package agreed upon , on both sides , as we saw with the murder of a number of Serbs a few days ago .
That is why the international community , everyone involved in this process , must look in both directions and not just at one side .
Fourthly , it is important that we should stress the framework within which developments in Kosovo - full autonomy while at the same time respecting the existing frontiers in the Balkans - are to take place .
My last point is addressed to Mr Bangemann .
I would like to ask why it is that the European Union , the Commission and , indeed , all of us are so keen to take up the cause of Kosovo , of the Kosovo Albanians , and even resort to military threats , but when it comes to occupied Cyprus or the Kurds , the Commission is happy not only to turn its back on threats and political pressure , but even to manipulate policy so that finance for Turkey can go ahead .
That is a very sad state of affairs , and it reflects badly on the European Union , Mr Santer and all the Commissioners .
Thank you , Mr Cushnahan .
The debate is closed .
Economic crisis in Latin America
The next item is the statement by the Commission on the economic crisis in Latin America .
I give the floor to Mr Bangemann , on behalf of the Commission .
Mr President , the current economic and in particular financial situation in the world is having a number of adverse effects which , of course , also affect Latin America .
There is a difference between the real economic situation and the situation of the financial markets .
This difference is particularly marked in countries like the Latin American countries , which basically have a fairly stable economic situation that offers some good prospects , while at the same time being threatened by financial uncertainty .
Because of this situation , because of this difference , we must not overreact to these uncertainties .
The sober fact , which nobody can overlook , is of course that the uncertainty on the global financial markets has led to situations of crisis in some regions of the world , including Latin America .
But at the same time , we must point out that the current economic situation and the prospects in the Latin American countries still look promising . That is to say that the situation can be assessed in two different ways , depending on the factors we take into account .
But perhaps these two different points of view can be coordinated if we realise that we must not try to make a self-fulfilling prophecy , in other words that the financial uncertainty should not lead us to regard Latin America 's economic prospects unfavourably , which would only help worsen the real economic situation , since the statistics paint an entirely different picture .
In 1997 , Latin America 's economic performance was the highest in decades .
Average growth in the region was over 5 % .
Per capita GDP rose by more than 3 % and inflation tended to fall throughout the region - certainly not to the level we consider acceptable here at home , but what is important here is the trend .
All this reflected the rise in investment , the massive influx of capital .
Let me remind you that during the time when people were speaking of a lost decade , the flight of capital was quite substantial .
Today we have the reverse situation , which is why , looking at the statistics , the picture is certainly quite different from that suggested by the financial situation alone .
All the Latin American governments have also set themselves the aim of achieving general economic stability through reforms , and the majority of these governments have carried out some radical reforms , based on sound financial management and economic openness .
The Commission therefore believes we can regard this as a solid foundation for tackling the current financial problems .
Of course the economic downswing in Asia - less so in Russia - has an impact on the region .
That impact varies depending on the countries ' economic links with the Asian region .
Brazil conducts 12 % of its foreign trade with Asia , 25 % of Chilean exports go to Asia , and 13 % of Peruvian exports .
This means that the economic decline in Asia will certainly affect some countries more than others , and that despite greater diversification and the increasing importance of the processing industry and the services sector , raw material exports will continue to play an important role and therefore also make some countries economically vulnerable .
The Asian economic downswing will , therefore , necessarily be reflected in these countries ' current account balances .
But that is not the real danger .
We are convinced this decline can be absorbed .
The immediate danger is that the Latin American currencies may weaken .
The loss of confidence in the international capital markets and the growing awareness of risks following the Asian and , more recently , the Russian financial crisis have made the Latin American currencies more vulnerable to potentially destabilising capital movements .
That is why Brazil has now taken stringent measures to combat speculation and Chile , Mexico and Colombia will no doubt follow suit .
These rapid and resolute reactions show that the region is better equipped than in the past to meet the challenges of the globalisation of financial markets .
Argentina is one outstanding example of how joint international efforts can support a country in this respect .
Although growth has also slowed in Argentina in recent months , we believe the country has solid economic foundations and that the reforms introduced earlier this decade are now having an effect , and a very positive one too .
Yet at the beginning of this month there were great fears that the worldwide financial instability would overtax its economy .
On 5 October , the World Bank therefore approved loans of USD 5.7 billion to reassure investors and because foreign banks were hesitating to provide Argentina with the necessary resources .
This guarantees that Argentina will be able to meet its financial obligations by the end of March next year .
It is also a clear sign that the international community will also help other countries - if it proves necessary - which means we have good reason to evaluate Latin America 's future realistically and also positively .
However , the radical political and , more importantly , economic reforms on which so many Latin American countries embarked at the end of the 1980s must be pursued to their end .
It would be suicidal to conclude that because of these difficulties , the reforms must be brought to an end and a different policy pursued .
The Commission will therefore support every measure that encourages the continuation of these reforms .
That is the only chance for the continent .
You know that we are taking very practical steps in many areas : both political but also , where necessary , financial measures in the area of industrial cooperation , and of course in the area of traditional cooperation .
With this statement we want to help prevent a collapse , which could not be justified in any rational , realistic economic terms , but could only be the result of an overreaction .
The key point of this debate , in our view , is to help prevent this overreaction .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for the information he has just given .
This debate certainly provides a good opportunity for us to review relations between the European Union and Latin America . The fact that contact has been made with a view to preparing the final phase of trade liberalisation agreements with Mercosur , Chile and Mexico proves that the Union is genuinely committed to strengthening and moving forward with the agreements , and is not just expressing a vague desire to come closer together .
Likewise , the Latin American economies have made a genuine effort to modernise , fight inflation and meet their international obligations such as debt repayment .
As the turn of the century approached , growth was becoming quite marked , and expectations of a strong economic recovery were high .
It was hoped that a fairer distribution of wealth would begin to do away with the polarisation of Latin American societies into the haves and the have-nots . Increased international investment , improved growth , the encouraging progress made towards integration , along with marked political stability and strengthened democracy had all played their part .
However , as the Commissioner just mentioned , most of the progress made has evaporated in just a few weeks , following a crisis which was probably partly exaggerated , causing a panic reaction .
Certain economies still have structural problems and some had not yet felt the benefit of the spectacular growth in other countries . For them , the consequences have been devastating .
After a decade when our relationship has grown so much closer , there is a degree of mutual trust between us , and Latin America is therefore hoping we will do more than make a fine statement of intent .
My group is concerned for the citizens , for social stability and democracy .
We therefore wish a firm political stand to be taken .
Let me explain what I mean by this .
We must make a determined effort to tackle the debate on the workings of the international financial system in what is now , to all intents and purposes , a globalised economy .
The joint resolution takes this approach and is a positive step which will have a calming effect and spread confidence in those markets most affected by the crisis .
However , the practical effects of this resolution must make themselves felt soon .
My group urges the Commission to take the initiative , because due to the extent of our social development and the size of our economy , of our financial system , of our share of the world market and of our profits - which must be mentioned here - we are called upon to take a lead in today 's world . We should not shy away from this role , particularly in situations such as the one we are currently discussing , when the international monetary institutions fail to play their part in resolving the crisis and persist in applying conventional solutions , thus generating worldwide unrest and loss of confidence .
Mr President , the economic crisis we are confronted with is certainly real . It began in the Asian countries , moved on to Russia with serious consequences , and is now threatening to spread to Latin America .
Yet , as Commissioner Bangemann explained so clearly , there are no objective reasons for it . What the Commissioner neglected to mention was that in the meantime the European Union , its institutions , and almost all the Member States have failed to become involved in the debate and consequently in providing solutions , maintaining a silence which has baffled everyone , our Latin American partners most of all .
It is bad enough that the European Parliament has not made time to debate the situation until today , but it is even worse that the European Commission has shown itself totally lacking in initiative and that the Council has been unable to adopt any decisions on the matter .
For us to claim a place on the world stage , as the major economic power we are , and to hope to take on the responsibilities and the leading role which the arrival of the euro on the world economic scene could create for us , when we lack the breadth of vision called for in today 's globalised world - overlooking even the view , that fortunately for us , Latin America is the only emerging area not so far shaken by the crisis - would be a contradiction in terms .
We ought to bear in mind too that , only this morning , the Commission reduced our forecast growth for next year by six tenths .
Thanks to the determined effort made by those countries to carry out structural reforms during the last ten years , they have been able to withstand speculation from a strong economic base , created by developing sound economic policies .
Fiscal and monetary discipline , liberalisation and regional integration have been the key elements of Latin American economic policy in recent years .
Without these , Latin America would have suffered grievously already .
Now is the time to reiterate and emphasise the need to resist the temptation to block the free movement of capital , and adopt protectionist policies which are irrelevant at the end of the twentieth century .
Of course , for us , this new vision of a globalised world economy must be subject to certain restrictions imposed by the values of democracy , solidarity and social cohesion .
At this juncture , therefore , we feel we should draw attention to the social consequences of financial instability .
My group therefore supports the call made at the recent summit of Latin American nations for discussions to be held with a view to establishing minimum rules of conduct where major flows within the financial and economic worlds are concerned .
In this context , we should certainly welcome the unblocking of the United States ' contributions to the International Monetary Fund and the reduction of interest rates , but more is needed .
For its part , Spain has contributed USD 3 000 million to the International Monetary Fund to provide for a reserve or contingency fund for Latin America to be established .
So you will understand , ladies and gentlemen , how pleased I am that , in the hope of extending it to the Union as a whole and to the Member States , this initiative has been included in the joint motion for a resolution with which this debate will close .
Responsibility for developing the initiatives and putting forward further measures now rests with the European Commission .
In this connection , I think it is worth mentioning , Commissioner , how very low the utilisation of the budget allocation for Latin America has been - barely 2 % in the first six months of this year .
We would urge the Council to make every effort to further the processes now in place for progressive and reciprocal trade liberalisation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must say how much I welcome Commissioner Bangemann 's statement and the concern both he and the Commission have expressed regarding a situation which is affecting international financial and economic stability .
I have reflected on the reason behind the progressive impact of this international financial and economic crisis which has hit the economies of Latin America so hard . It is worth mentioning , in the first place , how fragile they are .
These economies are still emerging from a long period of internal conflict , and excessive debt .
They have , in fact , as has already been mentioned , made a great effort - on the one hand , to achieve stability , setting up democratic regimes and , on the other , to restructure their economies . They have also tried hard to open themselves to the outside world .
To date , the attempt to open up to the outside world had proved successful when coupled with good access to foreign markets . Furthermore , as Commissioner Bangemann remarked , the flow of investment had been most beneficial .
Unfortunately , according to a range of statistics , the price of raw materials has plummeted .
For instance , the price of rubber fell by 32.9 % , that of wool by 31.8 % , that of maize by 9.3 % , and that of cotton by 14.6 % .
Expectations for economic growth have been dramatically revised : growth has halved from last year to this . Furthermore , participation in trade and production has been drastically reduced , for example by a third of exports from Chile or 23 % of exports from Peru .
Clearly , the situation must be retrieved , and this should be done through financial arrangements which restore international confidence in these economies .
As we see it , two essential elements are involved .
Firstly , the process of internationalisation and opening up the markets on a world scale must not be jeopardised and , secondly , genuine economic , social and political stability must be guaranteed . Progress has already been made in these areas , and the importance of transparency and support for the economies must be emphasised .
In conclusion , therefore , I should like to join with the previous speakers in calling on the Community institutions and the European Commission to play a more effective role in this area . Unfortunately , although the launch of the euro is now almost upon us , they are not yet making their presence felt in the international financial institutions .
Commissioner Bangemann , you will have realised that all the Members who have so far spoken have done so in Spanish . Naturally , we are particularly sensitive to the situation in Latin America , and we know many of our colleagues in the House share our concern .
However , when we speak , we do so as Europeans .
We are not alarmist . When we speak as Europeans - in my case , as spokesperson for a group on the left - we do not wish to be prophets of doom , but we do wish to register our concern .
Following the so-called lost decade of the 1980s , the International Monetary Fund 's structural adjustment applied a coercive mechanism which produced a mirage of recovery and growth .
We can now appreciate that the reality is quite different , and that Latin America is very vulnerable to the effects of the Russian and Asian crises .
And not only is it psychologically vulnerable , its structures are vulnerable too .
This does not bode well for countries which have suffered under a succession of authoritarian regimes .
We feel that the responsibilities we have acquired through our role as Europeans require us to respond to the serious challenges posed by the loss of production , loss of employment and drop in salaries .
That is not all : we are also witnessing an exodus of capital , a drop in internal and foreign investment for fear of insolvency in the private sector , and a progressive deterioration in the fabric of society . The outlook is far from bright for this region , which should be very dear to us in Europe for historical and cultural reasons .
My group believes that , due to globalisation , the crisis may have a negative impact on societies in regions which have just emerged from what were often bloody conflicts . Most of these societies are embarking on major processes of internal restructuring .
We therefore appeal to the Commission and accept as Members of this House that we have a duty to act as well as to consider .
We have to work responsibly and not be motivated purely by our self-interest as Europeans . It is true , however , that the Latin American crisis may destabilise the European economy if we fail to express our solidarity and to take prompt and decisive action to safeguard the future .
An enhanced role for the European Community could counter the influence of Japan and the United States , and result in a better framework for the globalisation of the world 's economy .
Our group does not defend the simplistic notion that economic policy should be surrendered to politics and solidarity .
We are in favour of social adjustment which takes the human factor into account , but we know that if the economy is disregarded , costs will spiral and benefits vanish .
We therefore support the resolution which will be put to the vote in the House today . We urge the Commission to play an active role in these processes of regional integration , demonstrating strong support for and solidarity with Latin America , and facilitating the emergence of stable , democratic and highly developed societies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the crisis that is currently gripping more and more regions in the world and therefore also Latin America is not a disease , but the logical consequence of a world economy that has gone awry .
So there is no risk of contagion , no point trying to vaccinate with new financial injections , as various groups are proposing in their compromise resolution .
On the contrary , injections of finance would only be grist to the mill of those people who have been unscrupulously amassing fortunes in Latin America for years .
All the fiddling and cheating that has been going in Brazilian banks in the last ten years alone can only be described as criminal .
Let me just remind you of the famous ' pink file ' affair two years ago .
It contained a list of politicians from António Carlos Magalhães to the former President Sarney who had been receiving illegal transfers for years ; the only reason it did not come to court was because these same politicians voted against setting up a committee of inquiry .
Large private banks collapsed by the dozen , the State took over the debts , balance sheets were forged unscrupulously and the ordinary people lost all their savings .
Anyone who in such a situation calls for more liberalisation , fewer controls and nothing but measures to , and I quote , ' ensure that confidence is regained among investors ' is asking for trouble .
Just offering funds to service the external debt simply makes the vicious circle rotate even faster .
In the face of the growing poverty in Latin America , it would be cynical of us once again to miss the opportunity to incorporate brakes in the financial roundabout .
Fresh money , new investment must remain in Latin America ; at least they must remain there for a minimum period , and they must be used to support local production and promote local consumption .
At the Latin American summit in Lisbon last week , even President Cardoso was prepared to remember his own left-wing past , in view of the crisis .
It was he personally who called for a tax on short-term capital movements and for the resulting revenue to go to poverty programmes .
That is exactly what the so-called Tobin tax is meant to achieve .
It may not be a way of gaining the confidence of irresponsible speculators , but will certainly attract investors who look to the long term .
Ladies and gentlemen , if you endorse our amendments in this regard , we would also be prepared to support your resolution .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for his statement .
Ladies and gentlemen , try to imagine a scenario where a country experiences a steep rise in the interest rate , a dramatic fall in the stock market , an increase in the national debt , panic amongst financial investors , the threat of currency devaluation - in short , a major crisis of confidence and the collapse of economic reforms in progress .
Well , this is exactly what befell many Asian countries last year , then Russia during the summer , and is now happening in Brazil . There is a danger that other countries in Latin America may soon be affected .
Fear , particularly financial fear , comes free of charge .
If we do not put a stop to this domino effect , there can be no guarantee that the United States or the European Union itself might not soon be affected , even though their economies are solvent .
We should , of course , hope that this possible domino effect will be arrested thanks to the solid democratic basis established across South America , following the many agreements signed with the European Union .
In our view , long-term measures should be taken to deal with the situation , namely the reform of the institutional framework which developed from Bretton Woods . Medium-term measures are also called for , to promote greater transparency and the regulation of financial institutions .
In the short term , we should find ways of offering immediate financial support .
Spain , for instance , has set up a fund to assist Brazil , and the United States has followed suit , offering lines of credit to countries threatened by similar financial problems . It is to be hoped that the European Union too will act swiftly and decisively in the near future .
I stress the need for swift and decisive action , because we need to move quickly to prevent the crisis spreading across Latin America and resulting in the withdrawal of foreign capital and a regional recession . It has been estimated that the Brazilian stock market is currently losing a million pesetas a second .
Ladies and gentlemen , this cannot be allowed to continue .
Mr President , the scale of the financial crisis that is affecting the countries of Latin America , as it is affecting nearly all countries with emerging economies , and the extent of the impact it is bound to have on the European economies and particularly on the countries in the euro area , have been largely underestimated in Europe up until now .
Here , in fact , we have incessantly heard the political cant about the euro shield and the European exception , as if Europe could remain an island of stability , due to a mistaken understanding of the importance of intra-Community trade , and as if we were trying to ward off the crisis and its impact on us through a show of optimism that is infantile and irresponsible .
Our primary task as responsible elected representatives should be , on the contrary , to consider the true reality of the crisis as it stands , even if this in fact threatens to make the introduction of the euro more tricky than we thought and might even lead us to question the possibility of introducing a new currency in the middle of an international financial upheaval .
The declaration that has just been made by Commissioner Bangemann on Latin America is at least a sign , in part , of this essential return to realism , and we are beginning to see such signs in various quarters .
The Prime Minister of Luxembourg , Mr Junker , is saying that the euro is not an eternal shield .
The winner of the 1998 Nobel Prize in Economics , Amartya Sen , is expressing his fears of seeing a single monetary policy guided solely by anti-inflationary concerns having devastating effects on Europe when faced with a sustainable drop in American rates .
The Asian and Latin-American financial crises and their effects on the value of the dollar could indeed be the first asymmetrical shock to affect the various countries of the euro area .
Their economies , I remind you , are still far from being in line .
The Iberian economies will therefore be affected earlier and to a greater extent than the others by a major Latin-American crisis .
It is in this context that we will be able to judge whether the euro really acts as a shield or whether the countries of the euro area can together withstand the wide gap between the very heavy constraints of the single currency and the shocks that each of the countries is going to suffer as a result of the crisis , to different degrees , in different sectors and at different times .
Nor can we fail to ask whether it is really the right time for the various countries committed to forming the euro area to deprive themselves of flexible monetary resources that are tried and tested means of adjusting to an economic crisis , at a time when we appear to be verging on a major world financial crisis !
Mr President , the overall economic situation in the countries of Latin America is not good .
It is not good in the banana republics exploited by North American trusts . It is not good in the countries where the communist guerillas are pillaging , raping and killing .
In Peru , the so-called ' Shining ' Path is massacring entire villages .
Nor is it good in Colombia , especially in Caguán , where the extreme left-wing Columbian revolutionary armed forces receive payments from drug traffickers whose cultivation and trade they are protecting .
Only one country , which was put back on course for a sound economy several years ago , is showing a clean bill of health all round .
That country is Chile .
The Chilean model is therefore an example for the other countries of Latin America , but also for the African countries and for Russia .
The bulletin of the French Embassy , which I consulted yesterday on the Internet , says that growth is continual and that stability is guaranteed for prices , the currency and public finances .
Chile is the country where investment is being made and where financial reserves are increasing .
In 1973 , the situation was different .
The Marxist dictator Allende had ruined the country , which , following the lorry-drivers strikes , was experiencing a revolt among housewives .
Everywhere , extreme left-wing armed groups were ruling with violence and murdering more and more people .
It was like Spain in 1936 , where the right-wing majority , Gil Robles ' CEDA , had its activities curbed and its leaders and militants assassinated , not to speak of the anti-Catholic atrocities .
Then a republican officer took a stand : General Pinochet .
He took a stand , like General Franco in the past , to avoid the grip of communism that , there as elsewhere , was preparing to set up its gulags and fill the mass graves .
The army and the police dealt with terrorism and the violence of subversion with warlike methods and every type of regrettable abuse .
And , on the pretext that torture is institutionalised and widely practised in Israel , are preparations being made in London or Madrid to imprison Benyamin Netanyahu , whose army has killed more Palestinian resistant fighters than Chile has killed revolutionaries ?
Is General Sharon going to be arrested in Washington or Paris for all the savage repression that has taken place under his authority ?
We are forever appealing here for the rule of law , but the ambush on General Pinochet , organized in a joint Spanish and British plot , cynically violates all the rules of international law .
However , no committee of inquiry and no people 's tribunal has been set up to judge 80 years of red terror in the world and those responsible for 200 million deaths , if we add the victims of the wars to the 100 million who have died in the organised famines and mass executions of communism , an impassable scenario of modern slavery .
Mr President , allow me to add a few words to Mr Kreissl-Dörfler 's comments .
He is naturally quite right to cite corruption as one of the causes of the economic instability .
The fact is , of course , that there are some thoroughly corrupt states - one could call them military dictatorships .
Mr Antony just referred to a country that used to be a military dictatorship .
These countries are certainly stable economically .
But there are also some properly governed states that are economically vulnerable .
There are many reasons why this can be so .
We are seeing this situation in Latin America at the moment .
There is a certain psychology that applies to financial markets when they obviously no longer have confidence in the fixed exchange rates of Brazil , for instance .
It leads to a flight of capital , as in Asia and Russia .
That happens for psychological reasons .
It has no economic basis , as Mr Bangemann rightly pointed out .
But there is also one factor over which the states often have no influence at all , namely the fall in raw material prices .
The advantage Europe is currently deriving from cheaper oil is quite simply a disaster for Mexico , Venezuela and other countries .
That has nothing to do with corruption , it is because of the fall in raw material prices , which really should give us food for thought .
How can we also stabilise raw material prices in the long term ?
It is also due to the disappearance of Latin America 's Asian markets , through no fault of its own .
Furthermore , with the disappearance of the Asian markets and the devalued Asian currencies , Latin American goods are now faced with cheap competition from that region .
That is why I think we must take a very practical approach to this problem .
Looked at in practical terms , that means Brazil must be stabilised at this time .
Brazil is the key economy in Latin America .
Let me refer you to paragraph 9 of our motion for a resolution , in which we call for a special fund - something which has been discussed in the past - supported by the international financial institutions , to help Brazil cope with the present difficult situation .
If Brazil collapses , if Brazil has to devalue , the entire region would be affected .
We would be exactly where we were in the early 1980s , namely confronted with a disastrous situation in which the ordinary people , the people of Latin America , have to pay the price for the inability of the financiers to maintain order in the world .
So I ask you to approve our motion for a resolution and thereby to support all the efforts made by the Commission and the Council and also by others to prop up the Brazilian economy at this time .
That does not excuse them from the homework that needs to be done in these countries , with which we would be happy to assist them .
Mr President , I should like to thank Commissioner Bangemann for his ever-positive and involved presence amongst us .
Following the debt crisis , Latin American countries have in recent years made a considerable political and economic effort towards structural adjustment . This has involved enormous social costs .
It so happens , Mr President , that although those countries agreed to the clause on democracy in their cooperation agreements with the European Union , they receive the worst treatment , in real terms , under the Community budget .
Not only do they not enjoy any budgetary advantages , but they do not benefit either from the preferential trading treatment granted , for example , to the countries of the Lomé Convention .
With the advent of this crisis , the Latin American countries have been punished twice over : they have been the victims of the adjustment , and they have also been the victims of the system we advised them to adjust to .
Clearly , the solution to this crisis lies beyond the competence and sphere of influence of the European Union . Nevertheless , Commissioner , much can be done at Community level .
Mr Marín , the Commissioner responsible , is aware that I have always supported him in the past , and that he can continue to rely on my humble self to support any initiatives he may put forward with a view to strengthening relations between the European Union and Latin America .
I do have to say , however , Commissioner , that on this occasion a clear , effective and diligent response from the Commission was sorely lacking .
In such difficult times , the European Union cannot and must not shirk its responsibilities , nor may it resort to silence .
Mr Bangemann , it is regrettable that year after year the Commission should propose the same amounts for the main budget lines for Latin America .
No account is taken of the new agreements with Chile , Mexico and Mercosur , of the challenges next year 's Rio summit will present , or of the current crisis affecting the economies of Latin America . No provision is made either to compensate for the rate of inflation .
I therefore share the concern expressed by Mrs Miranda in this regard .
I trust all the political groups which have participated in this debate - Mr Puerta 's or even Mrs Miranda 's , since the general rapporteur for the budget is in her political group - will be able to support the amendments to the draft budget for the coming year put forward by both Mrs Miranda and myself . As it has consistently done , my group also supports the amendments I have proposed .
I do hope , Mr President , that following this debate the Commission will tackle the situation with enthusiasm and imagination and will consider a suitable response at Community level . What is needed is not just a declaration , but a package of budgetary measures , investment , more credit from the European Investment Bank , Community guarantees and trading agreements .
The Old World has to find a way of expressing its solidarity with its long-standing and long-suffering friends in Latin America .
Mr President , although the financial and economic crisis in Latin America is undoubtedly linked to those in the Far East and Russia , being a consequence of them , it has certain specific features of its own .
There is a clear disparity between , on the one hand , all the admirable proposals and efforts being brought to bear by the parties concerned - the international community , the Monetary Fund , the European Investment Bank and the World Bank - and , on the other , the utterly inadequate results achieved .
This is a sign that the treatment is perhaps not the right one : we should stop showering Latin America with aspirins , which have disastrous effects , but should perhaps prescribe for it a course of antibiotics , or in other words - as Mrs Kreissl-Dörfler put it - adopt an alternative policy approach .
Tough decisions must be taken to break the vicious circle of debt which only produces more ; debts should be written off once and for all .
Measures should be taken with all due respect for human rights ; equitable growth should be pursued in both Europe and Latin America , without applying different standards .
Finally , excessive liberalisation should be avoided , since that serves only to make matters worse , and we should put an end to unconditional guarantee funds , which have contributed to the disaster in Russia .
Mr President , not so long ago , Latin America was regarded as one of the most promising regions for the world economy .
Today the economic and financial crisis in this region has had very serious consequences , and not only for the people there .
The Latin American countries rely heavily on the trend in raw material prices , and it is an established fact that this crisis is seriously disrupting the international financial markets .
We keep rightly declaring that so far the euro zone has reacted in a relatively stable way to the international network of crises .
But we must realise that all the worldwide economic problems are bound to have an impact on the European Union too , unless internationally coordinated measures are taken .
We shall have to tackle the problems at their roots if we wish to resolve them and revive the world economy .
One problem is that the level of real interest rates is at times too high .
We must improve the quality of management systems , supervisory systems and , in particular , financial systems , on an international basis .
Mr President , dear colleagues , Commissioner Bangemann , it matters little that the fundamentals of the real economy are sound , as you said at the beginning of your speech , because in a monetary economy , a market economy , the disease always comes from the money side .
It is the money side that we have to somehow cure if we are going to stop the financial crisis from spilling over and overwhelming the real economy .
The question is what are we doing to achieve this ?
The answer is that we , the developed world , are doing very little indeed , yet we are asking Latin American to bear the burden of the adjustment .
What is Latin America doing ?
Latin America is actually doing quite a lot .
Brazil has raised its interest rates to 50 % .
You can appreciate what effect that is likely to have on its real economy .
Next year Brazil will have negative rates of growth : -2 or -3 % .
You can understand how that will exacerbate the poverty and misery in that country , which are already considerable .
Now we are asking them to do more .
We are asking them to reduce a deficit of 7 % in Brazil to 2 or 3 % , as if they were going to join the euro .
You can understand what that will do to their public services : it means taking the food out of the mouths of starving children .
This is what this pressure implies .
We threaten them with a repeat of the speculative attack on their currency .
The speculators , we tell them , are waiting to see what we will do on 25 October after the election when the new measures will be announced .
What can they do ?
They are starving already , what more can they do to save the Western financial system , Mr Commissioner ?
What can we do to save our own system ?
President Cardoso spoke in favour of introducing a Tobin tax . For four years we have been talking about a Tobin tax and we have not made any progress .
We need to have a fund to rescue them .
What size should this fund be ?
Between $ 40 and 100 million say the specialists - that money does not exist in the financial institutions , Mr Commissioner .
It is a mistake to think that we are talking about their interests alone .
If Brazil falls , any person in a responsible position will tell you that Wall Street will fall and if Wall Street falls the consequences for Europe will be terrible .
Mr Commissioner , it is our interests that we have to defend and we should defend them at our cost and not at their cost .
When one hears the ominous sounds coming from Latin America do not ask ' for whom the bell tolls ? ' - it tolls for you .
Mr President , after all these economic and political considerations , let me point to another aspect .
We all breathed a sigh of relief when we heard in the early 1990s that the economic upswing in Latin America heralded the end of the lost decade of the 1980s .
In addition to this economic upswing , which in fact differed widely from one country to another , we also saw more stable democratic governments emerge in all the countries - and I believe this is most important for us - with the exception of Cuba .
True , this was sometimes accompanied by severe political difficulties and social crises , and there were still many human rights violations .
But what was important was that democracy and economic recovery gained ground and gradually also filtered through to the people , as reflected at least in some degree of political stability .
Now the Asian economic and financial crisis has also reached Latin America , where structures that are still weak are being further weakened and threatened .
We must not allow the new financial crises to make the people begin to doubt in democratic structures that are , in any case , still very inadequate in some respects .
By now we in Europe should be familiar with the disappointment people feel if the chain of democracy , the rule of law and prosperity does not match up to their expectations .
Europe , the EC and the democratic parties provided much support in their time .
Despite all the problems engendered by the changes in Eastern Europe , which have brought similar problems in their wake , we should not forget these partners , and especially not the risks which this kind of disappointment can entail .
The current debate about Pinochet shows how thin the protective cover actually is , although here we are dealing with an established democracy , namely Chile .
Nor must Mercosur , with its high ambitions , become a victim .
It too is in a sense our godchild , and we must attack the human rights violations that accompany every economic and social crisis , even if the two aspects may seem quite unrelated .
Certainly , the Latin American markets are future markets for us .
We would ask the Commission to take these factors into consideration in any initiatives now taken , given also that the word has now spread in what are called the worldwide and international financial institutions that the two aspects are indeed interrelated .
Mr President , despite the Commissioner 's upbeat tone , the financial crisis affecting Latin America is bound to cause alarm and concern in the European Union , not only because of the need for the EU to play a role in international monetary cooperation , but also because Europe has for many centuries been linked to that vast area of central and southern America through ties of culture , language , religion and civilisation , and - perhaps - because everything possible has not yet been done to establish a special relationship with that market .
Naturally we welcome the idea of a financial package for Latin America , geared to creating new jobs and boosting domestic consumption .
We are equally pleased to note the increased growth of recent years , but there can be no doubt that reforms aimed at achieving economic stability and financial transparency have now become absolutely essential , and that we must ensure that a loss of confidence by financial markets does not weaken the currencies of Latin America .
How should the challenges of the future be tackled ?
The World Bank has already assisted Argentina ; it could obviously do likewise for other countries .
But the European Union cannot refrain from playing its own part , by reinforcing political cooperation , intervening more effectively and ensuring that capital does not stop moving freely around Latin America .
Rather , strict controls should be put in place to prevent speculation , and new investors encouraged with incentives targeted in particular at small and medium-sized enterprises . At the same time , human rights must be complied with in full , and democratic conditions respected .
Unless the European Union can assume a leading role in the shaping of a new international monetary system , the much-vaunted launch of the euro could result in partial failure , like a Ferrari without an engine : good enough to display in the shop window , but not to set out on the long road towards international solidarity .
Mr President , the economic crisis in the world today clearly demonstrates the fact that few countries are immune from the consequences of economic shocks in other parts of the world .
Asia is important , but Latin America only sends 1 % of its exports to Russia .
It was , however , badly affected by the flight of capital triggered by the situation in Russia .
If Latin America is plunged into deep crisis , this will inevitably have a very serious effect on the American economy and pose the threat of a world crisis more serious than any since the pre-war era , which could devastate Europe .
It was hoped that the low inflation rates and improving levels of growth in Latin America would provide the basis for real progress and , as Mr Bangemann said , in 1997 the average rate of growth was over 5 % .
This was attributed by many observers to liberalisation , privatisation , deregulation , etc. encouraging an inflow of capital .
However , the present crisis has shown that such policies leave their practitioners vulnerable to events totally beyond their control .
As the Managing Director of the IMF , Michel Camdessus , put it : ' At times one has the impression that markets do not differentiate properly the good players . '
While it would be totally mistaken to consider returning to closed economies or narrow protectionism , there is a need for agreed international regulation to deter huge and sudden capital flows , particularly of short-term funds , and to work towards globally coordinated interest rates .
Consideration must also be given to a rescheduling or writing-off of huge foreign debts which rose for Latin America as a whole from $ 83bn in 1975 to $ 627bn in 1996 .
Structural adjustment programmes , liberalisation and fiscal reforms have also frequently involved cuts in health , education and social and poverty alleviation expenditures , and these should have been avoided in the past and must be resisted in the future if poverty is not to be rapidly increased and demand further reduced .
It is incumbent on us in Europe to adopt policies , such as the easing of interest rates , to encourage growth , and the provision of appropriate financial support - not , however , just to help the rich and the speculators .
The crisis in Latin America and in the world as a whole should alert us to the necessity of questioning the neo-liberal policies which became the conventional wisdom and seeking to construct a new model of development involving regulation at the global level , a new international financial agreement , reform of international financial institutions and a new deal to reverse the trend to ever greater income inequality and vast poverty .
Mr President , I very much appreciated Mr Bangemann 's introduction , and I believe there is no need to stress that - as virtually all the previous speakers have said - the violent financial turbulence which has hit all markets in recent months , sparked by the crises first in Asia and then in Russia , could have particularly serious adverse effects on the economy of Latin America .
This possible development is all the more worrying , given the efforts made in recent years by most of these countries to stabilise their economies and equip themselves for a satisfactory move into world markets .
These processes of adaptation have demanded considerable sacrifices on the part of the populations of Latin America , not least in terms of reduced real incomes and living standards .
The first green shoots are nevertheless emerging , as proved by the growing interest in that area on the part of economic operators , in terms of both financial flows , trade and investment in production .
Unfortunately , our assessment is less upbeat in the case of countries claiming to be friends of Latin America , in particular the European Union .
By way of example , we could mention the deadlock reached over the draft cooperation agreement with Mercosur and Chile , not to mention the one with Mexico .
Indeed , despite the Commission 's efforts and the support from this House , the selfishness and short-sightedness of certain Member States - more concerned to protect narrow farming interests than to develop a broad-based vision of international economic and hence political relations - are preventing the launch of initiatives which could have extremely important repercussions , primarily for Latin America but also for Europe .
Whilst this unacceptable stalemate should be criticised in no uncertain terms , it is equally necessary to encourage the Commission and Council to do whatever they can , not least through financial measures , to consolidate the results achieved to date and prevent the efforts made by Latin America from degenerating into a new and untenable ' lost decade ' .
For example , referring to the figures quoted by Mr Katiforis , whereas it might be entirely inconsistent with the principles of sound economic policy management to think of using for domestic purposes any excess reserves of the European central banks which might be generated once the euro is introduced , it would seem quite reasonable to devote part of these sums to extraordinary financial support for Latin America , by agreement with the other international institutions , with a view to avoiding a situation where - as has already been underlined - those countries ' problems could soon become ours as well .
Mr President , I would like to draw three lessons from this . The first is that in a very interdependent world , the possibility of infection means that we have to make it our priority to stop the spread of disease , if I might say so .
We have scarce resources : the intervention methods of the Monetary Fund .
We have wasted them .
Going to Mr Yeltsin 's rescue , in the circumstances in which it was done , was a waste .
And we no longer have these resources to give to countries that show that they have a State and a market structure , which is not perfect - nothing anywhere is perfect - but which , when compared to the void with which we are faced in Russia , is totally different .
This is , therefore , the first lesson to draw : we must initially block the spread of the disease .
The second lesson to learn is that the problems of balance of payments or of collapse of credits are not simply problems of credit or of advancing the necessary liquid assets .
There needs to be a framework , a culture , a set of institutions that work .
A market is not a jungle .
The market is the result of a civilised legal and political structure .
That is what a market is .
Those people who today - and this is the third lesson - want to do away with the entire condemned system and replace it , because the failures we have seen are the result of uncontrolled collective behaviour , are not saying what they want to replace it with , but we know that they are thinking of systems that have brought no results .
Protectionism , which for 20 years has been called support for the Third World , has yielded no results .
Billions have been spent on helping regimes that have done nothing to ensure the development of the population , and this was done in order to have a clear conscience .
I therefore think that , all things considered , integration into a globalized economy according to very precise rules is the best solution , in the long run , to guarantee development .
The example of Chile has shown this .
There have been others , and the fact that at a given time things may get out of control , for very specific reasons , must not make us give up .
We know very well why things got out of control in Japan , Thailand and elsewhere .
What we are dealing with is not so much poor management in those countries , but rather the arrival of a short term influx of capital , which was withdrawn at the first sign of a setback , and then the collective chain of events led to a difficult situation .
That is what we need to solve , that is the lesson to learn .
We must not throw out the baby with the bathwater .
I have received five motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Telecommunications , media and information technology
The next item is the report ( A4-0328 / 98 ) by Mr Paasilinna , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission : Green Paper on the convergence of the telecommunications , media and information technology sectors and the implications for regulation ( COM ( 97 ) 0623 - C4-0664 / 97 ) .
Draftsmen ( Hughes procedure ) : Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel for the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , Mr Hory for the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and Mr Kuhne for the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , last spring I had the honour of being appointed rapporteur of a Parliamentary report on a Green Paper dealing with the convergence of telecommunications , the media and information technology .
The Commission 's document was very technical and perhaps even meandered somewhat .
I , for my part , tried to keep the report brief .
Too lengthy a report might not have led to any action being taken , since it might have been difficult to see the wood for the trees .
Convergence is such a complicated and unpredictable matter that reports should at least not end up making it even more obscure .
My position is based on advocating an open European information society for everyone , in which there is no division between the information-rich and the information-poor .
Information is not an ordinary commodity .
Regardless of its mode of dissemination , it has great social and cultural value .
Bytes are not neutral .
I maintain that participation in the world networks should be the modern right of every European citizen , which also means having as extensive a market as possible .
Likewise , the SME sector , which employs so many , must have a basic right to flexible access to the new , integrated environment .
Convergence does not necessarily mean the merger of different sectors of industry - trends indicate that it is actually more a way of transcending borders .
It is then that new and partially overlapping activities and services will co-exist .
To safeguard the availability , interchangeability and multi-functionality of the networks , the transmission of information has to be regulated within the terms of a standard regulatory framework .
Regulation has to meet the challenges of employment as well as the rights of citizens , while at the same time satisfying the needs of new economic strategies and the synergy interests of companies .
As sectors are developing fast so must our legislators also work fast and keep up-to-date .
I have in mind a model for flexible regulation .
It will not hamper competitiveness in European industry , but will actually aid it .
Nevertheless , regulation will be available if any sector runs off the rails .
I did not approve of the delay in drafting this report : on the contrary , when it comes to competitiveness , we have to press on .
I await prompt action on the part of the Commission to get legislative initiatives into place so that we can bring the matter to a conclusion when Finland holds the Presidency .
The current framework for regulation is still feasible , then , but convergence is happening right now and the transition period we have is short .
Competition already exists , for example , among the telephone and the cable television networks and between the fixed telephone network and mobile phones .
You can get music and television programmes off the Internet .
For this level of technical transmission a new , separate legislative code must be created , one that will cover all the many systems that exist today .
We most definitely do not need a European supervisory authority to take responsibility for content or services .
They will naturally remain a matter for the Member States , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
The part mobile phones play in our society was perhaps not done justice to in the Green Paper .
For example , recently in my own country , Finland , there has been an explosion in the number of mobile phones , which is showing no signs of abating .
They are used for paying bills , for surfing the net and playing computer games , and soon you will be watching TV programmes on them .
The mobile has seen convergence , if anything has .
The mobile is a way of life : you are always close by , yet you have your freedom .
When we consider equivalence among the networks , equal and fair terms of allocation have also to be ensured for service providers .
In this connection , we must strongly oppose the auctioning of mobile communication frequencies .
Auctioning would lead to monopolies , and then the American and European giants would start dividing up the frequencies among themselves .
That would be going against everyone 's interests , especially the consumers , as prices would rise .
The amount of money a company has is no indication of how good a service it can provide .
Under the Treaty of Amsterdam , the preferential treatment that public service broadcasters are getting is bound by special conditions governing the content and quality of programmes .
In addition to effective regulation , we need an enormous injection of investment into education and training , the European information industry , and employment .
Above all , we have to promote the notion of an information society which is open to everyone .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of all the committees involved in the Green Paper on convergence , I should first like to thank the rapporteur for the excellent cooperation which has produced a coherent report .
Convergence of the telecommunications , media and information technology sectors is a major challenge for policy-makers and legislators .
The keen competition between the various technologies makes it extremely difficult to predict what the situation will be in the future .
But what is certain is that the arrival of new services will lead to an expansion of the information market as a whole .
This will bring new opportunities for economic growth and employment .
A new environment for communication services also provides opportunities to improve the quality of life of European citizens by offering the consumer more choice and lower prices .
Applications and services are becoming independent of the supporting infrastructure , which is why technology is clearly a motor for change .
Support for research and development activities in the field of ICT under the fifth framework programme can make a major contribution to the convergence process .
The Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy therefore much regretted that the budgetary resources proposed by the Council for the Technologies of the Information Society programme are lower than under the fourth framework programme .
This is not in keeping with the economic and social importance which the Green Paper on convergence rightly awards to information technology .
Technological developments influence the regulatory framework and vice versa .
Regulations must not be an obstacle to the interoperability of different technologies and must therefore , if nothing else , be technologically neutral and non-discriminatory .
Rules should also preferably be applied worldwide .
The convergence of telecommunications , media and information technology is essential to a flourishing electronic trade .
The relatively high cost of data and telecommunications in Europe and the lack of security on the Internet means that electronic commerce has so far remained principally limited to the transfer of data between large companies and their suppliers and customers .
Lower telecommunications costs due to liberalisation and the possibilities offered by the Internet will facilitate access to electronic commerce for small and medium-sized businesses and the consumer .
There is a real shortage of factual material - by which I mean good statistics - with which to assess the rate and direction of the development of ICT services currently used in trade and industry in other areas of society .
Measuring computer use or Internet use , for example , is just one of the elements .
Good benchmark studies , preferably at international or European level , are necessary in order to judge whether or not it is desirable to regulate .
We must learn to live with the fact that government cannot keep up with all these developments at the legal level .
Finally , Mr President , convergence is not an aim in itself .
It is a matter of eliminating barriers to the supply and use of ICT products .
National legislation for telecommunications or for information technology or for printed media alone must therefore be adapted .
In this context , the capacity for innovation and the opportunities for risk-taking must be sustained , and not hindered by an excess of rules and regulations designed to channel convergence .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would love to see a more detailed debate on how an uncontroversial and positive technical process can fall victim to an interest-led ideology of deregulation , regardless of its market capacity or the behaviour of users and viewers , regardless even of everything that is recognised and known as necessary to the economic strengthening of the production and use of European content .
In the view of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , the report before us must also contain the following points , in addition to the emphasis on public broadcasting and the Amsterdam protocol on the subject , i.e. not having programme requirements laid down by an EU Commissioner . They include what are called ' must carry ' obligations for network operators in respect of the programmes of public service providers ; a form of regulation which reflects a balance in the law on the media , telecommunications and competition , to ensure security for investors and legal certainty ; the continued enforcement of regulatory principles such as pluralism , cultural diversity , protection of young people and the production and marketing of quality programmes , even in a world with no shortage of frequencies ; and the submission of a draft directive on media ownership and the protection of pluralism .
Precisely in view of the growing convergence of transmission channels for all forms of electronic communication , access is quite rightly an important factor with regard to acquiring market power and must therefore be subject to democratic control . I believe we still have quite a lot to do here , which includes supplementing and correcting the motion for a resolution by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy along these lines .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wonder why this curious combination of vulgar Marxism and speculation keeps cropping up whenever we discuss the information society .
According to Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , technology is the motor of development , which is simply not true .
The question of productive forces and production conditions is not that simple , not even according to Marx , although that is another matter .
Even good statistics are no use in themselves .
We need to look at quality .
We need to understand what is happening .
Until we understand that , there is no point in producing statistics .
Vague ideas about where market opportunities might exist do not help open up markets ; what helps open up markets is careful regulation , investment security , definite rules .
Careful regulation cannot be used as a blanket excuse for continuing to apply the deregulation ideology in the way it has been applied in the past .
In that respect , I welcome Mr Paasilinna 's report .
By taking a specific approach and by clearly defining his terms in his report on convergence , he is shedding some light on the obscurity which the Commission report unfortunately creates , and is establishing at least some basis for a discussion that really can answer the question : what does careful regulation mean here ?
Two words , information and communication , can in effect serve as a gold mine , a weapon or a lever for democratic participation .
But that depends on how they are applied in the various areas , what the people need and expect , and what needs and expectations must be supported , created or indeed scaled down by the appropriate rules ; because of course only a vulgar Liberal would believe that we can simply let things take their course and surely something good will come of it .
That is not the real world either .
Mr President , I take the floor to deputise for Mr Hory of the ARE Group , draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
I fully support his views , and shall now continue in French , since we discussed this speech in that language .
Mr President , in drafting this opinion , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights set itself the prime objective of studying the legal problems presented by the phenomenon of convergence .
This phenomenon is mainly a result of the technical developments of digitalization and compression , which permit various types of infrastructure functioning independently of each other to transport various types of content .
This infrastructure despecialization erodes the traditional distinction between telecommunications and broadcasting , and is bringing about a debate on the desirable regulatory changes in this sector .
The Committee on Legal Affairs therefore felt it was important to adopt a functional approach that is not limited to the three options proposed by the Commission 's Green Paper .
This is why our committee has proposed a model for the future that , while maintaining the traditional distinction between infrastructure and content , aims to simplify the regulatory framework .
The new framework that is proposed is subdivided into five different sectors .
The first involves infrastructure provision : resource access and interconnection arrangements .
The second relates to network operation : routing and transporting of communications content .
The third concerns access system management : allocation of Internet numbers and addresses and browser systems , including electronic programme guides .
The fourth relates to general content , that is , the content of television and Internet programmes , including intellectual property rights .
And the fifth relates to specific content , that is , the provision of services such as voice telephony and Internet access .
The Committee on Legal Affairs also emphasises that due to the speed of technological change , simply applying Community legislation on competition , which is there to stop , a posteriori , the formation of cartels and the abuse of dominant positions , is no longer enough to respond effectively to the large-scale process of alliance-making and vertical integrations within the industry .
Our committee therefore considers it necessary to broaden the ONP-type open provision rules whenever bottlenecks threaten to limit competition between businesses and to compromise consumer protection .
It therefore calls on the Commission to do its utmost to ensure that digital TV decoders in Europe are compatible in future and to draw up a draft directive to close the remaining loopholes , notably in the protection accorded by consumer law to consumers of goods or services offered via new technologies .
Mr President , I should like to start by thanking Mr Paasilinna for an excellent report .
The Green Paper and the report defined convergence as growing together and interchangeability of networks and channels for communication , and , in addition , the integration of distinct technologies in the new forms of applications and services .
They also talk about convergence of content which I will discuss a little later .
The divisions of the past into the technical areas of voice telephony , broadcasting and new services have led to a complex legislative and regulatory framework which has arisen due to a variety of different technologies being applied .
These technologies made the distinction between a telephone call , a television broadcast and an Internet page access quite pronounced in terms of delivery and content .
In network and technological terms those services will still be delivered in a similar fashion as they are today but the technologies applied will be predominantly digital rather than analogue and predominantly fibre-optical and satellite-based rather than electrical , cable and terrestrial broadcast based .
Therefore , the delivery mechanisms will not greatly affect the way in which these services are delivered or consumed .
They will , however , provide and offer new services of a form and nature which will break down the traditional boundaries that exist between current forms of communication .
This will mean that traditional forms of content can be stored , transmitted and received by the same media and means .
The content will , by the technology at least , be treated indiscriminately .
For that matter , why should we , as regulators , discriminate between different forms of content other than to cost added value , protect copywrite and provide security when the boundaries between the traditional forms of content break down ?
We are , in effect , experiencing convergence of content .
Is a video-conferencing session between four people a telephone call with vision ?
Is it a live television broadcast to multipoint destinations ?
Is it a new service which should not be covered by European telephony or broadcast regulation but treated like a new service such as Internet shopping ?
I believe it is none of these .
The review of communication into a single regulatory framework to be carried out by the Commission next year is to be welcomed .
On the basis of its Green Paper on convergence and Parliament 's response in the form of the Paasilinna report , it will provide a framework that will contain light and simple regulation to promote economic and industrial objectives such as competition and interoperability .
It will also enhance the concept and implementation of universal service so that everyone is information-rich and cultural diversity is maintained .
The Commission 's Green Paper and Parliament 's response make those arguments .
I commend Mr Paasilinna 's report to this House .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , globalisation and convergence are the prevailing slogans of our time .
That is why the Green Paper described the review of the traditional regulatory system in terms of its relevance to the future as the most important challenge .
The Commission launched this discussion in December last year .
It is clear from the huge participation of media representatives , consumer associations and industry in the consultation meeting that was then organised , with 270 contributions and more than 80 000 visitors to the Internet site by July 1998 , that there is enormous interest and an enormous need for action in this area .
How should we respond ?
Depending on the various interests of the parties concerned , the proposed solutions range from trust in the self-regulatory powers of the free market , through a partial regulation of specific areas , to excluding certain areas of public service .
My position in this discussion is that we are standing at the beginning of a development whose effects we cannot clearly predict , with the best will in the world .
There is certainly no consensus in the forecasts on the future use of digital services .
It is too soon to say anything for sure , because there are still too many unknown variables .
So we must take care not to place too much importance on any one aspect , which could distort the discussion and spoil our future chances on this potential European market .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur warmly on his first report in this Parliament , in which he has endeavoured to strike a balance between the various demands .
He says to the Commission , and I quote : ' a cautious attitude towards regulating new services should only be introduced where and when it proves necessary for the safeguard of the interests of consumers ' , adding , ' and if self-regulation by the industry based on these principles appears not to be efficient enough ' .
Here I can only agree with the rapporteur .
However , there are some points , though only a few , on which I differ with him .
I think that , at this stage of the discussion , to over-regulate by focusing the debate on the impact of convergence on content could have some adverse effects .
Mr Kuhne , of course I believe in recognising today 's evaluation of the importance of public broadcasting , but all the various areas must be included in this discussion , and on an equal footing .
We must create a favourable climate , so that everyone can find their own place in future developments , by which I also mean the future role of public and private broadcasting in this changed environment .
We are still in the first year of the discussion , which will extend over another two or three years with the further measures planned by the Commission .
So at this initial stage , I would urge that we do not block the way to further discussions by laying down rules that are too specific .
We are only at the beginning of our search for the best solutions for all the areas concerned .
Mr President , perhaps I might cite two topical examples of convergence .
Today we experienced a world - or at least a European - first . The Finnish Parliament 's ' debate on the future ' was broadcast live over the Internet .
Using my notebook computer , I was able to follow in real time here in Strasbourg .
Moreover , the promoters of Sami Radio in Finnish Lapland have designed a website . Now the Sami people in Sweden , Finland and Norway have a cheap and easy way of keeping in touch across the borders and exchanging news about what they are doing .
Samis account for four to five thousand of Finland 's five million inhabitants .
I am quoting these examples to illustrate the need for us media folk to stop thinking that , as long as we copy the Americans , everything will be fine .
Instead we should have the confidence to go our own way , offering variety and opening the door to all groups in society . Danish film producers have recently pointed us in the right direction .
It is our duty to ensure that minority groups have their own channels and that small producers are given the scope they need . Journalistic quality should be a priority .
More channel space will become available over time , and greater specialisation will increasingly be an option .
We need to prepare ourselves for less regulation , as several speakers have said .
We need common EU rules more than ever before .
This means more transparency in the telecommunications sector , especially with regard to tariffs .
This is certainly an exciting area and no one has all the answers . Dizzying developments are underway .
This partly explains why we in the ELDR Group cannot support the rapporteur 's Amendment No 13 , stating that TV will increasingly become the prime means of locating and processing information .
It is a pity we are not discussing Mrs Ryynänen 's report on the role of libraries in the modern world until Friday .
Lastly , I should like to inform the President and the rapporteur that Amendments Nos 1 to 4 in the Swedish version of the text make no sense at all .
Thank you , Mrs Thors .
We have taken note of your comments on the Swedish versions of the amendments .
That will be looked into .
Mr President , first and foremost , I wish to pay tribute to the rapporteur for the preparation and presentation of the report .
We cannot deny that developments in the telecommunications industry and in the information technology sector are verging on the astounding .
Examples of new products being delivered include home banking and home shopping over the Internet , Voice over the Internet , e-mail data and Worldwide Web access over mobile phone networks and the use of wireless links to homes and businesses to connect them to the fixed telecommunications network , web casting of news , sport , concerts and other audiovisual services .
Such developments represent concrete examples of an information society that has the potential to touch the lives of every citizen in the Union .
They also highlight the significant change and the range and diversity of traditional telecommunications and media services .
The changes described in the Green Paper have the potential to substantially improve the quality of life for all the citizens of Europe .
They will also have the effect of assisting the process of integrating the regions of Europe in the heart of the European economy .
Legislation by means of regulation must be introduced to oversee the working of the new evolving sector of e-commerce , because the general good might not always be protected if unfettered market rules were to apply .
On the separate but related matter of media pluralism , I support the recent initiative by the Irish Government to maintain free access to major sporting events for all viewers .
This is a commitment of the Irish Government and it is a programme for government , and legislation will be enacted , thereby giving pride of place to this important social objective .
Sport must remain an outlet for all people , regardless of class or background .
Legislation must be enacted which ensures the principle of equality of access for all prospective viewers to our important national sporting events , such as hurling and football , all-Ireland finals and , of course , the Irish Grand National .
We must recognise that the new multimedia conglomerates are continually endeavouring to buy up the rights of many sporting events worldwide .
The Member States of the Union must not lose sight of the fact that cultural and regional diversity can only be protected if national sporting events are accessible to all viewers who wish to see them .
Mr President , there is one aspect of this debate on the Paasilina report that I find especially important and should like to highlight .
This report was approved in committee by 49 votes for , 1 abstention and 2 votes against ( those of our group ) .
The reasons why we voted against it are very clear .
We believe that convergence in the sectors of telecommunications , the media and information technologies , in the framework of the information society , should not mean treating everything as if were merchandise , ignoring cultural specificities and identities , or calling into question the notions of creation and copyright , intellectual property or the fundamental concept of public service in this area .
We are quite convinced that our stand is the right one , which is why we have tabled eight amendments in keeping with the reasons why we voted against this report - apparently in a minority .
It is both curious and significant that the rapporteur has had the courage to table 16 proposals for amendments to his own report . We congratulate him on this as some of those amendments suggest that we are on the same wavelength , although we would not have chosen to word them as he has .
But these amendments refer both to the role of the authorities as an essential component of public service and the preservation of cultural diversity and we welcome that .
We shall therefore wait and see what fate the plenary has in store for these amendments before we decide which way to vote .
They reflect an approach that goes beyond merely looking upon these phenomena in terms of the economy or trade . That might restore to the text the stances taken by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media and the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment rejected by the Commission .
Mr President , tomorrow we will have to answer the main question posed by the Commission 's Green Paper : what will be the impact of the use of common technologies , particularly revolutionary ones , by the audiovisual and telecommunications sectors ?
One does not need to be a genius to imagine what consequences such a technological breakthrough will have on our daily lives , consequences that will not only be economic and legal , but also cultural and social .
Despite this , we must not be discouraged by the scale of the task . On the contrary , I welcome the fact that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has recognised the need for European regulations .
In this respect , I would like to offer my congratulations for the contributions from Mr Kuhn , the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture , whose work is an example of clarity and precision , and from Mr Hory who , in the Committee on Legal Affairs , led with intelligence and talent a thorough discussion on the legal implications of the issue .
We therefore need a clear separation between the regulations to be applied to electronic communication infrastructures and those relating to content .
Maintaining current Community regulations and setting up more flexible regulations for the mixed interactive services offered by the Internet fulfill the requirements of public interest and also the need to take cultural concerns into consideration .
This means that priority would be given to a combination of options 1 and 2 proposed in the Green Paper , as advocated at the Birmingham Conference .
However , we need to remain vigilant because technology moves faster than political decision-making and there is a great temptation , when faced with changing concepts , to strengthen competition law or make sacrifices to the religion of ultra-liberalism .
Moreover , the European Union , which has already lost the battle of Hollywood , is in danger of losing the battle of Silicon Valley if our various Member States do not realise the urgency of regaining technological control by putting in place a common multimedia policy .
We will thus belie the statement by Mrs Irina Magaziner , an adviser to President Clinton , declaring that the Internet is not an international resource , but the fruit of American investment .
Mr President , I want to start by offering my congratulations to my colleague , Mr Paasilinna .
I know how much careful preparation and extensive consultation has gone into his report . I commend him on it .
Colleagues , it is normal when considering issues like this to look to the future .
But I want to illustrate my own comments on Mr Paasilinna 's work and the Commission proposals by looking to the past , to a book written by Mark Twain called ' A Connecticut Yankee at the Court of King Arthur ' .
The Connecticut Yankee was a telephone engineer in America who sustained a blow to his head and was transported back to the time of King Arthur .
He used his skills and knowledge to intervene in the wars of that time , mainly to save his own skin - it has to be said - rather than from any philanthropic designs .
He understood from his own practical experience the importance of access to networks and services .
He knew , as does Mr Paasilinna , that these proposals are not just about technology , they are about how technology can address the needs of citizens and consumers .
But what the Connecticut Yankee did understand - I quote from the motion for a resolution - ' takes the view that the convergence of telecommunications media and information technology sectors must be reflected in European rule-making in such a way that inter-operability of various technologies is not hampered ' .
It is that point that I think was so crucial at the time of King Arthur and is going to be crucial not just in the future but now .
The Green Paper and the rapporteur can but guess at the speed of change .
Other speakers here have commented on how this whole world of telecommunications and broadcasting and transfer of data has changed in a relatively short time .
What seems very clear is that the market can deliver on some of this but there is a need for clear rules at European level about much of it to make sure that the European industry remains in the forefront of these changes .
The Connecticut Yankee was not particularly concerned about competition rules .
He had all the information and for understandable reasons he kept it to himself .
But the rapporteur - as well as this House and the Commission - is concerned that the rules are clear , that there is a price to pay for anti-competitive measures , but that the needs of citizens and consumers are not lost sight of .
I commend Mr Paasilinna 's report to you .
I also commend to both the Commissioner and the rapporteur - and anybody else who is interested - that you read Mark Twain 's work .
It was remarkably prescient and really repays reading .
Mr President , the Green Paper on convergence is devoted to an issue of great importance and , I believe , the main question it raises is that of three options for future regulatory work : the first is to extend existing regulations and keep the different sectors distinct ; the second is to create a new incremental framework for services as and when they become available ; and the third , more ambitious one is to create a new global framework .
I agree with Mr Paasilinna 's reasoning , and would refer in particular to the fourth paragraph of his conclusions , which inclines towards the third option , that of a global framework .
I believe in fact that within a reasonable time-span , perhaps not immediately , we shall have to move on from a legislative approach based on the means of transmission , the hardware , to one based on the type of transaction , and hence the user and the added value of the transaction .
In the meantime , however , work must continue both on updating the existing regulatory framework and on defining the new statutory framework requirements occasioned by the new media . I am thinking here of the Internet initiative launched by Mr Bangemann , which we shall be discussing at the next part-session .
Time is pressing , but very briefly , what two points must be taken into account in this move towards a global regulatory framework ?
The first is interoperability , in other words the promotion of open systems and standard platforms .
Even though Europe is not the leader in this sector , it must hold its head high , and I believe that the fifth framework programme will help it to do so .
The second rule is competition .
Whereas , on the one hand , the huge transmission capacity generated by digital technology will reduce the pressure on a shortage of transmission channels and on the public utilities , on the other hand new forms of public or private monopoly could arise - I refer in particular to the Microsoft case , which we are all currently following with interest - and the rules of competition might need to be reviewed in the light of new technological opportunities , so as to reorientate alliances along these lines .
Mr President , the Commission 's Green Paper presents some open options , but underlying them is a basic approach : that the convergence of modes of transmission would lead to the convergence of content .
This amounts to treating cultural works in the same way as any type of goods .
This liberal approach is of particular concern because it would have an adverse effect on creation , information and public service , and would end up calling into question cultural policies and legislation on authors ' rights and intellectual property .
The Paasilinna report recognises some of the risks and dangers of this approach , but it is based overall on the respect for competition law .
Moreover , it is significant that the positive amendments by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Committee on Culture have been rejected .
My group has therefore tabled amendments that are all based on the principle that cultural works , especially films and television programmes , cannot be treated like other products .
It is essential to maintain specific regulations for the audiovisual sector that are justified with regard to the issues of freedom of expression , pluralism , cultural diversity , minority cultures and preserving the public interest .
The current regulations , which need to be improved and not abolished , should be complemented with a directive on pluralism and the concentration of media that takes all forms of communication into account .
I would like to refer to what was said by one of Mr Bangemann 's own compatriots - to repay the Francophile approach he often shows towards me - , namely Walter Benjamin , if you will excuse my pronunciation : letting things take their course is a recipe for disaster .
They are his words and I agree with him .
By adopting these amendments , our Parliament will express its will to oppose the Commission 's ultra-liberal approach that contributed to the failure of the MAI , one of the objectives of which was , I recall , to liberalise the audiovisual sector .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am especially addressing the two of you , as you have a lot of experience of parliament and government , in order to draw your attention to the ridiculous situation that we are in .
We are debating the Paasilinna report , to which there are about 20 amendments from a certain Mr Paasilinna , on behalf of the Socialist Group .
I am wondering which is the real Paasilinna , Paasilinna I or Paasilinna II ?
It is like the films : Rambo I , Rambo II .
It must be a Nordic saga I do not understand .
But perhaps tomorrow the real Paasilinna will tell us what position the rapporteur Paasilinna intends to take on the Paasilinna amendments tabled to the Paasilinna report .
You must admit that , in the world of information technology , it is a little difficult to work it out !
Personally , I am in favour of Paasilinna I and against Paasilinna II .
I am saying this so it will be clear in everybody 's mind .
Aside from this exercise - which was not at all rhetorical , because it seems to me to be somewhat contradictory , Mr Paasilinna , as you must realise - , I would like to say that even Paasilinna I , which I personally support , seems to fall a little short of what we might have expected .
We are faced with a global challenge .
In Europe we have 20 million computers .
There are 70 million in the United States .
Silicon Valley is in the process of taking over all our minds , as my colleague Mrs Leperre-Verrier rightly said , and here we are , saying that maybe we could ...
We should have given Mr Bangemann a lot more scope to include this as a main point in the Agenda , in the interest of our countries , in the interest of research , etcetera .
I think this little report lacks ambition .
Mr Bangemann , I would like the White Paper to be a little more equal to the task , and to set out the huge challenge that we are facing .
Either we face it , or we will be dominated by the Americans in this field , too , as we already are in others .

Mr President , let me first of all commend this sterling report by Mr Paasilinna - although I should point out that some parts are not easy to comprehend in the Swedish translation .
How we move forward towards an information society is a very important matter , and I wish to make three points in this respect .
Developments are not moving at the same pace in the USA and in Europe ; the Americans are clearly ahead .
US companies are much more successful than their European counterparts .
Some people may wonder whether we should seek to offset Europe 's competitive disadvantage with some kind of development programme to help us catch up .
I think not .
The theory of comparative advantage teaches us that it is quite natural for a country to be ahead in certain sectors .
In return , other countries will be on top in other sectors .
Take the Nordic area , where we currently have two of the world leaders in mobile telephony .
I see no reason for concern that America is ahead on computers and the Internet .
My second point has to do with market regulation , which - as the rapporteur says - is not all bad .
Nor does it necessarily stand in the way of technological development .
In fact , evidence shows that regulation in a particular branch can actually boost innovation .
It is above all the Internet that needs attention , in my opinion . I am no advocate of regulation for regulation 's sake , but the Internet is an essential tool for certain new varieties of crime .
Standard use cannot sensibly be regulated , however .
It would be like trying to stop people in a crowd chatting to one another .
One watchdog per individual would be required .
Comprehensive Internet surveillance is just not possible ; every single computer would need monitoring .
The role of public service companies is the third area I wish to cover .
I am fully behind the rapporteur when he says that we must have a strong public service sector so as to prevent the commercial companies - whose taste is not always of the best - from taking over .
Throughout Europe and the USA , we have terrifying examples of how privately-owned media concerns , particularly in the television sector , are pursuing flagrantly political goals .
One does not have to be paranoid to realise that the concentration of ownership we now have poses a potential threat to democracy .
Mr President , both the Commissioner and Mr Paasilinna are tackling a difficult subject , and I pay tribute to their commitment and efforts in this field .
Technological developments proceed at such a pace that PCS , TVS and so on are able to do things which until recently we never thought possible .
But naturally there is also communication between the fixed and the mobile network , and we are seeing that it is possible to telephone via the cable system and so forth .
In short , traditional legislation is changing .
The answer is often technology-independent regulation , but I should like to ask the Commissioner if he could name any cases where technology-dependent regulation exists .
Mr President , the market players are involved in all kinds of integration processes , such as mergers , alliances , and the rest .
It is of course necessary to avoid the creation of huge monopolies or parties with a dominant market position .
The consumer 's choice must not be limited , and that is particularly important when access to the customers is via systems of conditional access or even decoders .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner if on that point he envisages strictly enforcing the rules of competition .
The UMTS , the successor to the GSM telephony which has been so successful in Europe , is an example of a convergence system .
Does the Commissioner know at the present time the situation regarding the allocation of frequencies in the Member States ?
I believe this to be of essential importance .
But convergence also involves international compatibility .
It is very important that the business community is now busy with this in the context of the Internet manual .
But what are we doing in the public field ?
What is the role of politics ?
Can the Commissioner explain the current role of politics in this field ?
Finally , it is a question of consumer confidence in the field of privacy .
I therefore believe that it is very important for the electronic signature directive to come before Parliament as quickly as possible , and I hope that vigorous efforts are being made to ensure that this is the case .
Mr President , I agree with our rapporteur that convergence is not a technical , legal or economic issue .
It is first and foremost political , and concerns individual rights , employment , cultural polymorphism and consumer protection , all of them issues which cannot be left to market forces .
However , with the public sector being unseated in the converging areas , the ever-shrinking world and the creation of huge , global monopolistic conglomerates through the many takeovers and mergers taking place , disquiet about what is happening to citizens ' rights is growing .
In light of these developments the Green Paper should first consider and highlight the connection between convergence and the way the market is being controlled more and more by monopoly interests , the prospect of vertical integration in the sector , the imposition of restrictive policies and the control of critical resources and services , and the consequences for employment and labour relations . It should indicate measures for the protection of the service as a whole , for people 's right to have access to a broad range of services , for the avoidance of artificial cost increases , etc .
Technological progress is necessary and one way or another advances will be made .
However , it is not right that citizens ' rights should be denied in its name and that the interests of the market and the monopolies should be put first .
Mr President , Mr Dell 'Alba has summarised my feelings about this debate very well .
He was , of course , far better able to do so than I could , because if I had put it the way he did , the rapporteur , who has done a remarkable job , and perhaps some others too , might feel offended .
This debate has brought to mind the first discussion we held on what we have called the information society .
At that time , exactly the same arguments were put forward : the information owners and non-owners , the social role of the public monopolies , the question of how to apply competition law , a whole catalogue of fears which have now proved groundless , when we look back at the information society , and in particular at telecommunications .
Mark Twain offers a good example . The success of market mechanisms takes me back to Huckleberry Finn , who was made to paint his fence .
He does so with such fervour and enthusiasm that all his friends who are watching think it must be so much fun to paint the fence that they offer him a few cents to allow them to paint too .
What this means is that we are not dealing here with the question of regulating , but with a development that has arisen from the needs of people and from technology .
Nobody , and I say this to Mr Kuhne , can define convergence .
You say in your opinion that we have not even defined it .
That is typical of the lawyer 's attitude , who wants a definition before he can do anything , instead of looking at life , at what really happens .
Convergence is not something that was defined by the Commission , or by myself as an ultra-liberal ; it is something that happens on a day-to-day basis .
To say that convergence , if it exists at all , relates only to technology and cannot relate to its content is fundamentally wrong !
Even now you can of course find content in what used to be called telecommunications that used to be found only on television .
One of the problems , Mr Kuhne , if I may say so , is that in discussions of this kind , the public television networks keep letting themselves be represented by people who once had dealings with them of one kind or another .
The rapporteur for the Federal Constitutional Court was the head of Norddeutsche Rundfunk , a public television corporation .
That is a hindrance to discussion .
Why ?
For example , you say that quality should be the deciding factor .
I can only reply that if you want to make quality the yardstick - and I am quite prepared to take the time to watch the television content produced by public corporations for nights on end with Mrs Pailler , indeed especially with Mrs Pailler - then you will have to ban half the programmes , at least half of them !
I am certainly optimistic in this respect .
Walter Benjamin for instance , if I am pronouncing his name correctly , was a total individualist .
He was , if you like , a left-winger in the broad sense of the term .
But he would never have been given a job in public television .
Never !
Because he was far more of an individualist than those people .
Then there is Mr Wibe , who has now left - it really is a bit much to put forward some kind of argument in a debate with the Commission and then to go away .
I find that appalling !
Anyway he said , well , we need the public broadcasters so that they can evaluate things in a politically neutral manner .
Of course there are private broadcasters who are political animals .
As we saw in Italy .
But there are also public broadcasters who push their political views , Mr Kuhne !
If I turn on the television instead of the radio in the morning and know after about three seconds that this can only be Westdeutscher Rundfunk , that is because of the political slant of that corporation !
So please do not try to argue that we need public broadcasting because of its political impartiality .
That is a total myth , nothing else , and it is misleading for the public !
What we have here today is something quite different .
I tried to point out during the first debate with Parliament that we should not let ourselves be drawn into this discussion .
In the first place , the public television companies have a right to exist .
Of course they have , if they are doing a job .
If you read the Amsterdam protocol properly you will see exactly what it says , namely that no treaty provision may be annulled ; of course it cannot .
The competition rules remain in force .
If the Member States want to apply the right to operate public companies , then they would be well advised to begin by defining what that public purpose is in the first place .
But I do not want to pursue this further , otherwise I will be making the same mistake you made , namely concentrating on this question .
The key question is a quite different one .
We are seeing closer convergence not only of the technology of various media and communications areas , but also , therefore , of content .
I do not know who said this , I think it was Mrs Thors , and Mr Hendrick also pointed it out , but of course today we can obtain all forms of content via the Internet .
We can telephone through the Internet .
The question that interests us right now is not how to guarantee the continued existence of public television companies .
That would be like having a discussion on agricultural policy in the context of economic policy in which every farmer asks whether his son can still be a farmer in the future .
Likewise , you go to a television company today and every journalist asks whether journalism has a future .
Can my son still become an editor or head of department in a public television company ?
Mr Wolf , a little while ago I accused you of vulgar Marxism .
You obviously took that very much to heart .
I do not know what this is about , perhaps vulgar corporatism or something like that .
But that is not the point .
The point is whether we can apply the rules we currently have in telephony to the provision and use of Internet telephone services .
The question is , according to what rules can purchasing agreements , for instance , be concluded on the Internet ?
As Mr van Velzen rightly pointed out , these are the real problems !
And does the report mention any of this ?
Not in the least .
You are chasing shadows , talking about things that will never happen !
Just as I said at the time about the deregulation of telecommunications , there will no disadvantages for the consumer .
On the contrary , when you look at telephone charges today - in fact they are no longer charges , they are prices - when you look at the various offers , you discover that everyone benefits greatly from this .
Meanwhile , the job losses that initially occurred with the earlier monopoly companies , because these were unproductive jobs , have actually been offset .
We still have a positive balance here today .
Mrs Pailler , as a member of a Communist party , you are quite right to consider this question .
We are counting on the creation of a substantial number of jobs in a few areas , including precisely the area of telecommunications , over the next few years .
We already have about 500 000 new jobs in the Union , and we reckon on another 1.5 million jobs by the year 2005 .
If we do not create the appropriate market conditions , we will simply find others trying to take over that market .
Today , if you want to accept an offer on the Internet , you will find it virtually impossible to identify the source of that offer , and if we want to make all this impossible by trying to apply the restrictive rules of traditional telephony , we might as well say goodbye to the whole business !
Then it will not happen here .
That is the real problem .
We asked questions about this in the Green Paper .
I admit that those to whom we sent the Green Paper were rather conservative in their replies .
They are - well , I do not want to insult anyone again , but it is nothing personal when I insult you .
I am quite prepared to work together with you , but your response to the Green Paper is inadequate , with a few exceptions , as a means of supporting us in our efforts .
Mr Gallagher ?
He is gone too .
The sporting events he described to us again with such aplomb are matters that have all been settled already .
There has been a European Union rule for more than a year now which leaves it up to the Member State to decide whether access to certain outstanding sporting events is free .
So that no longer needs saying here .
He puts it forward with great aplomb as a contribution to the debate , and a few people clap because it is such fun .
You could say that if Newcastle United played against - I can 't think of an Irish club at this moment - let us say some Dublin team , the game must be accessible to everyone .
Of course it must , we have already decided that .
That is not the problem .
The problem is that if this game is to be freely accessible , can it only be made accessible by a public company or could a private TV company do so too ?
These are the kind of questions that arise .
I was also told that first we must see how things develop , and then we would have to react as fast as possible .
True enough .
But we have two trends that we cannot control .
The first is the rapid development of technology , the other , as Carsten Hoppenstedt said , is that we are living in a global system .
That means we can no longer lay down rules for ourselves alone .
You have not yet realised , if I may say so , that the general , traditional regulatory framework we have is inadequate here , for two reasons .
Firstly , because we can never keep pace with the speed of technical progress .
We need at least two years to get a directive through , by which time , of course , everything may have changed entirely .
Secondly , if we did manage to keep pace with developments , we would never achieve global rules .
That is precisely why we are now trying to produce global rules for the Internet with the participation of private companies .
It would have been nice to have answers or contributions to the debate that could have helped us on our way .
I hope that will be the case in future discussions .
Mr President , many thanks to the Commissioner for what was a very colourful and arresting speech .
I would , however , say that there can be no information society without rights , either in Europe or the world at large .
That is something we want to assert strongly .
It is why we have traffic regulations and other rules .
There are no phantoms in the report , as you suggested , since we now have enormous international global companies that operate in these regions and spend larger sums of money than many EU Member States .
The big question is how we can work together so that both culture and business and firms both large and small can operate successfully .
For this reason we need some sort of framework .
I do not think we disagree on this issue .
It is an important one .
Mr Paasilinna , I did not dispute the fact that we need a regulatory system .
I said so myself at the end of my statement . We need a regulatory framework which is appropriate to technical progress , to its speed and to globalisation .
That is what we need .
It is a regulatory system .
But that is something different from the traditional rules , directives and regulations we normally produce here .
That is the problem .
Thank you , Mr Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Third stage of EMU
The next item is the report ( A4-0341 / 98 ) by Mr Giansily , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on foreign currency reserves in the third stage of EMU .
I give the floor to the rapporteur , Mr Giansily , for five minutes .
Ladies and gentlemen , what are the currency reserves of the central banks used for ?
This question was at the root of the debate we had in the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs and in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on this own-initiative report that I have the honour to present to you .
The first use of these reserves is to enable intervention in the exchange market when there are major disruptions and especially when there are attacks against the currency concerned , which are mainly massive sales of currency that cause the price to fall .
The second use is to cover balance of payments external deficits .
Having pointed this out , let us now look at what is stated in the Treaty establishing the European Central Bank .
In Article 30 ( 1 ) it states ' that the European Central Bank shall be provided by the national central banks with foreign reserve assets , other than Member States ' currencies , ECUs , IMF reserve positions and special drawing rights , up to an amount equivalent to 50 billion euros . '
Naturally , the removal of the need to have exchange reserves among the 11 currencies that , through the application of the principle of fungibility , will become subdivisions of the euro on 1 January , could lead us to believe that a substantial proportion of the reserves in question will become useless and that this supposed excess of reserves could be used elsewhere .
In other words , once the reserve of 50 billion euros has been set up - in fact , as 50 billion euros was planned for 15 countries , this sum is reduced to 40 billion euros for 11 countries , 39.46 billion euros to be precise - , we can estimate that the excess that will remain in the coffers of the banks that are members of the ESCB will represent around 400 billion dollars .
This is why one could , through a somewhat summary analysis , imagine that those funds might be redistributed on the economic circuit by massive injections into the markets of the reserves that have thus become useless .
I held the opposite opinion in the debates in the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and I would like to thank my fellow committee members for supporting me on this point , and particularly Fernand Herman , who improved my draft without actually altering it .
We must not , in fact , believe that the euro will be the sum of the 11 currencies that are going to be absorbed : it will be something else entirely .
It will be , above all , another great world currency , as President Jacques Chirac called it , and its role as an exchange stabiliser will be the first truly positive act in the world monetary system since President Nixon 's unilateral denunciation of the Bretton Woods agreements on 15 August 1971 .
The euro is a new currency , it has been well received by global operators since it has become clear that it is really going to come into circulation , and on the global monetary market it will find itself mainly in competition with the dollar , while the ESCB will have a reserve of 400 billion dollars .
Injecting massive amounts of the American currency into the market , with the risk of causing it to fall and thereby increasing the competitiveness of the products of our principal competitor on the world industrial and agricultural markets , would be completely counter-productive in economic terms .
We therefore need to be extremely cautious and , as a consequence , not lose sight of the fact that the quality of the euro will be assessed according to three main criteria .
The first of these will be the ability of the governments of the 11 countries involved to respect the stability pact and , consequently , to keep , dare I say it , the spirit of Maastricht alive .
The second will be the ability of the directors of the European Central Bank and the ESCB to give credibility to the management of this currency , notably through the amount of outstanding credit that will be granted .
The third will be the response in terms of reserves in the event of ' disfiducia ' concerning our new currency .
In this particular case , it is better to be envied than pitied and to preserve and keep what we have .
I will conclude with two points .
Our committee thus approves the decision dated 8 July to make an initial transfer in gold of 15 % of the exchange reserve assets from the national central banks to the European Central Bank .
The second point is that we also want a gold euro coin to be minted , the value of which is still to be decided , but which in the future would be an important marker in the general disorder that has been reigning for too long on the world capital market .
Mr President , one of the major changes which the euro will bring is that 11 countries which are strongly or very strongly exposed to exchange rate risks will immediately become a single zone which is only very slightly exposed to such a risk .
The average exposure to exchange rate fluctuations will be reduced by a factor of three , while foreign currency reserves will remain unchanged .
That is a luxury .
The other principal reason for keeping foreign currency reserves , namely a balance of payments deficit , will also not apply to the euro-11 zone .
Unlike the United States with its huge deficit , the EU in fact has a modest surplus .
Yet despite this large balance of payments deficit , the United States has relatively modest foreign currency reserves , opting to print new dollars instead .
This is all very well as long as there is no alternative to the dollar as a world currency .
The euro provides just such an alternative , and as a result the US will have to take a more critical look at its balance of payments deficit .
At the present time , with the global economy on the brink of crisis , this balance of payments deficit , which is just a symptom of an even greater US trade deficit , is the principal motor for the global economy .
Without the US deficits , the rest of the world would be unable to build up surpluses .
The privilege of being a global currency therefore also brings responsibilities in respect of the global economy .
In practice , the US helps provide liquidity in the world trade system , even if largely at the expense of the rest of the world , the so-called seignorage which comes with issuing the global currency .
The question now is whether or not Europe is prepared to take on , even if only in part , this role currently played by the United States .
The euro will certainly mean the end of an all-powerful dollar .
The euro will become a trading , monetary and reserve currency .
There will be seignorage and the euro will be stashed away in safes and socks .
The euro zone will grow rich at the expense of the rest of the world , but are we going to give the rest of the world anything in return , apart from a stable currency to hoard and to pay with ?
The answer could be yes , if the euro further appreciates in value .
Although this would not be good for the internal economy , as it would worsen our competitive position , it could prove necessary as a result of our global responsibility .
It would be the quickest route to a situation in which Europe would also contribute to economic recovery in Asia , the former Soviet Union and Latin America .
With a more expensive euro , our trading partners in the second and third world can more easily export themselves out of misery , just as Europe recently did by virtue of the high dollar .
But what has such a philosophy to do with the Giansily report ? A great deal .
Because the vast quantities of foreign currency reserves held by the European System of Central Banks , USD 400 000 million , would most certainly make the euro more expensive if they were released onto the market in large quantities .
The Giansily report argues against doing this at present , partly in the belief that a more expensive euro is undesirable at the present time .
I should like to see the surplus reserves released more quickly onto the market , because a more expensive euro can act as a much-needed additional motor for the international economy .
Also , because the euro zone is a much more closed economy than that of the 11 individual countries which comprise it , the euro zone will be better able to cope with a more expensive euro .
One thing is clear , however .
The euro will not automatically become a global currency .
We must also earn it , and have the courage to assume our global responsibilities .
Mr President , let me thank Mr Giansily for his excellent analysis and for his efforts to deal with a difficult subject .
The entry into operation of Economic and Monetary Union , and consequently too the European Central Bank 's assumption of responsibility for monetary policy , coincide with a period of exchange-rate fluctuations and pressures which , I would like to hope , are temporary but , as it seems , are not an isolated phenomenon but one that is fairly generalised and needs careful and prudent handling .
For that reason , the management of foreign reserve assets is extremely important from the very beginning .
In fact dealing with the crisis will entail coordinated action and international cooperation , which unfortunately does not seem to be happening at the moment , especially between countries whose currencies occupy an important position in the world economy .
So determination of the optimum level of foreign reserve assets will depend to a large extent on the efforts to stabilise the euro , particularly against the dollar .
It is also vitally important to lay down clear rules for the exercise of the powers granted by the Treaty to the national central banks , so that decentralised foreign exchange interventions can be effective and will not go against the objectives we hope to achieve .
Of course , the sums involved are not very large , and with the enormous volume of money that is circulating internationally , foreign exchange reserves sometimes appear too small to be able to withstand difficulties .
However , it should be noted that in the early stages of a profiteering raid , well organised and coordinated intervention by the central banks can have the effect of preventing profiteering from getting out of hand .
And this is precisely where foreign exchange reserves play a major part .
That is why we should not hurry to reduce them .
Reductions will be made by the national banks according to circumstances : if they see that the conditions require or allow a reduction of foreign reserve assets , they will reduce them .
If the conditions are otherwise , then they will naturally hold on to those assets .
Consequently , I think we should deal with the issue more calmly , in other words we should not propose reductions of foreign reserve assets until the situation becomes clearer and we are in a position to decide that there is no need for interventions of the type I mentioned earlier , which anticipate more general crises .
On the subject of utilising foreign reserve assets for other purposes , I must say that foreign reserve assets are not something we keep hidden in a drawer and which we can take out when we like and use for anything we want .
They are already resources in circulation , they are in use , countries have invested them , and consequently they are not just there like something that grows on trees , to be used as we wish .
I therefore think that we should have been rather more conservative in the amendments we tabled , and for that reason my group , having consulted those who introduced those amendments , would prefer not to adopt this rather superficial and premature approach to the problem .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , today we are discussing something quite sensational , namely that there is money in the bank and everyone seems to admit that it is in a sense money surplus to requirements .
We know from everyday experience that it is not that easy to get it out of the bank .
And what Mr Christodoulou said is quite true : we must look at the circumstances and not be too hasty .
But we really should accept the arguments Mr Metten put forward here , namely that an economic area which does away with the old concepts of external and internal trade and then , to be realistic , still has a foreign trade dependence of less than 10 % , does not need the same currency reserves as the pre-euro economic area , with its foreign trade share of somewhere around 60 % .
Secondly , the balance of payments is in fact positive , structurally positive , and that is no mere chance .
Consequently , it is important to realise that these two factors together produce a potential quantity of surplus money in the hands of the European system of central banks .
Of course we will not manage to get hold of it by breaking in with a crowbar - that would indeed be silly - but we shall have to liberate it and use it for purposes compatible with the aim of stabilisation in the euro zone , perhaps in the framework of the European Investment Bank .
I believe that is the point we are discussing today .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we share Mr Giansily 's point of view in that we are against reducing the reserve assets of the ESCB during the changeover phase to the introduction of the euro .
However , we share this point of view on the basis of an analysis that is not exactly in keeping with that of our rapporteur .
Mr Giansily expresses , in fact he endorses , an opinion that states that a level of exchange reserve assets of around 400 billion dollars would be excessive in terms of international standards .
However , one could question the nature or the relevance of the standards to which he is referring .
Obviously , the introduction of the euro , in a geographical area where trade will take place mainly between the participants , will reduce the need to cover possible external deficits .
We feel , however , that the need to have the ability to intervene in order to prevent disruptions on the currency markets has been underestimated .
It has been underestimated firstly in respect of the economic risk presented by monetary disruptions associated with the fluctuation of considerable flows of private capital ; we should recall that the loss of wealth through the devaluation of shares that followed the crisis that began in Asia a little over a year ago is estimated at between $ 1 600 billion and $ 3 500 billion . It has also been underestimated in respect of the role we believe the euro should play in stabilising monetary relations in the world and even in reorganising the international monetary system .
A significant stock of reserve assets is likely to act as an effective deterrent against monetary turbulence .
That is one of the main reasons , along with that set out by Mr Giansily , for ensuring that we do not give in to the temptation to reduce the reserve assets of the ESCB .
So monetary union will have the effect of transforming a fraction of the exchange reserves of the national central banks into internal assets .
We think that this fraction could be usefully employed in some cases to reduce public deficits or for investment spending that supports growth and employment .
This would in some way be a bonus for joining the euro that could make it even more acceptable to the citizens of the countries taking part and encourage those countries that are still reluctant to participate .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Giansily report explains extremely well how part of the reserves of the national central banks will be pooled in the future single currency system and how the relations between those banks and the European Central Bank will be organised in order to manage them .
Nevertheless , we would like to ask here for clarification on two points .
Firstly , what will be the exact relationship between the ECB and the national central banks with regard to the management of the free reserves , that is , the reserves that fall outside the 39.46 billion euros that will be placed at the disposal of the Central Bank , in accordance with the Statute ?
Article 31 of the Statute of the ESCB mentions the possibility of authorisation from the European Central Bank for the most significant operations carried out by the national central banks .
This authorisation is therefore provided for in the Treaty , but it is quite an outrageous procedure concerning reserves that , in principle , remain entirely the property of the Member States .
We would very much like to know at least what the limits are .
Secondly , will exchange reserves in gold be physically transferred to Frankfurt or not ?
The Giansily report is not entirely clear on this point .
It leaves the issue open to several interpretations .
You know , Commissioner , that the French Minister for Economic Affairs , Dominique Strauss-Kahn , took a very clear position on this before the French National Assembly .
When he was questioned on 31 March by members of our Assembly 's committee on finance , he stated very reassuringly that the ECU 50 billion that is the sum of the contributions to the European System of Central Banks will remain the property of the various Member States .
He then added that only the management of the reserves was transferred and that for the currencies and bonds concerned , it is only a matter of simply signing them over , while the gold will stay in the cellars of the Banque de France , without even being physically transferred .
I would therefore like us to be equally reassured of this at a European level and to be given confirmation that there will be no physical transfer , as this does not seem to me to be essential , from a technical point of view , for the smooth running of the system .
Finally , I would like to take this opportunity to recall that , two months away from the introduction of the euro , some very important issues have still not been clarified , such as the exact degree to which the Council is involved in defining the exchange-rate policy , the democratic control of monetary union or the resolution of liquidity crises .
These ambiguities obviously reflect , in my opinion , structural defects .
The International Monetary Fund has recently expressed its concern about this , stating that there will be an increase in systematic risks to the banking system at the time when the single currency is introduced , due to the fact that a large number of important decisions have not been taken .
To conclude , we do not know where we are going , but we are going anyway .
This seems to be the motto of our politicians , who are caught up in the spiral of their so-called irreversible commitments to the single currency .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Giansily on his balanced report and agree with him that the extremely high currency reserves may act as a necessary safety net during the transitional period .
A successful speculative attack on the single currency during this phase could in effect have serious implications for the European economy and do considerable damage .
It is clear , however , that surplus currency reserves of up to USD 200 billion must not remain unused in the long term .
In my view , it is therefore quite legitimate to begin considering even at this stage how this money could be used in future to combat the high unemployment rate in Europe .
In any event , it would be unjustifiable to leave it lying around unused any longer than is absolutely necessary .
Everybody knows that neither the Community nor most of the Member States have enough funds for research .
Here the situation is markedly better in the United States and Japan .
With more support for research and innovation , we could manage to make our firms more competitive and thereby give impetus to employment policies .
In particular , this would enable us to strengthen the SMEs - which form the backbone of the EU - in terms of technology and also make them more competitive .
So let me conclude by calling for the surplus currency reserves to be targeted at practical research programmes , when the time comes , so that we can successfully tackle our main problem , namely massive unemployment .
Mr President , Mr Castagn & # x010D ; de is right , the reserves are not only necessary for settling international payments .
They are necessary , too , in order to intervene in the markets and they also serve to offset the issuing of the currency .
So people are wrong when they think that the reserves can be put back into the budget to be used for something else .
That money does not belong to the State , or to the budget , but to the banks .
Even when the banks are completely nationalised , in order to reduce reserves , there has to be a reduction in the currency circulation that offsets it .
So for goodness ' sake , let us think a little about the basic workings of the currency in Europe .
Before using money that is not there , for political objectives , we must take account of how the current banking system actually works .
Having said that , I completely support Mr Giansily , especially as at the start , when we still do not know how things are going to develop , it is essential to have a minimum amount of reserves in order to be able to play the markets .
I know that it will be rather through changes in interest rates that we will be able to influence prices , but we also know that it is better to have several strings to our bow than just one .
If it broke , we would be left with nothing .
But when we have considerable reserves here , we can intervene if the manipulation of or changes in interest rates are not enough to deter some speculative attacks on the future euro .
This , Mr President , is why I completely support the Giansily report and we will vote in favour of most of the other amendments that have been tabled , apart from taking account of the fact that some of them could be modified in order to take the international economic climate into consideration .
Mr President , the creation of the euro zone means that the Member States with a relatively very open economy will immediately be part of a relatively closed economy .
As a result , a large part of the present official external reserves will in time prove to be superfluous .
In due course , they can therefore be disposed of .
But it must be done in a way which does not cause market turbulence .
Care is required .
The European System of Central Banks must be on its guard .
There is no reason to suppose that it will not be .
In this respect , the resolution we have before us supports the proposed policy .
Part of the problem will solve itself .
Around one quarter of the present official external reserves are in currencies which will be converted into the euro .
From 1 January 1999 these will no longer be part of the reserves , but internal resources .
There is no question of them being used to pay off the national debt .
Monetary financing is in any event prohibited by the Treaty .
In this debate , we must be careful not to be solely concerned with a euro which is valued too high against the US dollar .
In fact , a relatively strong euro stimulates US imports and hinders European exports , while a weak euro is very attractive for US companies contemplating merging with or even taking over European companies , which is not the intention either .
We believe there is one conclusion to be drawn from this : the internal price stability of the euro must always be the priority .
The euro 's external value is the result of monetary policy .
Depending on the possibilities offered on international currency markets , the official external reserves can be reduced to a lower level .
Payments to international organisations , such as the United Nations and the International Monetary Fund , are an excellent means of doing this .
But we must always remain very attentive to the impact of this on exchange rates .
The necessary changes having been made , this also applies to reducing the gold reserve .
I do not much like the idea of a gold euro coin - it would be a strange symbol of European unity .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Giansily on his judicious report .
The report concludes that the 330 billion in foreign reserves can ultimately be reduced .
I agree .
The American Federal Reserve Bank keeps relatively smaller reserves , and in the future the US situation will be comparable to that of Europe .
The Federal Reserve adopts a policy of benign neglect with regard to the dollar 's external value , comparable to what is expected to be the approach of the European Central Bank .
In terms of openness and exports , the US economy as a bloc is also comparable to the future euro zone .
The central banks themselves also have cause to keep an efficient quantity of foreign reserves , since in future part of the income from foreign reserves will be added to the reserves of the national banks .
In the Netherlands , the ratio is 95 % to 5 % , with 95 % going to the state .
A less than optimal mix will result in reduced transfers to the reserves .
But foreign reserves are necessary .
At the end of December 1998 , it may be possible to intervene on a large scale on foreign currency markets against the agreed rates .
Until that time German marks , French francs and so on can be used .
After that , the European Central Bank will start to apply its monetary policy .
Assets in German marks and French francs will then automatically be domestic assets .
But a considerable proportion will remain in dollars and gold .
For the durability and credibility of the bank , it may be important to keep significant reserves .
I should like to ask the Commissioner to what extent he has received signals that the financial markets believe in the rates which have been established .
One more very urgent matter , Mr Commissioner .
There is already some discussion in the Netherlands of how the euro coins and notes are going to be introduced .
The scenario of the legal big bang , which is supported by the Dutch Parliament , makes it necessary to distribute euro coins and notes before 1 January 2002 when they are not yet legal tender , in the same way as a tourist buys pesetas before going to Spain .
He is not yet able to use them .
This so-called ' frontloading ' requires permission from the Central Bank .
Will the Commission and the European Central Bank try to reach a speedy and positive decision on this point ?
For the rest , I am indeed in favour of gold coins , and precisely for that reason , Mr Blokland .
I should like to thank the rapporteur for this fine report .
Commissioner , it has been said , with slight Gallic exaggeration , that the introduction of the euro is the most important event which has taken place in Europe since 1917 .
It is certainly true , however , that we Europeans have been absorbed by the internal repercussions of the euro and have been slow to consider its external impact .
Conditions inside and outside the Union have changed since the Washington Conference two years ago , at which these matters were first raised , and even since the spring , when the decision on the countries to be included in the first group was taken .
Forecasts for growth have been revised downwards , as a result of the Asian crisis , the Russian crisis , the Latin American crisis and the fall in the value of the dollar , as the Commissioner has mentioned this very afternoon .
In these circumstances , we should be glad that the report recommends prudent handling of the reserves .
The key question , Commissioner , is this : in these circumstances , what action has to be taken to ensure that the euro does not become too expensive and does not make our exports dearer , threatening jobs ?
In the present situation , prudent handling of the reserves alone will not suffice to save us from such consequences . Development has already been slowed down enough .
As the report states , what is required now is greater coordination between the governments concerned , and between European governments and the governments of countries outside the Union regarding the management of the international monetary system .
It will be difficult to achieve such coordination until the euro makes its presence felt on the wider political scene . It will be difficult too to review the system or set up a system like Bretton Woods until the euro is managed by a political authority , until we install a pilot at the helm of the vessel we are about to launch .
I shall begin by congratulating Mr Giansily on his magnificent report with which I agree .
Apart from some more technical problems , the main concern when the reserves of the European Central Bank are created must be the dollar reserve assets at its disposal .
They come to an enormous amount , some US $ 400 billion , the ' legacy ' of the reserves of the various national central banks .
No useful or immediate use can be found for them , if we bear in mind that trade between euro-countries will no longer be external trade .
Realistically , we might foresee the need , even in the future , for between US $ 50 billion and 200 bn , i.e. only one eighth or , at most , one half of what is at the Bank 's disposal .
We must not be tempted by any objective , however noble , for using these reserves at once , flooding the world markets with dollars and drastically reducing that currency 's value against the euro .
A strong euro might be attractive for prestige 's sake but we must also maintain the competitiveness of the European economy .
Realistically that would be jeopardised if the euro were to be over-valued .
The European business community would react against such a move and that would lead to less investment and , in turn , to fewer jobs .
The credibility of a currency , after all , does not depend only on very high parities .
If it is to be genuinely and durably credible its parity must be the right one externally , which in turn will depend on its internal stability . We must therefore do all we can to ensure that the stability and growth pact is achieved , as the rapporteur rightly stressed .
... but his plans to use some of the reserves of the euro zone Member States ' central banks - an idea shared , as it happens , by Lionel Jospin - for taking a major political initiative to boost economic recovery in Europe , with job creation as the main target , fail to provide the necessary safeguards .
That is mainly because the proposal still applies very little rigour to the so-called surplus currency reserves of the European System of Central Banks .
It is true that , with the advent of the euro and stage three of Economic and Monetary Union , the exchange risk inherent in transactions using national currencies will be considerably reduced .
It is also true that most external trade will be transformed into internal trade , because it will take place within the euro zone itself , drastically reducing the need for currency reserves as a means of international payment .
But the exact size of that surplus is still a mystery .
Figures quoted range from US $ 50 billion to as much as US $ 300 bn .
Nor can it be ascertained for sure that reserves are the same as surpluses , especially since sizeable reserves set up in DEM will automatically be converted into euros as of 1 January next , and will no longer be regarded as currency reserves .
They will become internal assets .
On the other hand , it will not be easy to violate the broad autonomy granted to the national central banks for managing their own reserves , and make them use those reserves in specific ways to suit the political decisions taken by the Member States ' governments .
This all suggests that the right strategy will prevail , namely a hands-off approach to the management of assets held by the ESCB . That would reduce the risk of a sharp depreciation of the dollar against the euro , something that would be disastrous for exporters in the European Union .
Maintaining a significant volume of currency reserves in dollars and yen will undoubtedly be the best safeguard for preventing the speculative turmoil that might hit international financial markets in this stage of transition towards the euro . That will enable stability measures to be taken so that the euro can earn prestige , based on soundness and credibility , as a major international reference currency .
Mr President , I promise to give as global and as brief a speech as possible , and I thank you for agreeing to prolong this debate slightly .
Ladies and gentlemen , at a time when the European Central Bank is establishing how it is going to function , it is right that Mr Giansily is calling on you to discuss the problem of currency reserves in the third stage of EMU .
First of all , I must point out that I am speaking here today without prejudice , of course , to the position of the European Central Bank , which , under Article 105 , is responsible for managing the reserves .
I do not wish to interfere with the independence of this institution .
In general , the Commission agrees with most of the analysis made by the rapporteur .
However , there is one point on which I would like to speak , as it could cause problems for us . It is the question of the optimum level of exchange reserve assets .
Of course , there will no longer be a need to intervene in the exchange markets in order to stabilise exchange rates between the currencies of the participating countries , and this obviously removes the need to keep reserves for this purpose .
However , moving from that position to deducing that the total amount of reserves held by the ESCB will be higher than the optimum level of exchange reserve assets requires a step to be taken , and I hesitate to take that step , because we are not sure how we should estimate an optimum level of exchange reserves .
Mr Wolf , exchange assets are not superfluous money lying dormant in the coffers of the national central banks , and as I think Mr Herman rightly pointed out , the amount should not be exaggerated and its usefulness should not be underestimated .
I think that , in the context of the euro area , to answer this question we need to consider a series of factors .
Firstly , even after the introduction of the euro , on 1 January 1999 , the exchange reserves of the euro area will still be considerably less than those held by the main Asian countries .
I am thinking here , for example , of China , whose ratio of exchange reserves to external trade will be twice that of the euro area .
However , China does not have a convertible currency .
Secondly , for industrialised countries at least , the traditional link between the volume of international trade and the level of exchange reserves needed is in any case extremely difficult to establish for reasons associated with free movement and the liberalisation of capital movements .
I have consulted a whole series of studies in order to try to estimate , to quantify , the surplus level of reserves within the ESCB .
I have seen results that vary from zero to 200 billion euros - 200 billion dollars - , and that is the how vague the results are .
The third important factor is that the national central banks will adjust their balance to the introduction of the euro .
The changeover to the euro will therefore automatically diminish the reserves in European central banks for purely technical reasons , notably the removal of reserves in currencies that are going to become part of the euro , for example , the reserves of German marks in the Banque de France .
Fourthly , high exchange reserves are an effective means of maintaining the banking system with its structural need for liquid assets .
By definition , this is essential for the sound running of monetary policy and for defining interest rates .
The fifth factor is that a high level of reserves in the ESCB will contribute to its credibility , which is absolutely essential at the launch .
It would be inappropriate for us to now reduce that credibility , especially considering the turbulence that we are experiencing on the financial markets .
I would like to remind you , and particularly Mr Metten , that if the credibility of the ESCB were affected , the credibility of the euro would also be affected , and this could , in fact , lead to a rise in interest rates , which is completely the opposite result to what we are seeking by introducing the euro .
You can be assured that the reserves are not there to turn Europe into an international powerhouse , but if there is a need to inject liquid assets into the system , there are other means of doing it apart from liquidating the reserves , which would affect the credibility of the currency .
I think , however , that this point was strongly and rightly highlighted by your rapporteur .

To conclude , while congratulating Mr Giansily on his serious analysis and cautious conclusions , I would like to point out that in this field - and I think this was highlighted by Mr Christodoulou , who is more skilled than I am in this respect having been the governor of a central bank - , only experience will allow us to decide on the appropriate level for exchange reserves , and this is principally the work and the responsibility of the ESCB .
The Commission therefore has every confidence that this task will be adequately carried out by the members of the Governing Council of the Central Bank .
Thank you , Mr de Silguy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 7.25 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Protection of workers
The next item is the report ( A4-0353 / 98 ) by Mr Correia , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Directive amending for the second time Directive 90 / 394 / EEC on the protection of workers from the risks related to exposure to carcinogens at work ( COM ( 98 ) 0170 - C4-0310 / 98-98 / 0093 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report deals with the Commission proposal amending for the second time Directive 90 / 394 / EEC on the protection of workers from the risks related to carcinogens at work .
The main purpose of this proposal is to extend the scope of the existing Directive to include hardwood dusts ( oak and beech ) , category I and II mutogens and vinyl chloride monomer .
Pursuant to Article 118A of the Treaty on European Union , the Council must adopt , by means of directives , the minimum provisions to promote the improvement of working conditions and guarantee workers the highest level of health and safety protection .
We welcome any initiative taken to achieve that and this is one such initiative .
It is , however , a shame that the Commission did not take this opportunity to broaden the scope of the directive even further to consolidate the provisions of Directive 83 / 477 / EEC on wood dust . The failure to amend the established general framework means that significant difficulties would arise should the Member States or the Court of Justice opt for a restrictive interpretation of the provisions of that directive .
Furthermore , under the terms of Article 118A , we are supposed not to impose any ' administrative , financial and legal constraints which might inhibit the development of SMEs ' .
During discussions on this report , we were told by the Commission representative that an impact study had been carried out into these constraints but , as far as we know , it has not been published . We do not therefore know what the consequences of the publication of this directive might have on SMEs .
It was against this background that we tried , with welcome help from other Members of Parliament , to reconcile workers ' inalienable right to health with the desirability of financially healthy businesses , with special emphasis on SMEs , the main job creators , but also not forgetting the major industries in this sector .
Nor could we overlook the fact that in the European Union there are more than 42 000 industries , the overwhelming majority SMEs , employing around 1.9 billion workers .
At a time when the main priority is fighting unemployment we must create tax and financial incentives or derogations to make sure that costs of applying this directive are kept as low as possible and do not fall solely on the shoulders of the entrepreneurs , as that would have a knock-on effect on their workers . Any bankruptcies caused would naturally lead to job losses .
As to protecting workers ' health , which is the main focus of our approach , we understand that the Commission will have to take into account - as it rightly proposes - levels which are about average for the limit values encountered at the workplace .
We should mention in passing that there are no accurate scientifically proven figures - opinions vary from 2 to 20 mg per m3 .
The choice of 5 mg / m3 is not based on any scientific evidence but it seems to me to be pitched about right .
We cannot say the same of the types of wood covered by this proposal for a directive .
Although it has been scientifically proven that oak and beech dust may be carcinogenic and , when inhaled , cause nasal adenocarcinomas , we think that , given the biochemical similarities of various other hardwoods , and based on estimates , this directive should as a preventive measure include all hardwood types - which does not mean that research into the potential carcinogenicity of wood dust when inhaled should not be continued , as long as it is extended to cover all types of wood .
We have tabled some amendments to the Commission text on the basis of these arguments .
Bearing in mind that the vote in the Committee on Social Affairs on these amendments was unanimous , we hope that the Commission will accept them and amend its initial proposal .
Finally , I should like to thank everyone who contributed to my report .
I welcome this report from Mr Correia because I know that considerable hard work has gone into it .
Health and safety is not the most popular pastime in the European Parliament , but within the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs Mr Correia has spent some time developing what I hope will be a future career in this area .
The committee has achieved certain compromises which , I believe , will effectively win a proper vote in plenary this week .
The carcinogenic effects of hard wood , as we have just heard , have been of the greatest concern to the European Union 's Member States .
The fact that we now embrace all hard woods in this particular directive is a sensible start .
The limit values which have been set , as Mr Correia indicates , are for a common European standard .
Of course each Member State will be able to set standards much higher than that - that is up to them , but one thing is quite clear : this is something which will be revised in years to come and which , I am sure , we will all wish to revisit in order to be able to accord the highest standards to workers in the industry across the European Union .
This is nevertheless a start .
I will say that in terms of those compromises financial assistance for such changes is something which will perhaps cause some concern , and maybe the Commission may respond to that particular issue .
We have clearly indicated that we can no longer tolerate the carcinogenic effects in these particular industries where the mass production of wood dust which people breathe in clearly leads to the mutagens which cause unidentified mass illness and sickness within our Community every year for many of our unprotected workers .
I would like to end here with a quick remark to say that Mr Correia has spent a difficult and courageous time discussing this in committee at times and I commend his report to all here today .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposal for the carcinogens directive to include exposure to wood dust from oak and beech wood is an excellent one .
There is good reason to adopt this approach .
Directives have to be supplemented as we acquire more scientific evidence , such as the evidence we have now obtained on oak and beech wood .
As for other hardwoods , we can state , on the basis of research , that they are likely to have carcinogenic effects on human beings , but that has yet to be conclusively proven .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has decided to apply the precautionary principle in this matter and propose that the directive cover all hardwood trees .
There is , however , no such proof in respect of softwood trees .
These produce a softer wood than the harder deciduous trees , which makes their dust less harmful .
For example , there is still no scientific evidence to suggest that there is any danger of cancer with Finland 's main industrial timber types : pine , spruce , and birch .
Naturally the directive will have to be amended again if we acquire new data on these .
However , it is hardly worth broadening the directive to include all species of tree at this stage , as there is no evidence to justify doing so .
We nonetheless have to remember that possible carcinogenicity is not the only problem with wood dust .
All wood dust causes health problems , such as allergies , but this is an area outside the scope of the directive .
The Commission finally proposed a limit value for hardwood dust of five milligrams per cubic metre , which is very high .
In many countries that will not mean any change at all to the situation that already exists .
Our committee , however , agreed to the high limit value once it had received an assurance from the Commission that the value would be amended downwards .
We did hear that such a proposal might appear even within the next two years .
If the health of workers is to be protected at the workplace , there must be an assurance that people at work are in no way exposed to carcinogens .
Whatever limit value is set , with the obvious exception of zero , means we are giving our approval to a situation where workers ' health is at risk .
In setting limit values there are always compromises between workers ' health , on the one hand , and the economic and technical consequences of worker protection , on the other .
Now that wood dust is covered in the directive on carcinogens we can only hope that the Commission will produce new proposals as speedily as possible to supplement this directive and lower the limit values set .
Mr President , my group , the Greens , is delighted that this directive is being extended to cover wood dust and hard woods .
The text we have before us is now very good indeed , thanks to the combined efforts of the rapporteur and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
I particularly appreciate the call for fixed limit values . Numerous studies have revealed that workers are constantly at risk as things stand .
And not only from the types of wood cited in the Commission 's proposal ; all hardwoods cause problems .
We cannot be sure either that softwoods are not carcinogenic , as Mrs Ojala said .
We need to establish the facts and then take action where necessary .
The tenor of Amendment No 1 is somewhat disturbing . The implication is that jobs and employees ' health are at odds with one another .
Transition periods and derogations should never be used as an excuse for not doing what needs to be done . Nor should they be a means for companies to wriggle out of investing in resolving the problems .
Society only ends up footing the bill - not to mention the cost in terms of human misery .
I really do not like the wording of Amendment No 1 .
Mr Pronk argued that companies should be given no assistance with redesigning premises and making the necessary adaptations .
That is quite the wrong approach , in my view .
It is Union policy , after all , to apply the precautionary principle .
That could well mean offering help to companies to remove carcinogenic substances from the workplace .
The Greens will be voting in favour of this report .
Mr President , there is still a need for minimum directives in the field of the working environment , so I am glad that the Commission has taken this initiative .
But the Commission proposal to amend the cancer directive is far from satisfactory .
The Commission proposes that the directive should be extended to include work involving wood dust from beech and oak .
That is quite unacceptable .
The Scientific Committee has concluded that dust from other tree species is in all probability also carcinogenic .
I therefore urge you to vote for dust from all woods to be covered by the directive .
A person exposed to wood dust runs a serious risk of developing cancer of the nose , chronic bronchitis and allergies .
We should help to ensure that European employees get real protection from this risk .
If there are doubts as to the carcinogenic effect of a substance , we should apply the precautionary principle .
Besides , it is difficult in practical work at a plant to have different safety arrangements for different types of wood dust .
The Commission proposal for a maximum value for wood dust of 5 mg per cubic metre is also unjustifiable from a health point of view .
The Commission does not explain why it has opted precisely for 5 mg .
The Scientific Committee has not given an opinion on the matter .
It is thus not possible to set a maximum value on the basis of any assessment from the Committee .
It is therefore appropriate to refer to the maximum values applied in the Member States .
In many Member States , the limit is much lower than the 5 mg proposed by the Commission .
Experience from these countries shows that it is a relatively simple matter in purely technical terms to adhere to these limits .
It can also make sense economically .
Danish studies have shown that , by halving the maximum value from 2 to 1 mg , it is possible to save considerable amounts on the cost of hospitals , absenteeism and early retirement .
It is of course a minimum directive , so Member States with lower limits will not be forced to raise their maximum values , but we must still work to ensure that workers throughout Europe get the best possible protection , especially when such serious diseases as cancer are involved .
We must therefore , at the very least , oblige the Commission to examine the question of lowering the maximum values as early as two years after the directive has been implemented .
We have also achieved a reasonably good compromise in committee , so I urge you to vote for the report since , in many ways , it represents an improvement on the Commission proposal . I would also like to praise the rapporteur for a job well done .
Mr President , I would like to extend my warmest thanks to the rapporteur for the good job he has done .
The European Parliament places a high value on the protection of health , as does the second amendment of this directive .
While the other issues are relatively easy to resolve , the problems of hardwood dust are more difficult .
A strict interpretation of the term by Member States , in so far as one is technically possible , could not only signify an end to furniture production , but could also pose a threat to the production of hand-crafted work .
Within a context of globalisation , the EU cannot cut jobs by laying down excessive requirements , which would lead for instance to the creation of yet more jobs involving higher health risks for workers in third countries .
That would not make sense .
The technical expenditure that is being called for should therefore be commensurate with the resulting protection of workers ' health .
It would also of course be logical to do further research into possibly improving the way in which limit values are fixed .
A solution is not possible without transitional periods .
According to one of the rapporteur 's amendments , Member States may need to provide financial assistance .
The SMEs affected do not by any means receive assistance , however , because if one Member State helps out its companies a great deal , and another cannot or does not want to do this , then a huge distortion in competition could arise .
That is why I would ask the Commission to make sure that the technical requirements and the limit values remain within a range that can be respected , and that the Union provides appropriate support so that conditions end up being more or less equal everywhere . Ultimately we do not want a situation where workers enjoy excellent protection against carcinogens and hardwood dust as a result of the new version of Directive 90 / 394 , but at the same time have no work because their company has had to shut down due to the excessive requirements .
That is not what the amendment of this directive is trying to achieve .
However , I will , of course , be voting in favour of this report .
Mr President , the report says that wood dust is a substance that causes cancer , but completely fails to mention an even more important substance in this connection , asbestos .
Its use is allowed in Belgium , for example .
It would have been easier for the Berlaymont to hoover up wood dust rather than having to take years and years to dispose of sheets of asbestos .
What is the situation with the new Parliament building with regard to asbestos ?
Asbestos is a notoriously dangerous material .
During the first years of the new millennium more than ten thousand people will die from diseases caused by it , mainly lung cancer , every year .
Asbestos can be effectively replaced by other materials that have the same properties but which are considerably safer .
Why has this not been done ?
The use of asbestos in new applications is already banned in the Nordic countries , in Germany , the Netherlands and France .
The Commission , however , for one reason or another , has dragged its feet in deciding to ban the use of asbestos .
If the Commission allows its continued use in new applications , national bans will no longer be able to prevent the importation of machinery and equipment that pose a risk in terms of asbestos .
I have asked the Commission what progress has been made in drafting a directive to ban the use of asbestos in new applications .
Urgent decisions have to be taken precisely because asbestos is so dangerous .
In addition , certain manufacturers use asbestos as a competitive tool against safe but more expensive substitutes .
People 's health should take priority and it is about time these urgent decisions were taken .
The directive is being drafted but the investigation stage is taking up too much time .
The experience of many countries over many years should vouch for the use of substitute materials .
Mr President , if we support the social dimension of the European Union , we must give it practical expression by giving priority to the protection of the health and safety of workers .
I support the extension of the existing directive on carcinogens to include dust from oak and beech wood , category 1 and category 2 mutagens and vinyl chloride monomer .
I also support the rapporteur 's view that the directive should cover wood dust from all types of hardwood .
Some may argue that sufficient scientific evidence has not been produced to justify this .
I dispute that approach .
Often action is taken too late in relation to health and safety matters .
In this context it is much better to be ultra cautious .
To put it quite simply , I would suggest that it is better to be safe in the short term than sorry in the long term .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Correia for his excellent report , as well as the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for the constructive way in which it has examined the proposed amendment to the directive on the protection of workers from the risks related to carcinogens .
The aims of the proposal are relatively straightforward .
First of all , we wish to extend the scope of the directive so as to include dust from certain types of wood , and category 1 and 2 mutagens .
This is an important initiative within the Community 's efforts to guarantee better protection of workers from the risks related to carcinogens at work .
Secondly , with a view to simplification , we are taking this opportunity to incorporate the provisions of the Council directive on vinyl chloride monomer into the directive on carcinogens .
I am pleased to say that the Commission can accept most of Parliament 's amendments since they help to make the proposal more effective .
I am referring to Amendment No 3 , the first part of No 5 , and Amendments Nos 6 , 7 , 8 , 10 and 11 .
I shall explain briefly why , in contrast , the other amendments are not acceptable .
Amendment No 1 stipulates that the provisions relating to wood dusts will only apply to existing places of work after a transition period .
Mr Pronk touched on this point among others .
In the Commission 's opinion , the time granted in the draft directive for undertakings to make technical adaptations to their workplaces is adequate .
Amendment No 2 , referred to by Mr Skinner and Mrs Schörling among others , proposes that the Member States should provide undertakings with financial assistance to help them meet their obligations .
If a Community instrument were to impose such a duty on Member States , it would conflict with the principle of subsidiarity .
What is more , it would set a precedent and , in our opinion , it would be a mistake to suggest subsidising employers to fulfil their responsibilities in terms of the health and safety of their workers .
Amendment No 4 sets out to fix limit values for wood dust at a level which rules out any risk to workers .
We have every understanding for the underlying idea here , but , given the characteristics of carcinogens , we should not fix unrealistic limits .
The Commission 's proposal puts forward a workable limit in this regard .
The second part of Amendment No 5 is deemed superfluous , given that the Commission accepts the first part of this amendment .
My final comment relates to Amendment No 9 : it is unacceptable to the Commission because the date of entry into force of the directive must coincide with the repealing of the directive being replaced .
Finally , I take note of Mr Pronk 's interesting suggestion of examining the feasibility of grouping together various directives .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Insurance
The next item is the report ( A4-0307 / 98 ) by Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens Rights , on the draft Commission interpretative communication on freedom to provide services and the general good in the insurance sector ( SEC ( 97 ) 1824 - C4-0049 / 98 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , to come straight to the point , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights welcomes the Commission 's initiative .
The single European market has created an integrated financial market , and this has lead to increased competition and the free movement of persons and capital in Europe .
Of course this also impacts on the insurance industry , where existing barriers have to be broken down gradually .
On 1 July 1994 , the ' third-generation ' insurance directives came into force , creating the conditions for an insurance undertaking to do business in the entire territory of the Community .
The single market in insurance is based on the principles of mutual recognition and uniform authorisation , and makes it possible for insurance companies that are registered and authorised in one Member State to do business in any other Member State in the context of freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services .
Prior inspection of contract conditions and premium rates has been dropped , but financial supervision of the insurance undertaking in the Member State of establishment has been stepped up .
Although there are indications of an increasingly integrated market and there is a more competition-based environment in the Single European Market , particularly in insurance products for what are known as high-risk companies , the effectiveness of the single market in insurance still remains restricted due to a number of legal and fiscal barriers and barriers arising from the policies of individual countries .
Recently Eurostat also arrived at the same conclusion , expressly bearing out the Commission view and underlining the necessity and importance of this draft communication .
The Commission rightly thinks that one of the reasons preventing insurance companies from taking advantage of the fundamental freedoms in the EC Treaty is the uncertainty which still surrounds the interpretation of fundamental concepts such as ' freedom to provide services ' and ' general good ' .
The inexact legal concept of the ' general good ' is used in the Third Insurance Directives with respect to services as well as freedom of establishment , and means that in each case of cross-border insurance activity it must be ensured that the application of national legislation to foreign providers of services can be justified for compelling reasons of the general good .
In its extensive case law , the European Court of Justice has many times clarified and decided in individual cases the conditions under which legitimate non-economic interests can be recognised in the interest of the general good .
The rules on the general good must apply to all persons or undertakings operating within the territory of the State in which the service is provided in so far as that interest is not safeguarded by the provisions to which the provider of a service is subject in the Member State of his establishment .
In addition , such requirements must be objectively justified by the need to ensure that professional rules of conduct are complied with and that the interests which such rules are designed to safeguard are protected .
The usefulness of this communication from the Commission consists above all in the overview it provides of the important and typical instances of difficulties in interpretation .
The Court of Justice has partly already clarified matters by means of judgments ; some cases are still pending , and there are others in which the Court has not yet intervened .
Therefore the communication provides the parties concerned with a useful and sensible guide .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights very much welcomes the fact that the Commission itself has made it clear in its draft communication that its communication does not in any way prejudge any interpretation of matters by the Court of Justice and is not normative .
A Commission communication on pension funds has already been declared void by the Court of Justice in another case .
We cannot endorse the criticism made of the Commission for referring in its study to practical examples of what it considers to be infringements of Community law in cases which are still pending .
Rather , the Commission 's role as guardian of the Treaties requires it to bring its legal opinion , which may of course be examined by the Court of Justice , to the public 's attention at an early stage and without qualification .
We agree with the Commission 's observation that the fact that cross-border business activities in the insurance sector are rather slow in getting started is also attributable to corporate policy .
Most European insurers have hitherto obviously preferred to establish themselves abroad through takeovers and build up their network in the EU through subsidiaries .
But the introduction of the euro is going to have a huge impact on the insurance market in Europe .
It should simplify the cross-border sale of insurance services , make it easier to compare products , and lead to a reduction in costs .
So it can be expected that the euro will considerably boost the cross-border insurance business , which today could often be described as underdeveloped .
That is another reason to have this communication at this time .
Mr President , I am a lawyer and I also worked in the insurance industry , but I did not expect to be leading the Socialists on this matter this evening .
But , obviously , Mr Rothley is still dealing with his onerous task of the Statute for Members and so on .
When I started my insurance career a long time ago - practically 30 years ago - I remember the first week I was in the company , and the boss told me : ' The big challenge facing us is that we are going to have to deal with competition from Europe ! ' Little did I think 30 years down the road that nothing would have changed , and I hope the same happens to duty-free .
As we know , over recent years we have adopted a considerable body of legislation aimed at achieving a single market in this sector .
However , it is having no real effect .
It is obvious to us all that the single market is just not working in this sector , especially when you look at the high cost of car insurance in my own country , Ireland .
Young male drivers , for example , face insurance costs at least twice as high as in other European countries , and that is on top of the higher car prices in Ireland anyway .
So that is not a single market : no competition there , no help to the consumer .
Member States have had sufficient warnings .
The Commission must make full use of its powers under the EU Treaties , especially Article 169 , to open up the market .
Member States are adding too many cumbersome requirements to European directives , thus making it difficult for insurance companies to operate in other Member States .
In Ireland , insurance companies trying to operate in other Member States have highlighted problems to me , such as different rates of tax relief on premiums paid to locally established insurers ; the requirement to appoint tax representatives - fiscal representatives as they are called ( we are not familiar with this notion and most companies do not have to appoint such agents ) - and to fill out detailed questionnaires ; there are also the problems associated with different rules on languages , and finally , there is the vexed question of minimum policy terms .
In my view , insurance companies should not fear the entry of other European competitors into their national markets .
A single European market should be seen as an opportunity rather than a threat .
It would , of course , make it easier for other firms to enter , but it would also make it easier for Irish companies to do business abroad .
I would like to agree with what the rapporteur says : the consumer must be looked after , and that means competition .
I wish to congratulate her on her report .
Mr President , I have noted very carefully what my Irish colleague has said .
I am very surprised that she was working in an insurance company 30 years ago : I did not think she was that old , so she wears her age well .
I welcome the Commission 's initiative in this area .
Many of us had hoped that the single market would have produced strong competition in the insurance sector , resulting in lower premia for consumers .
Regrettably , this has not happened and , clearly , no real single market in insurance exists at the present time .
I agree with the honourable Member that it is disappointing , especially for young Irish people .
They pay exorbitant rates for motor car insurance , and I had hoped , like many people , that competition would force prices down .
I urge the Commission to investigate insurance rates for under-25s in Ireland to ensure that no abuse of the market exists .
I welcome the fact that the Commission is investigating whether or not the general good clause is being misused .
Finally , I hope that with both this Commission initiative and the introduction of the single currency , we will witness more transparency , more shopping around by consumers and , consequently , the eventual creation of a real single market in insurance .
Mr President , there is considerable uncertainty surrounding certain key aspects of the general good clause concerning the freedom to provide services . In particular , these relate to the implementation of the directives on insurance .
We should be aware of the dangers of the possible use of this clause as a means of discriminatory restriction .
In fact , as the report states , the harmonisation achieved through the directive of 5 April 1992 has not prevented insurance undertakings wishing to operate in Member States other than the one where they are domiciled from having to comply with cumbersome requirements imposed by the host state .
True , the relative failure to establish an internal market in insurance is not due solely to the tendency to interpret the general good clause in a biased way . Problems in the internal operation of the undertakings themselves have also played a part .
Nevertheless , the clause must be clearly defined . In my view , it does not matter how this is achieved .
The best way may be through subtraction , as the Commission - supported by the rapporteur - is suggesting , or there may be another way , but what is important is to arrive at a clearly stated legal position .
To sum up , if a clear legal position is to be established , it is essential to approximate the most important provisions of the law on insurance contracts and insurance conditions . Our citizens will then be able to shop around in an open market and make a choice which is in their own best interest , not that of the insurance undertakings .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , both the Commission communication and the report by Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn deal with a central concept in the interpretation of Articles 59 and 60 of the EC Treaty on the freedom to provide services .
We know that in its insurance judgment of 4 December 1986 the European Court of Justice identified the ' general good ' as justification of the restriction of this freedom to provide services .
But even a lay person in legal terms would see at once that such a broadly framed concept as the general good has to be protected from falling prey to misinterpretation .
That is exactly what the Commission communication aims to do .
Like the rapporteur , we should support the Commission , and I also think that we should be behind her in encouraging the Commission to resume its efforts to approximate the provisions on insurance contracts , which have become bogged down , and to make its legal opinion known in spite of the fact that procedures are pending .
I hope that in future this will be a reason for many policyholders to be thankful to both the Commission and the rapporteur for their commitment to the freedom to provide services .
Perhaps even Mr Cushnahan may yet have cause to be pleased about this .
Mr President , I thank Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn and compliment her on her report .
Almost four years after the entry into force of the third insurance directives , the European passport system which they introduce has already had a major impact on the operation of the market .
The abolition of insurance premium controls and the prior notification of policy conditions have increased competition on national markets , especially in respect of certain types of activities previously excluded from competition .
Nevertheless , the Commission has noted that the potential of the single market has by no means been exploited to the full yet , as various speakers have mentioned .
Our contacts with economic operators - insurance companies , brokers , insured persons and consumers - lead us to conclude that the main reason for this lack of integration is the Member States ' diverging interpretations of two fundamental concepts of Community law : freedom to provide services and the general good .
These differences in interpretation not only tend to produce considerable legal uncertainty , impeding the development of the market , but also serve to perpetuate the national barriers which prevent the single market from functioning properly .
Clearly , there are legitimate targets for protection by the Member States in the name of the general good , the most significant being perhaps consumer protection .
I can assure you that the Commission has no intention of calling into question any genuine concerns in this regard .
It is equally evident , however , that in many cases the Member States make excessive use of the discretion conferred on them by the concept of the general good , to justify applying their whole panoply of national regulations to foreign service providers .
Rules on the general good are not in fact harmonised at Community level ; nor would it be possible to do so , since national interests vary from one Member State to another .
The concept of the general good should nevertheless be interpreted very restrictively , in that it limits the fundamental freedoms established by the Treaty .
Improper use of this concept by Member States can be avoided through compliance with the criteria established by the case law of the Court of Justice : non-discrimination , proportionality , necessity and non-duplication .
These criteria for ascertaining the general good circumscribes the legitimate use of this concept .
In order to remedy this situation , the Commission deemed it necessary to draw up the draft interpretative communication in terms which clarify its proposed interpretation of the concepts of freedom to provide services and the general good .
The Commission intends in this way to provide greater clarity and legal certainty concerning the scope of these two concepts .
I must say that , as you know , a similar initiative in the banking sector has proved most useful .
Having set the scene , please allow me now to comment briefly on the European Parliament 's report .
I wish once again to thank the honourable Members and in particular the rapporteur , Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn , for having taken part in these consultations and conducted a thorough analysis of our interpretative communication .
The report from the Committee on Legal Affairs focuses mainly on the question of the general good , which is in fact the main issue dealt with in the communication .
The report corroborates the Commission 's view that diverging interpretations from one Member State to another constitute a major impediment to the proper functioning of the single market in insurance .
Finally , it endorses the use of practical examples and defends the right of the Commission , as guardian of the Treaties , to express its own legal opinion .
I would moreover stress once again that the purpose of our communication is to improve transparency and clarify Community legislation , whilst at the same time increasing legal certainty .
It is clear , however , that this interpretation by the Commission can neither be binding on Member States nor impose fresh obligations on them . Nor does it prejudge the interpretation of the Court of Justice , which obviously is ultimately responsible for the correct interpretation of Community legislation .
I would also recall that the Commission is likewise duty-bound to bring infringement proceedings against Member States in the event of serious violations of Community law .
Encouraged by this resolution from the European Parliament , we shall now be even better placed to complete our work by adopting the final version of this interpretative communication .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Preferential tariff arrangements
The next item is the report ( A4-0262 / 98 ) by Mr Nordmann , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the Commission communication on the management of preferential tariff arrangements ( COM ( 97 ) 0402 - C4-0447 / 97 ) .
Mr President , the report that I am to present on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation relates to issues that go quite far beyond the scope of the Union 's development policy , as it involves suggesting improvements to be made in the management of the preferential tariff arrangements that the Union grants to some of its trading partners . This is done in several forms : for some countries it is in the conventional form of negotiated cooperation agreements , in particular , of course , within the framework of the Lomé Convention , but also in the form of autonomous preferential tariff arrangements such as the Generalised System of Preferences , which is unilaterally granted by the Union .
It seems that these preferential tariffs are subject to a certain amount of fraud , and the irregularities that have been uncovered , for example , amount to the very substantial sum of ECU 220 million .
This fraud affects textiles , fisheries products , industrial products and agricultural products , and one of the main attractions of the Commission communication is that it lists the products affected by fraud .
The mechanism of fraud here obviously involves the misuse of the certificates of origin that are granted by the customs authorities of the trading partners and that involve many cheques drawn on the Union 's funds .
The only thing is - and here lies the limit of the comparison - that in the case of cheques that have no funds there is no payment , and the surplus comes from the Union 's funds and therefore from the Union 's taxpayers .
The fight against fraud , which is the main objective of the Commission communication , involves a certain number of improvements to the system and a certain number of control measures as well as training measures , especially for the trading partners . Indeed , it has to be said that they do not always have the technical and administrative infrastructure to combat fraud where it is not actually encouraged , and this is something that also has to be recognised .
The Commission communication looks at a number of actions to be undertaken .
We would also like to add that we must raise the awareness of and encourage greater action on the part of the Commission 's delegations in the partner countries , which should play a driving role in this field .
The Committee on Development also hopes that there will soon be an initial assessment of the impact of the new ' binding origin information ' procedure .
This should allow importers in the Union to ascertain , before customs formalities have been completed , that the products qualify for preferential tariff treatment .
This binding information procedure gives some sort of customs validity to the products for three years .
We also hope that the penalties mechanism that was put in place in 1995 will be effectively applied , when appropriate .
Up until now it has only been used once and that was in a case arising from social problems and not from commercial fraud .
We hope that it can be implemented .
To conclude , I would like to point out that , notably in a very interesting hearing before the Committee on Budgetary Control , which in the end did not , unfortunately , give an opinion on this issue , the debate was centred around strengthening the legal certainty of importers .
In this respect , there is a difference in perspective between the report by the Committee on Development , which mentions that certainty , which must be improved , and the opinion by the Committee on External Economic Relations , which gives great emphasis to the problem .
We think that the responsibilities must be shared and that the Committee on Development 's wording is undoubtedly more balanced than the opinion - and this is quite normal as it comes from the Committee on External Economic Relations - that highlights only the issue of the certainty of importers .
This is the reason for the indications that I have given regarding the amendments , and I wanted to make that clear now .
Mr President , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on External Economic Relations on this matter , I read Mr Nordmann 's report with great interest .
At the beginning of his report , he rightly points to the importance of the preferential arrangements in Europe 's trade policy .
The main aim of this , fostering the development of less developed countries like the Lomé and ACP countries and helping applicant countries prepare for membership of the European Union , deserves our full support .
The problem is that the reality falls far short of the ideal .
Not for nothing did the Council ask the Commission in May 1996 for a study of the matter and for proposals to improve the system .
The Commission points in its communication to fraud over the rules of origin and a significant portion of Mr Nordmann 's resolution , the first nine paragraphs , deals with this in greater detail .
Of course we have to work hard to counter fraud , in the interest both of the European Union and of the beneficiary countries .
The Commission places the emphasis mainly on direct measures against fraud , using supervisory bodies and penalties .
To my mind , more has to be done to counter fraud by indirect means .
The preferential tariff arrangements should be made more effective .
That may prove more beneficial than penalties , control mechanisms and all the other administrative rigmarole .
What I have in mind is more flexible and simpler rules of origin and improved cooperation between Member States and beneficiary countries .
An early warning system , whereby the importer is alerted early on to possible irregularities , may be useful too .
But that means the current inadequate system has to be faster and more reliable , as Mr Nordmann advocates in his report .
A second consideration is protection for importers in Europe .
I was disappointed that the Commission communication contained nothing to protect those who import things in all good faith .
This was precisely one of the reasons which prompted the Council to ask the Commission for a communication .
The Council wanted the confidence of importers and the validity of certificates of origin to be protected , so that they no longer faced sky-high duties and the risk of going bust .
On this precise point , the Commission has done nothing .
That is unfair .
Mr Nordmann alludes to this obliquely in paragraph 10 of his report , but it has to be raised more specifically .
Our starting-point has to be that the risks must not be borne by the importer alone .
For this reason , I have tabled Amendments Nos 3 and 4 to paragraph 10 .
They derive from the opinion which the Committee on External Economic Relations adopted unanimously on this subject .
Amendment No 5 is from our Committee too , and takes up the Council 's question .
It concerns importers who , in applying the preferential arrangements , are disadvantaged by irregularities in the decisions of beneficiary countries .
I would urge the Commission to put forward a proposal to protect them where they cannot reasonably be expected to have known about such irregularities .
Lastly , given the aim of the preferential arrangements , I think it is important that they should also benefit the least developed countries .
So I urge the Commission to ensure that the system really does improve the market access of these most vulnerable countries .
This is the thrust of Amendment No 6 , once again tabled by the Committee on External Economic Relations .
I hope that the rapporteur , Mr Nordmann , will incorporate these crucial amendments into his resolution , which is an excellent one .
The improvements which I advocate are of great importance to the continuing existence of the preferential tariff arrangements .
The Commission 's communication is helpful , but does not go far enough on these points .
So it is up to the European Parliament and the Council to act .
The present situation is bad not only for the least developed countries , but also for firms in the European Union .
Given this situation , I believe that we have to conclude , irrespective of political allegiance , that the current system is ineffective and unfair .
We should take action accordingly .
Mr President , Mr Nordmann and Mr van Dam have studied this whole issue from the point of view of their respective committees and have thus largely made comments of a technical nature .
I should like to make some comments which are rather more political , on this proposal and on Mr Nordmann 's report .
Firstly it would seem , superficially , that the purpose of the system of preferences is to enable a number of third world countries to export their products to the European Member States on more favourable terms .
The reality of course is rather different .
The reality is that these products compete with products from our own European Union , and that is the main reason for charging import duties on products from the third world .
We then ease that burden a little by lowering the rate of duty imposed .
I say this because I think this system of preferences is viewed from within the European Union as a kind of concession to the developing countries , whilst the developing countries themselves see it above all as a minor concession , in areas where the European Union is struggling and setting import duties which are far too high , largely to protect farm products produced within the European Union itself .
In all honesty , it is actually a somewhat hypocritical system .
That is the first point I wished to make .
It is a general political observation .
When we then find that massive frauds are perpetrated on the system in the developing countries , we have to ask ourselves what is the point of such a complicated system and what is the need for it .
ECU 220 million , or half a billion Dutch guilders - that is a lot of money , if it is indeed the total sum being lost through fraud .
And knowing where that money has gone - into textiles , fisheries , agriculture and the countries of Asia - I really wonder whether far more fundamental changes to the system are not warranted .
The rules of origin should be radically revised , for example , but perhaps we should concentrate the whole system rather more on the really poor countries and not have to keep adapting the current system in this way .
Since we have a system of penalties and sanctions for humanitarian reasons , why can we not apply these sanctions in cases of fraud and abuse ?
If there is real abuse of the preference system , I think sanctions could be imposed there too .
Perhaps Mr Monti will tell us what he thinks of that idea .
Lastly , I agree with Mr van Dam that if importers are losing out under this system , that is a very good reason to review the whole procedure .
That , Mr President , is my political critique of the system as a whole , but the essence of my criticism is that it is a hypocritical system , because we start by charging duty on goods from the third world and then take a bit off again , all because of the scale of protection given to agricultural products , textile and fishery products in our own European Union .
It is hypocrisy , it is a cheap trick , and as we know the European Commission can do little about it .
Perhaps it would be better to get rid of the system altogether .
Preferential tariff arrangements , whether under the Lomé Convention or the generalised system of preferences ( GSP ) are still under-used because of contradictions between the European Union 's own policies .
While recognising these systems as a strong weapon for helping the developing countries and a vital element of cooperation policy , the Union sticks so closely to the demands and red-tape bound up with rules on origin that they become a protectionist practice which defends European industries to the detriment of their competitors in the developing countries who are supposed to be benefiting from them .
Many of the least-developed countries will not have any opportunity to compete in the open and free international market .
Throwing them into the lion 's den of the World Trade Organisation is tantamount to condemning them to eternal poverty and suffering .
Putting an end to the preferential tariff arrangements is therefore out of the question .
Not only are they necessary but greatly improving them should be one of the EU 's priorities .
That does not mean turning a blind eye to fraud or tolerating beneficiary countries ' lackadaisical or uncooperative attitudes .
But fraud cannot be combated without an effective and practicable system of sanctions .
Suspending the benefits of a preferential tariff arrangement , a sanction so far only applied in the case of Burma , should not be limited to cases of fraudulent trading practices , unfair competition , slavery , forced labour or relations with the drug trade .
Certain countries benefiting from the GSP have high incomes .
Countries where child labour and discrimination against women are the rule continue to benefit from the GSP .
But let us not exaggerate .
The ECU 220 million of fraud detected comes to only 0.25 % of the Community budget .
What is more serious is the fact that an excessive onus is placed on European importers when it comes to checking certificates of origin , a discouraging factor for trading with the beneficiary countries of this system of customs tariff exemptions or reductions .
That responsibility , as the rapporteur has said , has to be shared .
We support the consensus reached between the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament on the measures needed to increase the exchange of information , strengthen the control mechanisms , reduce red-tape and apply the system more flexibly .
But now we need action not words .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a member of the Committee on Budgets , I am always concerned with speaking out in favour of fair structural conditions .
I would like to come back to what Mrs Maij-Weggen said .
I think that in principle we should from time to time reflect on the worth of certain regulations , and attempt to lay down objective criteria as to where provisions are still relevant and where they could be removed .
Own resources is a sensitive area for us because it consists of amounts of money which are important for the EU .
I think that it is very easy to use forged certificates of origin , because monitoring the flow of goods ( which is often independent of financial flows ) , and dealing with the accompanying papers and the people involved in the operation is so difficult .
Any groups that have specialised in fraud would of course know the weaknesses of our system and also how to hide their cheating by staggering the four flows into a favourable chronological sequence .
I think it is necessary to offer better training in this area .
There has been some progress , but it might be necessary , especially in the field of statistics , to develop increasingly precise methods in order to determine what the likelihood of fraud is in each of the four flows .
I would also like to point out our request that OLAF should , together with the Court of Auditors , undertake intensive monitoring .
There is also of course the issue of jurisdiction , and of who is really laying down the measures that will lead us to fair structural conditions .
Mr President , the image of the European Union has suffered greatly because of recent scandals relating to fraud .
If we do not close the loopholes that facilitate fraud we will compound our problems , resulting in increased cynicism and hostility towards the European Union .
It is therefore frightening that the Commission 's 1996 Annual Report concludes that there were irregularities to the tune of ECU 220 million in the EU 's system of preferential imports .
Mr Nordmann - I congratulate him on his report - is correct to cite the need to tighten fraud detection systems in the countries of origin .
Unfortunately the preferential tariff arrangements enable goods to be imported into the EU from under-developed nations , either duty-free or at a reduced rate .
Regrettably fraud occurs by falsifying certificates of origin .
While the Commission is correct to propose simplifying the rules of origin , I support the rapporteur in his view that all risks should not be borne by EU-based importers and furthermore , that the poorest countries should not be penalised in any reform .
Mr President , preferential tariff arrangements have become a mainstay of the European Union 's external economic relations .
They are difficult to manage because of the need to play off political interests against economic ones ; as Commissioner responsible for both customs policy and the single market , this matter is of particular concern to me .
I wish to express my sincere thanks for the work of the rapporteur , Mr Nordmann , and to the Committee on Development and Cooperation for having highlighted so clearly that the challenge of improving on the present system for the future lies in establishing a balance that more effectively meets today 's economic requirements .
When discussing preferential arrangements , account must be taken of all the aspects involved : trade policy , development aid , public funds , customs rules , industrial interests , importers ' liabilities , etc .
This whole set of issues must be addressed in the search for a solution to the current problems : taking isolated measures affecting individual elements would only distort the system and could ultimately compromise its credibility .
Every economic operator must fulfil his obligations : the beneficiary country - and on the subject of beneficiary countries I would remind you , in relation to the remarks made by Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Cushnahan , that the European Union is the biggest donor of preferences ; the Union grants new possibilities of access to less developed countries through specific measures and derogations - must guarantee that the products exported satisfy the conditions of admissibility , especially the rules of origin .
The importer , for his part , must assume the normal commercial risk associated with all commercial transactions .
The importing country must guarantee that no fraud is committed and that public resources are safeguarded .
I realise that economic operators have felt themselves to be particularly disadvantaged by certain irregularities which have occurred in the past .
The Commission has taken due note , and I should therefore like to comment on the matter of importer liability .
There are - I would recall - two types of customs rules : the first , rather outdated and abandoned some time ago by the Community and the Member States , consists in checking every single consignment of imports as it is cleared through customs .
This cumbersome procedure , which is feasible only when few goods are moving around , does have one advantage : as soon as the goods have been cleared through customs , the importer knows whether or not everything is in order from a regulatory point of view .
Thus there is no need for subsequent checks .
The second type of rules is much more up-to-date and was adopted by the Community in 1992 through the Customs Code ; its purpose is to promote trade .
Imported goods are no long subjected to systematic checks , and thus their freedom of movement is not slowed down .
Only a small percentage are checked at the time of customs clearance .
But in return for this freedom , importers must assume legal liability .
That is why the Community 's customs authorities may demand that for a certain period of time - three years , which moreover the Commission has recently suggested to the Council should be reduced to two - customs duties must be paid on goods which have been imported .
At the same time , I am aware of the administrative shortcomings in certain third countries , which create both economic and legal uncertainty for operators .
We are exploring suitable measures to remedy this situation .
I would merely emphasise the main principles which we believe should guide us in our efforts .
These are the guidelines contained in our communication of July 1997 , the thrust of which was to prefer a global approach to this problem on the grounds that - as I said a moment ago , and as I think has been confirmed by this evening 's interesting debate - to focus on an individual aspect in isolation , neglecting the others , would not lead us very far .
This same reasoning was followed by the Internal Market Council on 18 May 1998 .
The Commission is therefore of the opinion that the following should be promoted : first and foremost , a responsible approach by all operators of these arrangements and better cooperation among them ; secondly , improvements in the rules on origin ; thirdly , greater awareness in the beneficiary countries and an offer of assistance to their customs administrations ; and fourthly , an examination with the Member States of customs-related and financial measures to be adopted .
Finally , it is important in the Commission 's view to seek to improve the mechanisms designed to enhance the security of commercial operations .
I am thinking , in particular , of the introduction of effective penalty clauses into preferential arrangements , supported by a mechanism for providing regular information to importers , like the one put forward by the Commission in its recent proposal on the new generalised system of preferences .
I would also refer you to other measures encouraging greater recourse to the ' binding origin information ' procedure .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would reiterate what I said at the outset : we cannot envisage measures relating to just one element of the system , for example merely extending the notion of good faith on the part of importers .
Here I am pleased to note that Mr Nordmann 's report gives strong political backing to the Commission 's initiative to update the management of preferential tariff arrangements .
The challenge for the future is the need to combat fraud effectively , whilst at the same time shouldering our responsibilities to third countries and to economic operators .
I am gratified to note that the Committee on Development and Cooperation broadly shares the Commission 's intended approach in this difficult area , and I hope that Parliament as a whole can endorse this reasoning .
Commissioner , I have a further question .
We have of course a system of penalties in this area .
Do you think that we might make more progress with a system of incentives or that , in the course of time , this could be turned into a system of incentives ?
Mr Rübig , we see assistance and cooperation between administrations and , in the final instance , penalties as complementary .
As you know , the system is currently in the throes of change , and we are striving to improve it with this cross-cutting approach , whereby no aspects can be overlooked , I believe , including the possibility of penalties .
I think we are right to maintain that cooperation and assistance are a step in the right direction , in an area which - I would emphasise - is highly complex and requires many conflicting demands and interests to be taken into account .
I thank you once again for the suggestions and encouragement which the Commission has drawn from this debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 10 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 10.25 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I wanted to inform you that 100 francs have disappeared from my petty cash .
That is the second time this has happened .
Would you please ask the parliamentary security service to take action to prevent these thefts , of which an average of 10 to 15 occur here every month .
Thank you , Madam President .
As you know , Mr Rübig , we try to provide the best possible security in all our places of work .
Thank you for this piece of information .
I can assure you that we shall step up our efforts further still .
Madam President , yesterday I made a statement to the House which was recorded in the Rainbow .
However , it was not mentioned in the Minutes , apart from the comment that I was in the Chamber and was not voting .
I took part in all the votes yesterday .
Therefore I would like the Minutes to be altered accordingly .
Thank you , Mr Falconer .
That twofold mistake will be corrected .
Madam President , I have a question which we should like the Bureau to answer as soon as possible .
There has always been a regular press digest produced by Parliament .
The German version , entitled ' Plenum aktuell ' , has recently been radically shortened , a situation which still obtains .
I have not checked the other versions . In the item on the Spaak report , for example , apart from the Commissioner and the rapporteur , nobody else is mentioned at all .
I should like an explanation for this . Is it only the German version which is affected , or is this part of a general savings drive ?
Precisely because this digest is designed to give the public a picture of our work , I believe that such measures are totally unjustifiable .
I cannot imagine that these are measures to achieve savings , Mr Rack .
In any event , we shall look into it .
I think it is very important that the reports should be as accurate as possible .
Madam President , I should like to endorse the previous speaker 's comments on the reporting in yesterday 's ' Plenum aktuell ' .
In connection with the crisis in the finance markets of Latin America , Commissioner Bangemann was scarcely mentioned and nobody else featured at all .
If this is to be standard practice from now on , we might as well discontinue the publication , because it no longer serves any useful purpose in its present form .
For one thing , it does not communicate Members ' views to the public as I would expect it to do .
Yes indeed .
Thank you for those comments .
Once again , we shall look into the matter .
Madam President , I would like to join the two previous speakers and point out that half the staff of the European Parliament were not allowed to come to Strasbourg for this second October part-session .
This saves money on the administration side .
Given that we must come to Strasbourg , Madam President , we must also have the necessary staff available so we can do our work properly .
( The Minutes were approved )
VOTES
Madam President , before beginning this important vote , I would like to make three remarks .
First , Parliament is voting initially on Amendment No 888 , on the strategic reserve , the appropriations for which will need to be adjusted at the end of the vote .
Second , small adjustments need to be made to the amounts relating to budget lines B2-517 , B3-4003 , B7-6201 and B7-6211 , and I will give you the details when we reach the vote on those lines .
Third , more specific remarks need to be made regarding lines B3-301 and B3-309 .
Lastly , certain technical adjustments need to be made in the remarks on the amendments to lines B3-4304 , B7-500 and B7-6602 .
Thank you , Mrs Dührkop .
I think it would in fact be preferable if you gave us the necessary details when the time comes , so that Members know exactly what they are voting on .
Madam President , since this will be forgotten afterwards in the hustle and bustle of voting , I wanted to take advantage of the time when we are all taking our seats to thank the parliamentary services for their exemplary cooperation in ensuring that the amendments and other documents in every language were delivered to us on time .
After all , we have more than 1 000 amendments to consider , and I think it is only right to express our congratulations to the services and the House for completing this mammoth task on time .
Draft Amendment No 714
Madam President , I propose adding EUR 400 000 in commitment appropriations , which means that the vote is on a total of 3 million in commitment appropriations for this line .
Draft Amendment No 844
Madam President , I would like the remarks to note the amount of EUR 1.7 million preallocated to the International Federation of Europe Houses .
Draft Amendment No 738
Madam President , I request that the following comment be included : these appropriations are also aimed at financing the 1999 campaign on violence against women .
Draft Amendment No 741
Madam President , I request that an additional EUR 3 million be approved in commitment appropriations , that is , a total of EUR 5 million for this line .
Draft Amendment No 584
Madam President , I believe a mistake has been made .
This is my group 's original amendment on the 30 % reserve , and I should like to emphasise that it does not relate to the condition for the establishment of this new reserve , but rather to the conditions we had for the 100 % reserve , because one of those conditions , namely the surrender of the documents to the Belgian prosecuting authorities , has not yet been fulfilled .
Madam President , I did not fully understand what Mrs Müller said .
If she wishes to make an oral amendment in a very complex and very long voting procedure , I will oppose it and I believe that other colleagues will also oppose it .
Let us vote on her amendment as it stands .
This is the only way to proceed in such a complex vote .
Therefore , I would like to ask you to put Mrs Müller 's original amendment to the vote , as it stands .
Yes , that is what I intended to do , Mr Dell 'Alba .
Thank you for your support .
Madam President , should we not hear the opinion of the chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control here ?
She is surely in the best position to tell us what exactly is behind the amendment .
No , Mrs Maij-Weggen , I do not see the need for that .
We shall proceed to the vote .
Draft Amendment No 808
Madam President , I request that an additional EUR 5 million be approved in commitment appropriations above the sum proposed in the amendment by the Committee on Budgets , that is , a total of EUR 45 million in commitment appropriations for this line .
Draft Amendment No 810
Madam President , I request that EUR 16.5 million be approved in commitment appropriations for this line in place of the amount proposed in the amendment by the Committee on Budgets .
We shall now proceed to the vote on the amendments to Section I.
Mr Martens has the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group I should like to ask , on the basis of Rule 115 ( 3 ) , that we should first vote on the fifth paragraph of Amendment No 899 relating to the link with the Members ' Statute .
Could I just take two minutes to explain why ?
For the last 20 years , we have had a system of flat-rate travel expenses .
The Court of Auditors ' report indicates that this is no longer acceptable .
We need to find a fair solution , and this is only possible if we link it to the Members ' Statute .
Our group is opposed to having a complex and untransparent system which , it has become clear , is extremely difficult to justify to the general public .
Secondly , and this is something I would ask you to think seriously about , we fear that if we accept a transitional system , certain members of the Council will use it as an excuse to reject the Statute .
The Statute has to be adopted unanimously .
Parliament has to put forward a proposal , the Commission will deliver its opinion and the Council must reach a unanimous decision .
We fear that the fair solution that relies on linkage with the Members ' Statute will not be possible if we accept a transitional system .
What we need to do instead - and this is what my group has decided - is to formulate a proposal based on the Rothley report that Parliament can then put before the European Council on 11 and 12 December in Vienna .
We are therefore prepared to approve the Rothley report as the basis for an interinstitutional agreement .
The only guarantee we have is if you , ladies and gentlemen , agree to vote on the fifth paragraph first and approve it .
I think we would then be on the right road towards , firstly , dismantling an untenable system and , secondly , establishing the Statute for Members .
( Applause )
Mr President , yesterday in this House Chancellor Klima of Austria made it clear that if there is a proposal from Parliament in time for the Vienna Summit in December , then he will present it to the Vienna Summit .
He made it absolutely clear and also did so informally , with the group leaders , when he met us the other day at your invitation , Mr President .
What we see here is an attempt to obfuscate and hide behind this approach .
My group is in favour .
( Murmurs of dissent ) I listened to Mr Martens , quietly .
I will wait until the baying crowds cease .
My group is in favour of voting .
We will vote on a free vote so that every Member in my group will be able to make up their own mind on this critical issue .
We will ask that the vote be taken in the order set out on the order sheet .
We are all in favour of a Members ' Statute here .
The only way in which we got it on to the agenda in Amsterdam - which changed the Treaty - was by changing the political balance in the Council .
So we take some credit for having at least got it on the agenda in Amsterdam and in the Treaty .
We now believe that we have the right way forward to pursue the Members ' Statute .
We are pursuing it in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
As you know , we have changed the timetable in order to get it included in the Vienna Summit .
But we also believe it is important that we make a political statement about our credentials and our desire to make sure that firstly , we are acting as required by the Court of Auditors and secondly , that we are completely open and transparent on this issue .
Knowing that some Members on the opposite side of the House were rushing around this morning , looking to get votes for a secret ballot on this request , I think this request is a bit rich , coming from Mr Martens .
We would like to retain the order of voting as on the timetable .
Mr President , if I have understood correctly , this request has been presented to you pursuant to Rule 115 on the order of voting on amendments .
I do not see what reason there is for changing the order of voting as it currently appears on the list of votes .
In the Committee on Budgets , this problem had already arisen .
Subsequently , we had voted on the paragraph that you are now being asked to vote on first .
There is no link between the first vote and the vote concerning the statute for Members .
The first vote is asking us to express our opinion firstly on an opinion , that is , on how allowances should be reimbursed .
The statute for Members is a different matter altogether .
Therefore , there is no reason , neither legal nor political , to ask for the order of voting to be changed .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I want to state clearly on behalf of the ELDR Group that we wish to maintain the order of vote as indicated .
We all know inside each of our groups this is a difficult issue .
It is difficult to strike a balance , and we need to have a mutual respect and tolerance for each others ' positions .
But we need to do so in such a way that each individual clearly , openly and transparently assumes his or her responsibility before this House , on the record and before public opinion , not because we do not respect the differences of each individual but because we must reveal those differences .
We must have the courage of our convictions to defend those differences .
It is the position of my group that we accept and promote the parallelism and the strong complementarity between a Members ' Statute and reform of the travel allowances .
However , in terms of the scheme of things , it is the responsibility of this House itself to determine the nature of its travel allowance system , whereas for the Statute it is the responsibility of others to ensure that this House gets its act together in time for Vienna .
Let us assume our responsibilities as a House in the area where we have the complete authority to do so and let us vote in the order indicated .
I do not think it is necessary to continue this debate because the second paragraph of Rule 115 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure states , Mr Martens , that the President shall establish that it is not opposed by at least 29 Members .
And I would ask you whether or not you are standing by your position , because it seems clear to me that it will be opposed by at least 29 Members , but I have no problem in counting them .
If you tell me that you are standing by your position , I will ask the Members who are opposed to stand and we can count them in no time .
Are you standing by your position , Mr Martens ?
It is clear that there are more than 25 Members opposed to changing the vote .
All I am asking is that , whatever else happens , we should vote separately on the fifth paragraph .
Yes , Mr Martens .
This split vote was requested at the appropriate time by the groups and will take place .
After the votes on Draft Amendments Nos 899 and 537
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , to avoid the pervading confusion , I would like both you and us to draw our conclusions from the votes that have just taken place .
In other words - and I am completely in favour of this interpretation - the Bureau 's decision of 19 October on a transitional system of allowances is to be enforced .
I would like to ensure that this is clear .
Exactly , Mr Pasty .
What has been decided is that no remarks will be added which modify the decision of the Bureau .
The Bureau 's decision thus remains in place .
The sum has been approved and will be applied in accordance with the decision taken by the Bureau .
Draft Amendment No 899
Mr President , we have rejected several remarks regarding particular budget items .
These same remarks are reproduced as a draft amendment to the text of the motion for a resolution .
Can we carry the previous vote over to the motion for a resolution ?
Of course .
Parliament has stated its position .
We will not vote twice on the same texts simply because they are in two different places .
The rapporteur , Mr Viola , has asked for the floor to speak on block 28 .
Mr President , now that we are about to vote on block 28 , I would just say that Amendment No 697 by the Committee on Budgets , which is included in this block , relates in particular to the appropriations under Chapter 21 , ' Data Processing and Telecommunications ' .
This amendment removed part of the appropriations entered in the reserve .
The conditions now exist to remove all the appropriations entered in the reserve under Chapter 21 , with the favourable opinion of the Budgets Committee .
Furthermore , Amendments Nos 900 and 901 to Chapter 37 take account of the principle that funds should be entered in the budget for specific purposes , and of the new accounting plan which has already been unanimously approved by the chairmen of the political groups .
I would therefore ask that these amendments too , Nos 900 and 901 , should form part of block 28 .
The rapporteur has asked for the floor .
Mr President , before proceeding to the vote on the motion for a resolution , I would like to make three remarks concerning the vote on Section III that we have just completed .
Firstly , I would like to repeat what I said before the vote to the effect that Parliament voted first on Amendment No 888 relating to the strategic reserve , for which the proposed payment and commitment appropriations will now need to be adjusted in terms of the limits of the financial perspective , and leaving margins in each of Categories 3 , 4 and 5 .
The amounts I propose are : in Category 3 , EUR 400 million ; in Category 4 , EUR 990 million ; and in Category 5 , EUR 150 million .
Secondly , I would like to thank the President and , equally , Mrs Fontaine for so ably conducting this vote on the budget and making it slightly easier .
I would also like to thank Parliament 's services and the staff of the secretariat of the Committee on Budgets for their excellent work , without which this budget vote would not have been so easy .
I would also like to say to the Council that I think we have adopted a budget for the citizens of Europe and to urge the Council once more to conform with Parliament 's position .
Mr President , I should like to point out that we have an amendment structure here which was requested by all the groups , namely that by voting for the budget we have also adopted the amendments to lines 3307 and 3308 .
This was a so-called pipeline that was created between budget lines 3307 - information policy - and 3308 .
All the group chairmen had asked us to incorporate this as an additional amendment .
This is what we did in consultation with all the groups .
I merely wish to point out that this also happened when we cast our votes .
On paragraph 21
Mr President , this block contains paragraph 21 , which contradicts the position we took when voting on the budget .
I would ask the rapporteur to withdraw it , since it conflicts with our vote of a moment ago .
Mr President , of course this contradicts the vote we have just held and this contradiction must be removed from the paragraph .
On paragraph 30
Mr President , paragraph 30 would also appear to me to contradict the vote we held previously and should , in my view , be removed from the resolution .
Mr President , this is about the bananas .
Mrs Dührkop rightly stated that the decision taken by the House to make budgetary resources available for the bananas is not at issue .
What the wording expresses is that , besides the budgetary resources , funds will also be allocated from the European Development Fund .
To that extent , the text before us is not inconsistent with the decision which we took when we voted .
I would therefore ask the House to approve it .
On Amendment No 4
Mr President , I do not see any contradiction here whatsoever and , therefore , I would prefer that you submitted it to the vote of the House .
On paragraph 39
Mr President , with regard to paragraph 39 , on which we are about to vote , I would ask that , in the report which the Commission is to forward to the budgetary authority , it should also give the appropriate information on the situation of the other institutions in the context of interinstitutional cooperation .
To save space in the text , I think that we could dispense with this paragraph in the resolution on the other institutions .
Mrs Dührkop , what is your position on Mr Viola 's request ?
I agree with Mr Viola .
On Amendment No 6
Mr President , it seems to me that this amendment is redundant since it already features in Mr Viola 's other resolution , where it mentions all the institutions .
I would therefore like to put my opinion on record although , of course , I leave the outcome to the wisdom of the House .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , as you said quite rightly a moment ago , Amendments Nos 1 , 4 and 5 , which are related to the vote expressed a short while ago on the budget , should now lapse , since they contradict the outcome of the budget vote .
With your agreement , I would propose that the House should endorse a decision taken by the coordinators of the Committee on Budgets , by which I mean the coordinators of all the various groups .
This decision relates to cases exactly such as this one , where no amendment at all is adopted .
It was nevertheless agreed to enter an oral amendment to the budget resolution , merely stating two points of fact , without adding anything .
If I may , Mr President , I shall read out this oral amendment .
The new text of paragraph 8 would read as follows : ' recalls that it has requested the Council to support unreservedly the principle of a statute for Members of the European Parliament , as provided for by the Treaty of Amsterdam ; draws attention to its resolution on the outcome of the European Council meeting in Cardiff of 15 / 16 June 1998 , in particular paragraph 20 thereof ' .
Mr President , the argument given by our rapporteur is unquestionable in terms of Amendment No 1 .
This is the amendment from the Committee on Budgets that repeats all of the text that was rejected earlier by split vote .
On the other hand , his theory is more questionable in relation to Amendments Nos 4 and 5 , namely , our group 's amendment and the amendment by the ELDR Group .
These amendments contain measures which most certainly were not mentioned earlier .
Amendment No 4 assigns the Bureau a task which is entirely different to the one in Amendment No 1 .
Amendment No 5 - and I apologize for speaking on behalf of the ELDR Group - provides for new allowances and different conditions .
Therefore , I do not think they should be considered obsolete .
As regards the oral amendment by Mr Viola , I reserve the right to oppose it , when the time comes .
That is , of course , the correct interpretation and the Presidency 's services have verified this .
Amendments Nos 4 and 5 are not affected by the previous vote and I will put them to the vote after solving the matter raised by Amendment No 1 .
Amendment No 1 has lapsed but now an oral amendment is being tabled .
Are there any objections to this oral amendment ?
Mr President , given the fact that this is such a difficult and sensitive issue , I myself might be very tempted to vote for that .
However , this whole issue is so controversial that it would be better if we did not actually vote on anything in this connection .
If we accept that Amendment No 1 by the Committee on Budgets was lost , as it was earlier , then we should just accept its loss and do nothing .
There are clearly more than 12 Members who are opposed to this oral amendment , so I cannot put it to the vote .
Mr President , it is clear , as Mrs Green said , that we are now in a position where we have established the principles from the earlier vote , and we should try to accommodate that at this stage .
We know where we stand ; we have recorded votes on the basic principles of the budget vote , and it would be helpful if we avoided trying to replicate something about which we have , in substance , already reached a decision .
Yes , there is clearly opposition to this oral amendment .
On paragraph 31
Mr President , basically I believe that this amendment to paragraph 31 , tabled by the Socialist Group , is no longer relevant after the votes which have been taken .
Instead , I think that paragraph 31 of my resolution - the text from the Committee on Budgets - should be modified to remove the words ' to create four permanent B5 proofreader posts ' , given that this proposal fell during the earlier votes on the budget .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , please allow me - I could not do so just now - to join Mrs Dührkop in thanking the entire staff of the Committee on Budgets . Their assistance in the course of my work was absolutely invaluable .
Mr President , I would just like to point out that we rejected the substance of this third indent when we voted on the budget .
These are two different resolutions , and while they may say the same thing , I have to put both of them to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , I would like to ask whether you said there were mistakes in certain language versions .
For example , there is one in the Finnish version .
It talks about hardwood and coniferous trees , yet the committee has constantly stressed that we are only talking about all deciduous trees , not conifers .
I just wanted to make it clear to everyone that there was a mistake in the Finnish version .
You are quite right , Mrs Ojala .
There is a corrigendum to the German , Finnish , Spanish and Swedish versions , and a second corrigendum to the Danish version .
This will all be looked at very carefully .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Different political groups in the European Parliament will always vary as to how best they feel the European Community budget should be spent at any given time .
I myself would like to put on the record of the House that I feel that appropriate financial resources must be put aside at all times to help the marginalised and disadvantaged in our society .
I give you one example , the Irish Government is presently formulating a National Development Plan outlining our social and economic investment priorities for the period 2000-2006 .
We have been told that Ireland has spent the Structural Funds under the present Community Support Framework 1994-1999 very shrewdly with the consequent economic benefits .
There are many people within the European Union , some notably from Germany and the Netherlands , who feel that Ireland should not be given extra resources under the next round of EU structural funds , 2000-2006 .
The person who invented the phrase ' the Celtic Tiger ' has not done Ireland a favour .
In Dublin city and county for which I am a Member , there are presently still 70 000 people on the live register .
The Irish Government must include concrete proposals in the National Development Plan which is being sent to the European Commission to help combat this problem which is highly concentrated within the Dublin city and county region .
One of the priorities must relate to the need to continue to put into place more innovative training programmes so that the evil of long-term unemployment can be defeated once and for all .
Notwithstanding the fact that Ireland as a country will not qualify for Objective 1 status for the seven-year period post 1999 , Dublin city and county still merits the receipt of EU structural funds for particular projects .
The EU budget must reflect this at any given time .
The priority number one area must be to ensure that the European Social Fund is made available for measures to help combat youth and long-term unemployment .
However , other areas which will merit the assistance of EU Regional Fund monies will also relate to the need to implement an integrated transport system as well as introduce innovative measures to deal with our growing waste problem .
Through our voting strategy we have sought to reduce the total EU budget , which we feel is too all-encompassing .
We are particularly concerned about the Structural Funds and the CAP .
We also voted consistently against funding propaganda ventures such as the Prince programme .
As regards the vote on Members ' travel expenses , yet again the majority in this House has managed to avoid voting for the only ethical option , i.e. refunding individuals for expenses on an actual cost basis .
The system under which Members of the European Parliament can stuff their own pockets will continue , a state of affairs which we deplore .
It should go without saying that reimbursement should cover what we actually spend on travel .
The recent decision by Parliament 's Bureau , soon to come into effect , will leave the situation largely unchanged .
The majority of MEPs have once more demonstrated their inability to come to grips with this important issue . This perhaps tells us more about Members themselves than about the European Parliament as an institution .
We do not think that it would be a good idea to remunerate Members on a common basis . We therefore voted against the proposal in Amendment No 899 , fifth indent .
The amendment calling for funds for a project to put an end to violence against women is , however , very much to be welcomed and we therefore voted in favour .
Although I reject many of the budget items , particularly the support for nuclear energy and for fusion research , the contributions to the NATO golden jubilee and some agricultural premiums , I voted for the budget because the prudent measures it finances outweigh the others .
I explicitly voted for actual travel costs to be refunded , yet without linking this decision to the new statute for Members .
This statute is vital if there is to be greater clarity , but the two issues cannot be linked .
I regret that , as a result of this Parliament 's vote , a decision by the Bureau is now in the process of being applied .
This decision is incorrect for at least two reasons . Firstly , it is only applicable from 1 May 1999 , one week after the close of this session .
Secondly , those Members who already receive the largest allowances will then receive an additional allowance .
I voted against all the proposals advocating ' more Union ' .
There is something wrong with an institution which , because it lacks grass-roots support among the people , has to resort to ceaseless propaganda campaigns in order to sell itself . Look at what is happening over the euro , for example .
I supported the proposals for changing the way the CAP and the Structural Funds operate . I welcome calls for less regulation and more straightforward procedures in these areas , and am therefore behind much of the Agenda 2000 package .
I voted against EU funding for Turkey , since it has not met the commitments it entered into when the Customs Union agreement was signed . Turkey undertook then to stop waging war against the Kurds and to cease persecuting them .
It also promised respect for human rights , democracy and freedom of expression .
I voted in favour of the proposals to reimburse travel expenses actually incurred , on production of receipts .
By voting against the Members ' Statute or ' common statute ' , I rejected calls for a standard level of remuneration , accompanied by low EU tax .
The indecipherable tangle of account-settling , bogus contracts and nepotism in the domain of humanitarian aid - the ECHO programme - has aroused indignation , and rightly so .
In fulfilment of its obligation to control and inform , the European Parliament reacted immediately ; because of the inadequate response from the Commission and its glaring failure to provide the elected representatives of the people with sufficient information , we froze all humanitarian aid as a first step .
In the face of this pressure , the Commission relented and promised to hand over to Parliament all the documents held by the anti-fraud unit UCLAF .
Moreover , the Commission undertook to submit the documentation on the bogus contracts to the judicial authorities .
Not all the problems , however , have been solved - far from it .
That is why it would be irresponsible to take the pressure off the Commission now .
On the contrary , Parliament must use all the means at its disposal to have this appalling business fully cleared up .
For that reason , I supported the Green Group 's Amendment No 584 , whereby 30 % of the TACIS funds were to be set aside for as long as it took to resolve the outstanding issues - an independent audit of ECHO , disciplinary proceedings and the handover of the documents .
The Commission would then have been required to practise transparency and to shed light on this matter between now and the second reading of the budget in December .
I deeply regret that the opposition on the Socialist side has killed this amendment .
Parliament has thereby thrown away an effective means of enforcing those demands that would have served to promote honesty and transparency in European politics .
Although I reject many of the budget items , particularly the support for nuclear energy and for fusion research , the contributions to the NATO golden jubilee and some agricultural premiums ( such as the ' Herod premium ' ) , I voted for the budget because the prudent measures it finances outweigh the others .
Madam President , we voted against the budgets and I would like to explain the additional reasons for this , that is , those that were not mentioned during the general debate .
Of course , three votes did receive our approval .
The first was Amendment No 439 where we deleted the amounts included in the reserve for Turkey . The second was Amendment No 866 where we withdrew financial aid to ACP banana producers , which is a good decision .
We also deleted the special reserves for external policies and we welcome this move .
On the other hand , we believe there are two decisions that are reprehensible .
Firstly , we got rid of the reserve for humanitarian aid with Amendment No 784 .
Secondly , Amendment No 1 , our amendment to the resolution , was rejected .
As regards humanitarian aid , I see that , having shown its fighting spirit in the face of the ECHO scandal , the European Parliament is once again satisfied with explanations and a mere letter . However , Madam President , we have still not , and I repeat , still not received the UCLAF report that sparked the whole affair .
Finally , our Amendment No 1 , on the exchange of information with the relevant committees in national parliaments was a repeat of the initial version from Mrs Dührkop Dührkop 's report .
It was merely a repeat of what she had initially stated in her report .
I see now that , on all sides , people are constantly talking to me and to us of closer links with national parliaments .
In this report there was a simple measure that allowed the relevant committees in national parliaments to become more involved in terms of the budget .
At a time when the budget is causing more and more problems , when we are asking more and more from the Member States , when some even envisage asking Member States to once again finance certain expenditure , how can we accept this refusal to allow such vital collaboration with national parliaments ?
These are the additional reasons for our opposition to this report .
Madam President , I did not vote for the agricultural chapters of the budget .
Not because I do not wish there to be an agricultural budget : indeed , I consider this to be a very good budget , with the exception of those funds which are to be spent on supporting certain activities that not only I but also an ever-increasing number of citizens of the European Union reject , fail to understand and simply no longer want .
We are using the 1999 budget to go on financing the Herod premium and subsidising the transport of live animals .
I am entirely on the side of Europe 's farmers , who have to work very hard to earn their living in the service of our citizens .
Let not a single ECU be taken from the farmers !
But do let us seek ways and means of paying our dues to the farming community without financing the transport of livestock to the Middle East and the Herod premium .
My intention in casting this vote was to speak for those people who would not otherwise have a voice in this Chamber .
In today 's vote on the budget the Commission , its President and the Commissioner responsible for relations with Turkey have received a firm political response from the European Parliament concerning finance for Turkey .
Parliament voted by 365 votes to 135 not merely to consign financial aid for Turkey to the reserve but to delete it from the reserve altogether .
I hope we will give the same response when we vote on the Commission 's new regulations , which I am sorry to say constitute an institutional coup d 'etat .
I also hope that Turkey will soon meet the European Parliament 's demands with regard to democracy and compliance with international law , if the financial aid is to be unfrozen .
I voted against the motion for a resolution ( A4-0360 / 98 ) on the Draft General Budget of the European Union for the financial year 1999 to protest against the neglect of and discrimination against the tourism sector and the fact that Amendment No 75 was rejected , thus preventing the inclusion of any budget heading on measures to help tourism and thereby depriving it of funding .
This majority decision by the European Parliament comes in the wake of the rejection by the Committee on Budgets of an amount of ECU 3.5 million and the proposal , currently under discussion , to restructure the parliamentary committees , which would mean that tourism would cease to be the subject of any committee in its own right ( there is currently a Committee on Transport and Tourism ) .
This anti-tourism attitude seems to be echoed by a majority of the Council . The fact that it is now finding its way into the European Parliament is an affront to the most important economic activity in the European Union , in terms of employment , investment and per capita GDP , a sector still facing problems requiring a specifically European approach .
The European Parliament 's only concern seems to be to open a budgetary heading on the Campaign against Sex Tourism in Third Countries ( B7-663 ) , and it has abandoned the European tourism sector altogether . That sector is now bereft of the resources and legal basis needed for Community measures to be taken .
I am a member of the European Parliament representing a country , Portugal , where tourism is a vital sector in the economy , and the Algarve , a region where tourism is extremely important , and so I have to express my disappointment at the attitude shown by the European Union institutions and vote against this report .
Madam President , we voted against the Viola report and I would like to stress the main reason for our position on this report , namely , what happened in relation to the reimbursement of travel expenses during the vote .
Amendment No 899 to the remarks by the Committee on Budgets was rejected .
It received only 224 votes .
The amendment by the Liberal Group , which said it was in favour of actual costs , received 214 votes .
Our group 's Amendment No 4 to the resolution obtained 143 votes and the Liberal Group 's amendment received 188 votes .
Each year , during the budgetary debate , we have asked that the travel costs reimbursed to Members are those actually incurred .
The rejection of these amendments , which took place today , shows how irresponsible our Members are .
In fact , how can we maintain a system that allows Members to receive a fairly significant allowance depending on how far they live from Brussels or Strasbourg , an allowance that is not provided for by any treaty nor any Community act and that is not taxable ?
We hear talk of the problem of the statute for Members , and of inequality , but the Member States are responsible for the situation of their Members .
It is the Member States which must decide whether or not there should be a different allowance in relation to members of their national parliament .
Since the European Parliament has not been asked , it is not responsible for providing a system of compensation , a system that also compounds inequality , as the level of compensation increases when one is geographically further away .
The level of compensation is not related to the amount of the parliamentary allowance in each country .
This is why we are opposed to this report .
It is wrong to claim that the Bureau 's decision is a good one .
The Bureau 's decision institutionalizes a system that reimburses fictitious costs .
We are against this system and will continue to oppose it in the future .
Madam President , I did not vote in favour of Mr Viola 's report on the expenditure budget of the European Parliament because the majority of Members voted against the amendments providing for the reimbursement of actual travel costs , based on the presentation of proof of travel .
I had personally voted in favour of these amendments .
The outcome of the vote is that the decision of 19 October by the Bureau of the European Parliament , as unjust as it is hypocritical , will enter into force and will benefit even further those Members who already receive too much in terms of travel expenses .
Through this decision , Members will receive a distance allowance that is , in truth , an additional salary and Members who already receive the highest parliamentary travel allowances provided by their national parliaments will be entitled to this allowance .
Subsequently , I voted for Amendment No 4 to the motion for a resolution on the budget of the European Parliament , an amendment that could have repaired the damage done if it had been adopted .
The Amendment did , in fact , aim to give the Bureau the task of withholding all payments of travel expenses that exceeded actual outlay .
Unfortunately , only 143 Members voted in favour of this .
Fortunately , the 275 Members who voted against have thereby revealed their hypocrisy , which I will continue to expose .
Their hypocrisy does nothing to improve Parliament 's image and does even less to improve the image of the majority of the Bureau which , through its decision of 19 October that is hypocritical and lacks transparency , has established a true self-service system for the money provided by the taxpayer .
In connection with this year 's budget round , the issue of Members ' travel allowances has once again been raised .
The current system allows Members who travel cheaply to keep the difference between the amount actually spent and the flat-rate allowance .
We have always said that we support those proposals which seek to replace the existing travel allowance with a reimbursement system based on the real cost of travel . This is preferable to a flat-rate allowance for the distance covered .
We have worked throughout for a proper , comprehensive solution to the problem .
The system that has now been adopted is not satisfactory .
If we as parliamentarians want to enjoy the confidence of the electorate , we must resolve the question of our allowances once and for all .
The four of us have therefore agreed that , as from the beginning of next year , we will accept reimbursement of the actual cost of travel only ; any surplus will be returned to the Community budget .
This initiative is designed to create transparency and counter the suspicion that travel allowances are used for purposes other than those envisaged .
On this much-discussed question of travel allowances , we of course voted in favour of reimbursement of the actual cost of travel , and no more . This has been our stance throughout .
Anything else is quite unethical .
Amendment No 1 - which was based largely on the Green Group 's proposal - was lost because of the way the earlier vote went .
Apart from the paragraph on the Statute for Members - which we oppose - the text with that amendment would have been eminently acceptable from our point of view .
We voted in favour of two of the amendments taken in plenary : Nos 4 and 5 .
We have our doubts about the proposal in Amendment No 5 for a further allowance to cover travel in a Member 's home country .
We would have voted in favour , however , had the principle of reimbursement on the basis of real costs been carried .
Yet again , the European Parliament has proved incapable of taking the necessary decisions .
The only sensible and ethical solution would have been to introduce real-cost reimbursement .
What we have now is a situation where Members are free to pocket any surplus allowance that is not needed for travel .
We very much regret that not even Amendment No 3 on ' greening ' the administration of the EU institutions was adopted .
Since the really important points in this text were dropped , we chose to vote against the whole report .
I voted in the Chamber for Amendment No 537 and paragraphs 1-4 of Amendment No 899 in the belief that Parliament would at last be prepared to adopt the practice whereby travel expenses may only be claimed for the actual costs incurred .
Such a practice would be consistent with a sense of fairness and the expectations of our citizens .
The new situation , in other words the fact that the decision of the Bureau is to come into force , will not improve matters as we had hoped , but on the contrary will confuse things even further .
Parliament does not seem to understand that such spectacles and resolutions only diminish our credibility still further , which I seriously regret .
Madam President , I voted against this resolution because it goes completely in the wrong direction and totally ignores the citizens of the Member States and their rights and the rights of national parliaments which are much closer to the people than the European Parliament or the European institutions .
It is extremely important that Member States allow their citizens to have as great as possible a role in decision-making and that national parliaments should have the right to scrutinise all the EU institutions .
In particular , it is quite incredible that Parliament should not criticise - since it has often criticised - its role as regards the Commission and that we should not be able to dismiss individual Commissioners rather than the Commission as a collegiate body , because Parliament will never use that power .
As regards the role of the common foreign and security policy , it is clear that Parliament and the EU institutions are obsessed with the development of a common defence policy , yet the question of whom we are defending ourselves against has never been clearly answered .
It is basically in the interests of the militarisation of Europe , which is not in the interests of people in the long term .
We need to look at demilitarising Europe and the world instead of going in this direction .
But this resolution fails to address the democratic deficit of the European Union and completely ignores the rights of ordinary people in the Union .
Madam President , in his introductory speech to the debate on the state of the Union yesterday morning , the President of the European Parliament , Mr Gil-Robles , expressed his concern over the complete lack of progress in the Council 's work on how to incorporate the Schengen acquis into the Treaty .
In fact , we know that the protocol incorporating Schengen , as it was adopted by the Amsterdam Council , states in Article 2 that the Council , acting unanimously , shall determine the relevant legal basis for each of the Schengen provisions .
In other words , the Council will distribute them between the first and third pillars by sovereign decision .
This procedure is completely extraordinary and , in my opinion , goes against the French constitution , as it allows the Council of Ministers to determine which aspects of the Schengen agreement can be dealt with by majority voting and which will still require unanimity , without any parliamentary ratification nor any control over constitutionality .
This , for France , is one of the many reasons why we reject the Amsterdam Treaty .
The Council working party has been considering this distribution for a year and has still not produced any tangible results .
If the situation were still the same after the Amsterdam Treaty had been ratified , all the Schengen acquis would be attributed to the third pillar , creating an incredible legal imbroglio with the area of freedom , security and justice that was automatically attributed to the first pillar by the Amsterdam Treaty .
Given these conditions , we can understand that the President , Mr Gil-Robles , is calling on the forthcoming Vienna Council to breath new life into this work .
But what can the European Council do ?
In reality , the working party 's paralysis shows that the Amsterdam Treaty , as it was signed , appears to be completely unworkable on this point .
How can the Heads of State or Government have put their signature to such measures ?
This will have to be clarified later but , for the moment , it would indeed be a relief if France did not ratify the Amsterdam Treaty .
In the event of a majority vote in favour of the original text :
We would point out that , in paragraph 3 , the Swedish words ' ett så kallad rättvist återflöde ' do not accurately reflect the French ' juste retour ' , which should be translated as ' exakt ' or ' precist återflöde ' .
The context of the invitation to this meeting has been changed by the German general election .
The meeting was an idea put forward in a joint letter signed by President Chirac and Chancellor Kohl . Therefore , what purpose can this meeting serve other than to give Mr Schröder and the 14 other Heads of State and Government a chance to meet each other ?
Nonetheless , the proposal by the Committee on Institutional Affairs contains some good points which , if they are taken into account , could just enable the ' summit ' to reach the kind of conclusions to give a fillip of a proactively European political nature to the fight against the root-causes of the crisis and the upsurge in reactionary nationalism . Those factors are making it even more difficult to stick to an already extremely complicated political programme , what with the international financial crisis , enlargement to the east , Agenda 2000 and the future financing of the European Union .
In my view , what makes this resolution interesting - for once getting away from the petty and monotonous institutional demands continually being drummed out by the European Parliament - is that it makes the political future of the European Union dependent upon four fundamental conditions :
the need to play a decisive political role , apart from the market and the single currency , and to try to promote human rights and peace through its foreign policy ; involvement in the regulation of international economics and finances in order to bring about economic progress and social justice ( see the proposal by Mr António Guterres made on behalf of the summit of Heads of State and Government of the Ibero-American countries , meeting in Oporto last weekend , for the EU summit on 2425 October dealing with the international financial crisis ) , and in the creation of an area of freedom , security and justice ; -achieving enlargement in a fair way while maintaining cohesion between old and new Member States ; -applying subsidiarity not as a pretext for renationalisation nor in a spiral of centralisation but as a ' dynamic criterion ' in order to determine who , the Member States or the European Union , should exercise their powers in order to guarantee that the aims of the Treaty are effectively attained ; -carrying out an institutional reform to guarantee greater democracy , transparency , citizen participation and effectiveness - aspects which this resolution , unlike others , rightly and expressly considers to be unconnected with the question of the weighting of votes or other issues linked to the power-related status of the larger Member States.This is a resolution which , by laying such emphasis on subsidiarity , by defending the vital participation of national parliaments and by realistically enhancing the decisive role of the Council in a union of sovereign States , demonstrates that the widespread fears of federalism were unfounded - a federalism that only produced bugbears of benefit to nationalists . What has won the day is an authentically federal approach applicable to those powers already transferred , ensuring participation and democracy at that level , in particular by strengthening the European Parliament and giving the Commission , which is effectively responsible to the European Parliament , a bigger say .
At the same time , the resolution does not ignore the fact that it is more urgent than ever to make progress towards European unification and that the ways of bringing that about require the appropriate institutional finances for meeting the aims of the Treaties to be made available - or , to put it another way , the governments must show willing !
Last but not least , the resolution puts economic and social cohesion and the European social model on a par with democracy , human rights and the market economy as the fundamental elements of the new constitutional pact being worked out in the European Union .
These are further reasons why we are voting in favour of the motion , denouncing the small-minded interests of those who confuse politics with accountancy and are defending come what may the anti-Community theory of the so-called juste retour .
Whatever committees we work in , the political future of Europe concerns all of us as Members of the European Parliament .
As the Pörtschach European summit is deemed informal and as the Amsterdam Treaty has not yet been ratified by the Member States , the Committee on Institutional Affairs has wisely based its resolution on the issues announced at the Summit : subsidiarity and the democratic legitimacy of the institutions .
This is so that its voice will be heard by the Heads of State or Government of the 15 Member States in a clear and concise political message .
This pragmatic approach must not prevent us , the socialist Members , from looking further ahead into the future , to a possible overall institutional reform , and we should remember that the next six presidencies of the Union will be held by governments where socialists are in office .
We should therefore ask ourselves what the words of our resolution mean : ' go beyond the completion of the internal market and the introduction of the single currency and move towards a real political union ' .
Twenty years of neo-liberal utopia have taught us the hard way that political globalisation is needed in order to face today 's financial and commercial globalisation , to face the deregulation of financial flows and to face monetary fanaticism .
For this reason , the development of the European Union represents an essential step forward in constructing a regional world power .
In today 's world , the economy , technology and the development of the information society are evolving in an increasingly international arena .
Those who wish to change society must have a supranational political structure available that will compensate for the influence individual states have lost on such developments .
The European Union has allowed us to benefit from globalisation whilst protecting us from its disadvantages .
The Union has become a strong economic block that makes businesses more efficient .
A single market has been created and it guarantees , albeit belatedly , the free movement of goods , services , capital and persons .
National trade barriers have been eliminated .
In 1999 , national currencies will begin to fade out and the euro will take over .
The Union has become one of the major commercial powers in the world and has many instruments available to allow it to face the challenges of the international economy .
Moreover , with the euro , the European Union will become a world power on a monetary level .
A specific policy has also been developed to assist less-developed regions in Europe .
This structural policy has generally been successful .
At the same time , the European Union is protecting peace in Europe .
Of all its achievements , this remains the most remarkable , even if it does have its faults .
For half a century , the Member States have lived in peace .
Confrontation has given way to cooperation .
Nonetheless , public opinion is turning away from Europe due to the unjust nature of the integration imposed by the single market .
Europeans as consumers , workers , unemployed people and citizens have often been neglected .
Although the Treaties have given the European institutions a clear mission , this mission has not been accomplished in terms of social , employment and environmental policies , nor in terms of fiscal and security policies .
European policy on these matters has been inadequate .
Therefore , there is an urgent need to develop these policies .
The introduction of the single currency will only increase this need further in social and fiscal matters .
And until people see the European Union solving their problems , their confidence in Europe will not be restored .
The Europe of Citizens only has meaning if it refers to a project that allows Europe to respond to the everyday concerns of its citizens .
Raymonde Dury , my predecessor in this European mandate , was fond of saying that if the European Union as an entity asked to join the Union , it would be refused on the grounds that it was not sufficiently democratic .
We are a unique showcase in history as the whole , the European Union , is less democratic than each of its parts , the Member States .
This is why the main aim of the institutional reforms must be to build true democracy and to achieve even greater efficiency .
This democracy and this efficiency will only be achieved in Europe by means of a federal model .
In this model , the Commission would become a true government .
The European Parliament would become a first chamber representing the people .
The Council would become a second Chamber representing the Member States and their bodies .
The entire structure would be founded upon a true European constitution .
The Court of Justice would become a European constitutional court .
Democratization means European decisions would be made within a framework where the essential guarantees of democracy would be real guarantees , namely , the principle of majority rule , the political accountability of the authorities , control of parliamentary institutions and transparency in decision-making procedures .
Strengthening the democratic nature of the institutions would allow their efficiency to be increased whilst reducing the weight of their bureaucracy at the same time .
This would first mean strengthening democratic controls in the first pillar and then bringing the two intergovernmental pillars fully within the Community arena .
This would also strengthen the role of the Court of Justice .
Democratization must therefore go hand in hand with a streamlining process , based on fundamental changes within the three major European institutions .
The main aim of reforming European policies is to increase efficiency .
Enlargement is forcing the European Union to review the efficiency of its policies .
In a European Union with 500 million inhabitants spread over the whole continent , all European initiatives must be reviewed . The need for efficiency must be given more consideration .
And this , more to the point , is the basic meaning of the principle of subsidiarity .
The role of the European Union needs to be reduced in certain cases and increased in others .
As a result , the European Union is still too weak in its fight against the negative social and cultural repercussions of globalisation .
On the other hand , some of its forms of intervention , and occasionally some powers , have lost much of their meaning .
They add to the cumbersome bureaucracy and budgetary expenditure yet achieve very little .
Certain forms of intervention must be reviewed , such as those relating to the fight against social exclusion , to social , environmental and fiscal matters and to agricultural policy .
The Cohesion Fund , in its current form , no longer has a raison d 'être .
It must become a growth fund offering Member States loans that will facilitate a policy of budgetary adjustment .
It will then be easier for them to respect the convergence criteria in times of financial crisis .
The resolution from Mr De Giovanni and the Committee on Institutional Affairs contains a series of points in the run-up to the October meeting of heads of state and government .
Most of what is said takes us too far along the road towards integration and federalism .
Paragraph 22 , for example , states that we should ' lay the foundations for integration of the powers of the WEU in the European Union ' . This of course means militarisation of the EU , which runs counter to our desire for a peaceful and demilitarised Europe .
The alternative resolution from the EDN Group is much better , since it calls for a strengthening of democracy and the application of the subsidiarity principle , as formulated in Cardiff .
The whole thrust of this resolution is that the EU should become more supranational , transforming itself into a ' United States of Europe ' .
In paragraph 10 , the European Council is warned ' against the temptation to use subsidiarity as a pretext for the renationalisation of Community policies ' .
Paragraph 11 ' underlines that fears of over-centralisation in the European Union are greatly exaggerated ' .
Our premise is that the EU should function on the basis of cooperation between independent states .
We therefore cannot vote for the resolution .
We also reject the idea that the European Parliament should have its own Statute .
The link between Members of the European Parliament and national parliaments is vital as a matter of principle .
A uniform EP statute would shore up federalist leanings further still .
Huge pay rises for most MEPs would inevitably ensue .
Many citizens who are currently going through hard times would find that difficult to swallow .
The latest medical data from the World Health Organization ( WHO ) shows that occupational cancer is constantly increasing in the European Union .
Such cancers account for a significant share of mortality statistics .
We no longer underestimate the impact of certain environmental factors on cancer and we should treat industry in the same way .
When hereditary tendencies are added to these unfavourable circumstances , we know that cancers then develop on a large scale .
As a doctor , I have had the opportunity to study this health problem .
Besides the human aspect , all this inevitably incurs an economic and social cost .
Today , the wood industry , in particular , is under close scrutiny .
Nonetheless , the answer does not lie in imposing measures that are too strict and that , in practice , cannot be applied .
It has become essential to consider the economic aspects of this problem .
The implications in financial terms and in employment terms affect several hundred European businesses in the wood sector .
Therefore , we must know how to act in this respect and take measures that will preserve human life but that will not condemn a sector that employs a large labour force .
If we act hurriedly and without proper judgement then thousands of jobs will be a stake .
Part of the European Parliament 's role is to advocate a progressive conversion to stricter standards on eliminating wood dust .
It is also important in this field to ensure that precautionary measures are harmonised for all countries in the European Union and for all businesses , no matter what size they may be .
A major part of the efficiency of this protective measure lies in the time allowed for transposing it and applying it to the various national legislations .
Our proposal is sufficiently flexible to allow it to be adapted over time .
I voted in favour of the Correia report .
As a consumer I am glad that new technologies are opening up new possibilities such as the opportunity to use the Internet for telephone calls .
The possibilities for this kind of ' convergence ' between different sectors of the communications industry are exciting .
Perhaps such technological developments will help to open up access for disabled people and others for whom past systems have been difficult to use .
Almost by definition we must adopt a light hand to regulating services offered by the Internet , which is independent of any national or regional control .
However the fact that we as legislators are currently often left to rely on industry self-regulation to see that consumer interests are safeguarded should not mean that we simply forget the needs of consumers .
We can , and should if needed , act against monopolies which could limit customer choice .
And the new communications service providers should remember that just as technology can be made to maximise profit , other experts perhaps employed by the public sector could be asked to come up with systems to check quality of service to paying customers .
I hope that the industries involved in the new communications services will serve all their customers to the highest standards and remove the need for devising what they would complain of as red tape regulations - if they do not , we should be prepared to act to make sure that everyone benefits from new ways of communicating .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted for Mr Giansily 's report on currency reserves in the third stage of EMU .
That does not mean , however , that we have abandoned Denmark 's reservations on the third stage of EMU , which remain in place , but that we are interested in what happens in this area , since the third stage of EMU will have great significance for Denmark , with or without our participation .
The proposal will in fact ensure that the European System of Central Banks ( ESCB ) holds a considerable currency reserve in the transitional phase between introduction of the euro and its final implementation .
This will assure the participating countries that their exchange rates remain stable during the transitional period .
Mr Giansily 's report raises the problem of foreign currency reserves in the third stage of Economic and Monetary Union .
The introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 will mean that part of the current reserves of the national central banks ( NCBs ) will cease to count as foreign currency reserves and will become de facto internal assets .
Nonetheless , the fact remains that the NCBs will still have considerable foreign currency reserves , particularly in dollars and in gold , but also in IMF reserve positions and in SDRs .
The overall amount is estimated to be $ 400 billion for the whole of the euro area .
Given that the NCBs are transferring the equivalent of 50 billion euros to the ECB , a considerable amount of currency will be left in the NCBs ' accounts .
Currently , these reserves can be used to carry out interventions to prevent exchange market disturbances or to cover possible balance of payments deficits .
With the single currency , interventions in currencies of the euro area countries will no longer exist .
What , then , should be done with these surplus reserves ?
We might think at first that this considerable amount will be used to enhance the stability of the euro by discouraging possible speculative attacks .
It is then important , for the euro 's stability , not to dispose of these surpluses in one fell swoop .
Such a move would result in a sharp appreciation of the euro in relation to the dollar and would harm the competitiveness of our economies .
For the euro as an international currency , it would also be wise to avoid any unnecessary disturbance on the exchange markets .
To conclude , I would like to come back to a point which , to my mind , has not been sufficiently developed by our rapporteur . The Statute of the ESCB states that the NCBs shall continue to be allowed to use their currency reserves , in particular to fulfil their obligations towards international organisations .
If these interventions exceed a certain amount , each NCB will have to obtain the approval of the ECB .
Our rapporteur should undoubtedly have stressed the risks of manoeuvring involved in such a procedure and the need for meticulous control of these interventions .
Besides this one observation , Mr Giansily 's report is a good report and I will vote in favour of it .
Since Sweden will not be involved in the introduction of the euro over the period 1999-2002 , we decided to abstain in the vote on this report .
This is a matter for the Member States who will form part of the euro zone .
We do however have a point on gold reserves . These carry with them a high emotional charge and tend to be seen as the safest form of emergency reserve for an independent nation .
The pooling of gold reserves would be another nail in the coffin of the independent democratic state .
In the resolution our colleague Mr Giansily is submitting for consideration , the question is being raised of how the introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 will affect foreign currency reserves currently held by Member States participating in the euro .
Article 30 of the protocol annexed to the EC Treaty on the Statute of the European Central Bank states that , in proportion to their share in the capital of the ECB - their share of Community GDP and of population - the national central banks shall transfer foreign currency reserves to the ECB to a total sum of approximately ECU 50 billion .

The stated objective of the system thus established is that interventions should be carried out on the one hand to prevent disturbances and , on the other hand , to cover possible balance of payments external deficits .
But , as Mr Giansily explains , the economic and monetary area created by the third stage of EMU should reduce the need for reserves , even though we must exercise the utmost caution during the changeover period in order to ensure that the euro enjoys a certain degree of credibility in the international arena .
If we take France as an example , a swift calculation shows that France will have to transfer just over 50 billion francs to the ECB .
The official foreign currency reserves of the French Government had increased to 400 billion francs by the end of February 1998 , of which 150 billion were gold reserves in the coffers of the Banque de France .
Therefore , once the euro has been introduced , the French Government will possess just under 350 billion francs in surplus foreign currency reserves .
The assets in ecus - around 67 billion francs - and in national currencies - the 11 currencies of the euro area - will have to be deducted from this amount and these assets will be converted into euros .
Given that the ECB should not use these currency reserves to establish the euro , the fundamental question remains : how are these reserves to be used ?
In addition , it ought to be pointed out that the level of reserves needed should increase according to how far an economy opens up to others .
The more an economy opens up , the greater the risks and the higher the level of reserves needed .
So , given that European economic integration and the introduction of the euro will reduce extra-Community transactions and exchanges , one amount , estimated at ECU 80 billion , appears to be rather excessive !

In the light of these figures , what conclusions can be drawn ?
The concrete result for the Member States is a loss of reserves , which is equivalent to a loss of revenue , as these reserves generate interest .
What is more , not content with whisking these financial resources away from the Member States - resources which also act as a means of reducing budgetary deficits - the ECB should find itself sitting on a real ' war chest ' .
So what does the Bank intend to do with it ?
As a result , we cannot vote in favour of Mr Giansily 's report as it seems to us that the vital question of how these reserves will be used has not been raised .
Nor has the issue of highlighting the financial resources given to the ECB been raised , where these resources appear to be proportional to the loss of real monetary sovereignty in the Member States .
Finally , it is clear that the aim of transferring financial resources to the omnipotent ECB cannot conceal the partial transfer of monetary sovereignty from the Member States to this Community body , which is devoid of all democratic legitimacy .
This debate should actually be seen in two broader contexts :
1.the determination of the future international role of the new Euroland , particularly within the global financial system , and2. the establishment of a European credit policy as an essential component of a funding framework for sustainable investments in our social and ecological future.In both respects , the rapporteur has been overcautious .
The bank funds of USD 200 billion which are available in the medium term are certainly not chicken-feed !
In our amendments , we have tried at least to initiate a structured debate to find out how we can exercise the necessary diligence and avoid undue haste , but still come up with measures that can lead to the gradual elimination of mass unemployment .
This is surely the very least that the 27 million and more unemployed Europeans can expect of us , and indeed of this House as a whole and of the Commission .
It would naturally also be useful and would serve the true interests of the European people if some of these reserves were used to finance a structured and regulated underpinning of the international financial edifice .
( The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Topical and urgent subjects of major importanceArrest of General Pinochet
The next item is the debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0975 / 98 by Mrs Green on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , Mr Cox on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , Mr Puerta on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , Mrs Aelvoet on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament and Mrs Lalumière and Mr Escolá Hernando on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the arrest of General Pinochet in London ; -B4-0976 / 98 by Mr Galeote Quecedo , Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra and Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the arrest of General Pinochet in London .
Mr President , as you have just said , it falls to me to speak on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , although I will be putting the case for a motion for a resolution submitted jointly by five political groups of this House , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , the Group of the European Radical Alliance , the Liberal Group , the Green Group and the Socialist Group itself .
I believe that this resolution is couched in very carefully considered terms in which we confine ourselves to welcoming the arrest of General Pinochet in London and urge the Spanish Government to hasten the extradition procedure , once the judicial authorities have submitted a formal request , in order to ensure that General Augusto Pinochet appears before the Spanish courts .
There is a reason for this which is that dozens of Spaniards were among the many people murdered during the Pinochet regime ; it is estimated that over 3 000 people were murdered during that black period in the history of the delightful country of Chile .
We now find ourselves in a European judicial area .
We have gone beyond the borders of the Union as both the Maastricht Treaty of 1992 and the new Amsterdam Treaty of 1997 lay down principles of judicial cooperation and , above all , the new Article 31 of the Amsterdam Treaty provides for cooperation in the field of extradition .
The mere mention of figures , of the thousands who disappeared , fails perhaps to convey the true human dimension of the tragedy that the Pinochet dictatorship inflicted on Chile .
I will refer to only one case , because it concerns someone I knew personally .
That person was Carmelo Soria , an international official of the United Nations .
I met him in person at the United Nations shortly before he went to Chile .
He went there full of enthusiasm , during one of the better stages of Chile 's history .
He was going to work as an international civil servant .
And this man , whose only crime was to be an official of the United Nations and to have a somewhat liberal ideology , disappeared , was tortured , was ill-treated , was murdered and his remains were even destroyed in order to give the impression of an accident .
He has left behind a family ; he was Spanish ; he was a man who was internationally protected as an international civil servant .
The endeavours made in this House to see the authors of this crime brought to trial in Chile have been to no avail , despite a number of promises , and now we have the opportunity , through collaboration between the authorities of different countries of the Union , to bring the main culprit of this and over 30 000 more murders before a Community judge , before a Spanish judge .
I think that the least we can do in this Parliament is to ask that General Pinochet be made appear before a Spanish court to answer for these crimes .
Mr Medina , you know that our group has been most adamant in condemning the regime of the dictator Pinochet , but the motion for a resolution tabled by the Socialist Group urges the Spanish Government to take steps to ultimately request extradition and that is simply not necessary because the Spanish Government - as you well know - has already expressed , through its President , its respect for the decisions of justice and of the relevant courts . When the time comes , as I am sure everybody is aware , it will be the British authorities who will have to grant extradition .
Therefore , I presume that nobody in this House will oppose a request for collaboration , too , with the justice system of the Government of the United Kingdom , that nobody will oppose our stating and repeating the principle of non-interference in the course of justice , and that , equally , nobody will have anything against our restating our support for the democratic institutions of Chile in the process of consolidating the rule of law .
I hope and expect that all these positions in particular , together with others contained in the amendments tabled by my group , will receive the support of the majority in this House .
However , if anybody is using this initiative to conceal the hidden , unacknowledged intention of causing problems for the Spanish Government , I would like them to know that it is very sad , and also very revealing , while also being completely useless .
Mr President , Pinochet , like his supporters , has nothing to oppose the imprescriptible charges pressing down on him other than his immunity which , on this occasion , the British authorities deem worthless .
It is as if following the Second World War , Belgium had made Léon Degrelle a life senator in order to shield him from legal proceedings by that very act .
Our joint resolution calls on the British authorities to seek a favourable outcome to a possible demand for General Pinochet 's extradition .
This would allow justice to run its course and would also be a sweet partial victory for those who have been fighting against the impunity of those responsible for crimes against humanity since the Nuremberg trials , the Eichmann trial , the setting up of international tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda , not to mention the International Criminal Court .
Pinochet 's arrest and the legal consequences involved will test the credibility of the international legal measures that can be applied in this respect .
That is why my group supports the joint resolution .
Mr President , the arrest of General Pinochet in London at the official request of Spanish judges has given rise to the hope that his crimes will not go unpunished .
Twenty-five years ago , Pinochet violently destroyed the Chilean democratic system , causing the death of President Salvador Allende and thousands of Chilean and foreign citizens , including dozens of Spaniards .
In a premeditated and systematic manner , the country 's population and its intellectual , political and trade union leaders were repressed on a large scale .
Let us look at a number of symbolic cases : the singer Víctor Jara , the United Nations official Carmelo Soria , General Carlos Prat in Argentina , and the diplomat Orlando Letelier in the United States .
Pinochet 's criminal activities knew no bounds ; he respected neither human rights nor democratic legality and he disregarded all forms of extraterritorial status .
Today , through the action of Spanish and British judges , this long impunity may be contested .
It was made possible by the fact that , for some time , individuals and organisations have not lost hope and have worked tenaciously towards this end .
Human rights associations , the Salvador Allende Foundation under its President , Joan Garcés , and the Spanish United Left have all been involved , from the outset , in lawsuits concerning the disappearance of Spanish citizens in Chile and Argentina .
The request to arrest and extradite Pinochet is based on a separate proceeding by the Court of First Instance No 5 of the Spanish National Criminal Court , at the official request of the United Left , on the basis of the documents on the so-called Operation Condor in the Southern Cone of Latin America .
In this respect and in keeping with the successive resolutions of the European Parliament and with the Treaties of the European Union , both the Maastricht Treaty and the Amsterdam Treaty that is currently being ratified , our group is tabling and supports this joint resolution . It urges the judicial authorities and the governments involved to fulfil their obligations and ensure that it is possible to hold a fair trial of General Pinochet that will put an end to his arrogant impunity .
It is to be hoped that this opportunity will be the point of departure for a universal and effective defence of human rights that must undoubtedly pass by way of the International Criminal Court .
It is to be hoped that this signal will help the Chilean people to complete their process of democratization .
We in the European Parliament cannot allow hope to be hijacked yet again .
Mr President , we Greens welcome the arrest of Chile 's former dictator Augusto Pinochet in London .
There is certainly every reason to consider the bloody deeds of the Pinochet regime as crimes against humanity which could be punished by any court in the world .
However , the divisions that are re-emerging in Chile also reveal how great the influence of this terrible dictator and his henchmen still is .
This makes it all the more urgent that we as Members of the European Parliament support the forces of democracy in Chile so that they can examine the consequences of the Pinochet dictatorship .
This also represents a major success for the human rights groups in Chile .
How must it offend the Chilean people 's sense of justice , and especially that of the victims ' families , to see the former dictator Pinochet sitting as a life senator in Parliament and being able to travel the world while his victims cannot be brought back to life .
There is still much to be done here .
This arrest also effectively means that many henchmen and generals who are and have been involved in butchery and dictatorships cannot sleep peacefully any longer , because they are now actually liable to arrest .
There is , of course , the International Criminal Court in Rome , which would also be a key institution in the prosecution of Pinochet for these crimes , even if he cannot be extradited to Spain and convicted there , although we very much hope that he can .
We also need to ask why dictators always have to die in bed at home in their villas .
Another point is perhaps quite important too : I believe that conviction and justice are also possible before death !
Mr President , the case of Augusto Pinochet is a model case in every respect .
It is quite probable that he did not kill anyone with his own hands , at least not after gaining power .
On the other hand , it is almost certain that he caused , authorised , encouraged and explicitly ordered the torture and murder of thousands of citizens of his country , and even of foreign countries , who did not share his vision of the world .
A Spanish court , more concerned over the fate of its fellow citizens than many European bodies , has put out an international warrant for the arrest of the suspect , General Pinochet , and this warrant has been relayed by Interpol , which does not take these warrants lightly .
The charges hanging over him do not all carry the same weight , in particular the genocide charge , which could well prove to be questionable .
In spite of all his efforts , Pinochet did not become Adolf Hitler .
This arrest , as well as encouraging those who long for peaceful justice , has also sent out an interesting warning to those who have ordered , supported and encouraged other crimes against humanity on this continent .
It must be said that it would be most unwise for them to set foot outside their own countries in the coming years .
The Spanish legal system will do its best with this case , but we cannot fail to acknowledge that legal and political powers will unfortunately weave a tangled web around it .
Never has the need for a permanent international criminal court been so glaringly obvious , a court protected from all forms of pressure and one that will allow this type of situation to be handled in the best possible manner in future .
Mr President , I should firstly like to say that I have considerable reservations about debating this subject at all this afternoon .
It is a judicial matter and not a political one .
It should be dealt with in a different way .
Although we in this Parliament may give our views this afternoon they will have no great effect on the ultimate outcome .
It falls within the competence of the United Kingdom authorities who will cooperate with the Spanish authorities , and I am sure they will follow the correct procedure .
We recognise the strong opinions which society holds about Pinochet .
I understand only too well the feelings of Spanish colleagues in this House .
I am conscious of their views .
Like them , I want to make it clear that many of the evil deeds carried out during his time deserve retribution .
I understand only too well the feelings of the families of the ' disappeared ' .
In my own area for the last thirty years there have been families who have sought the return of the bodies of their loved ones for burial .
So I understand them .
But it should properly now be left in the hands of the Spanish and United Kingdom Governments to go through the due process of law .
I am sure they will do that thoroughly .
Mr President , it is appropriate that we have a debate here on those events ; they are very significant events concerning an issue which we have been concerned about in this Parliament for over 20 years : human rights .
EU citizens were affected by what happened in Chile , citizens from almost every Member State .
Many Member States welcomed refugees from Chile .
There is every justification for us to debate it .
The events are straightforward : following an initiative from a Spanish judge , General Pinochet was arrested in the United Kingdom under an international extradition warrant ; he has no diplomatic immunity in that country ; the Spanish Government has 40 days in which to respond .
This is due legal process .
Due legal process is the sometimes long-winded tool for attaining justice .
Justice in this case has been slow .
However , everyone has the right to a fair trial .
Mrs Thatcher has sought through her disgraceful intervention to make this issue a political football in the United Kingdom .
This cannot be allowed to happen .
The judicial authorities in the United Kingdom and Spain have to go through the correct processes .
Were there crimes ?
Oh yes , there were crimes which shocked the whole world !
There was torture , murder , imprisonment , kidnapping , coercion and blackmail , affecting people in Chile and in our countries .
The European Parliament is not a court of law .
There will be no verdict during our debate on anything that General Pinochet may or may not have done .
We are not the body which will carry out any sort of trial on that man .
However , there must be punishment for those crimes for someone at some stage .
If this process - carried out , I am pleased to say , in cooperation so far between the Spanish and British Governments , which I am sure will continue - is a means to attain justice for those people who died and were tortured and whose lives have been changed , then I am very pleased that it is happening .
I certainly support every part of the resolution from all the groups concerned .
Mr President , General Pinochet 's arrest in London has triggered waves of emotion and support in broad sections of the population in Europe and South America .
Those who , like myself , supported the opposition in Chile in the 1970s and 1980s and visited Chile many times to help our political friends there know just how Chile suffered and was torn apart in those years .
The only way to describe the Pinochet regime was as a vicious military dictatorship which crushed democracy and incarcerated , tortured , abducted and murdered thousands of people .
There can be no excusing it .
The Spanish judges who are seeking to right this wrong , which also affected Spanish citizens , deserve our support , and Prime Minister Aznar 's announcement that he will react positively if the Spanish judges apply for extradition also deserves our support and respect .
The UK 's decision to arrest Pinochet was the right thing to do .
The law should take its course to deal with the terrible crime that Pinochet perpetrated in his own country against thousands of his own citizens .
A lot of people will be surprised at the attitude of the Chilean Government , which appears to want to protect Pinochet .
But the ridiculous dilemma is that because of their constitution , which Pinochet is using to hold the government to ransom , as it were , the Chilean authorities unfortunately have no choice , otherwise they would be acting unconstitutionally .
So it is good that the United Kingdom and Spain are solving the Pinochet problem for Chile .
It was the same coalition of Christian Democrats and Social Democrats in Chile which restored democracy in the 1990s .
We intend to vote for the resolution before us , but we would also ask our Socialist colleagues to vote for our amendments in the same spirit of cooperation that has always prevailed here .
They do not detract from the political content of the resolution , but primarily call for the law to be applied so that Pinochet can be brought to justice instead of being allowed to walk around scot-free .
In my opinion Pinochet belongs in prison , as do many violent left-wing military dictators .
Human rights are not left-wing or right-wing issues , they are universal , and they need our constant support wherever they are violated .
Mr President , the fact that the dictator Pinochet has been arrested and that a warrant for his arrest was issued by Spanish judges is important and excellent news , because it is high time that a dictator who was behind so many crimes - in this case , in Chile - ceases to be able to travel with impunity in his own country and throughout the world .
And in this respect , I believe that this has been an extremely important decision .
Our group has always supported , and will continue to support , the establishment of an International Criminal Court for crimes against humanity but , until this court becomes operational , any proceedings aimed at prosecuting dictators are to be considered very positive in this sense .
During this debate in the European Parliament , I , for my part , would like to express my support for the action that has been taken and to urge that any extradition request submitted should be granted , in accordance with judicial decisions .
I would like to remind you of the names of Joan Alsina , a Catalan priest who was killed by machine gun fire in Santiago de Chile under General Pinochet 's dictatorship , and Joan Olidon , from Valencia , who disappeared during the early days of Pinochet 's dictatorship .
The memory of these names will , I believe , prompt all of us to condemn what took place during those years in Chile .
Mr President , the arrest in London of the Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet , on a warrant issued by the judge Baltasar Garzón , has fulfilled the two aims pursued by the immense majority of European public opinion of bringing to trial a person guilty of crimes against humanity and of beginning to break the previously armour-plated glass of impunity .
We in the European Parliament must fully support Judge Garzón in his actions , call for continued cooperation and justice on the part of the British Government in these proceedings and , most importantly , demand that the President of the Spanish Government , José María Aznar , moves away from his current position of unacceptable ambiguity and makes a public and formal commitment to immediately and unconditionally forward the request to extradite Pinochet to Madrid .
Aznar should instruct the public prosecutors , Mr Cardenal and Mr Fungairiño , who are the authors of a de facto doctrine of exoneration of the Chilean military regime , to desist from denying the competence of the Spanish justice system in this case , and he himself should defend it politically from his position in the government .
We should also send a double message to Chile : firstly , to its President that he should not try to defend a person who , if he had been able , would have murdered him , as he did Salvador Allende ; and secondly , to its government and people , to let them know that Pinochet 's trial will certainly not be an obstacle to increasingly close cooperation between the European Union and Chile , and , in fact , should be the opposite .
It is to be hoped that these events will finally make it clear that no national sovereignty or diplomatic immunity will stand in the way when it comes to defending human rights .
Mr President , I would like to begin by saying that we have heard a lot about the rule of law this afternoon .
I would hope that General Pinochet , from the luxury of the London clinic , is reflecting on his failure to apply the rule of law to the citizens of Chile in 1973 when he was installed in a coup by the American CIA , with , I have to say , British collaboration .
Perhaps we should reflect on what happened to President Allende , the legally elected President of Chile , whose palace was strafed and bombed by the Chilean airforce .
That might give us some pause for thought on the way Pinochet is being treated currently .
For the thousands of people imprisoned in the football stadium in Santiago who were tortured , beaten and who then disappeared , that is what the rule of law meant under Pinochet , so I do not think we should have too much tender mercy for him at the present time .
The question is what we do with him now ?
I have just spoken to Mr Medina who tells me there is a law in Spain which says that you cannot go to prison if you are over 80 years of age .
So I would be a bit worried about sending him to Spain .
Perhaps we should try to find some more creative radical solutions .
We could keep him in England for a period , take him to a football stadium every week and subject him to English football hooligans .
That might make him reflect a little more .
More seriously , we have to insist that he is brought to justice in the courts either in Britain or in Spain and an appropriate sentence handed out .
I am a little worried that the British Government may be leant on by the Americans .
The CIA which installed him originally in the 1970s like to look after their own and there is a suspicion that the Americans are leaning on the British Government to let him slip quietly back to Chile in the night .
If that happens this Parliament should come back and reflect again on those measures .
Bring him to justice and throw the book at him !
Mr President , what sets Mr Pinochet apart from the other butchers in history - whether they were directly or indirectly responsible for the deaths of thousands of human beings - is that this man not only committed crimes but he also carefully arranged for his own acquittal and his own constitutional impunity .
Pinochet would have committed the perfect crime had he not thrown down this final challenge to crown the perversity of his political career - a challenge to the European judicial institutions that are responsible for justice and the prosecution of criminals like him .
If , just because of who he is , Pinochet were also immune from judgment or punishment in Europe then we would no longer be able to hold our heads up high and claim that our countries have been applying the rule of law and justice , since the end of the Second World War at least .
Justice was never something that Pinochet knew much about or had much regard for .
Fortunately , although history writes justice in crooked lines it writes it nonetheless .
At the end of his life , Pinochet has fallen foul of justice , a concept he has never known , because he has always practised the axiom ' might is right ' .
Whatever his current detention in London leads to , at least history will remember the victory of memory over amnesia and will vindicate , albeit symbolically perhaps , the just and innocent victims of Pinochet 's ideological ignominy - after all , these people have been hoping for even just a modicum of justice for the last 25 years .
Mr President , I had the honour of meeting the constitutional President of Chile , Salvador Allende , in person , and even in my own modest way to participate in negotiations that were initiated , during the first Chilean stage , by him .
At the end of these negotiations , he awarded me a decoration that he had signed and that is an honour in my modest life story .
You will understand my emotion , Mr President , whenever these subjects are discussed and when we endeavour , and rightly so , to bring to justice the person who brought him down with violence , who caused his death and who was behind so many murders .
Nonetheless , I also have other concerns , the first of which is that not only the Spanish authorities but also the British authorities should be reminded that at the end of the day it is they who must assume responsibility if the extradition request is submitted to them ; this , incidentally , is not stated in the motion for a resolution we have before us .
My second concern is that we must be able to respect the independence of the justice system .
It is the justice system that must take the relevant decision and we all hope that that decision will indeed be just .
And I would also like to say , in connection with a remark that we just heard that is clearly related to domestic politics in Spain , that President Aznar has already stated in the clearest possible terms that he will abide by the decision of the justice system .
My third , and perhaps most serious concern is that this Parliament should contribute to , and not undermine the strength of the political transition in Chile .
Those of us who have lived through and have on occasion been required to participate in a difficult political transition are well aware that each country has its rules , its needs and its problems .
And we know that , for instance , to contribute to a deterioration from within of the difficult Chilean process and the way they have managed to live together , having certainly paid a price that they doubtless had no desire to pay , is certainly not the best way to help Chilean democracy .
I would therefore ask that we demonstrate caution and serenity in accepting a number of reasonable requests that my group has submitted in the form of amendments .
Mr President , every day we face new challenges which are the logical consequences of decisions we have taken earlier .
Today it is the arrest of General Pinochet , the man who will stand in next century 's history books as the symbol of repression , human rights violations and dictatorship in Latin America .
He deserves to be prosecuted .
We will not let legal hair-splitting about immunity get in our way .
Of course there are always controversial aspects when new ground is broken like this , and a good many lawyers will probably have a field day , but we must have the courage to do it .
We also have warrants out for the arrest of Karadzic and Mladic , and we have the International Court of Justice .
Pinochet must be prosecuted for crimes against humanity , and human rights , as Mrs Maij-Weggen said , are universal , even in Latin America .
That is why my group , as we have already said , supports the Spanish and UK authorities for taking this courageous step .
We hope there will be effective cooperation not just between those two countries , but between all the Member States .
It is not our intention here to influence the judicial process .
The rule of law comes first , of course , but it will ultimately be a political decision by the UK Government to agree to the extradition .
We wish the government courage and wisdom .
I was also pleased to see the reactions of the Norwegian and Canadian Foreign Ministers in the International Herald Tribune , wishing us all courage .
I can assure Mrs Maij-Weggen that the Liberal Group also intends to support the amendments .
Mr President , over and above judicial technicalities , General Pinochet 's arrest in London has a fundamental significance for democracy in that it signals the end of impunity for those who , from behind the shield of power , violate the human rights of the peoples under the control of their regimes .
The principles of sovereignty and non-interference in countries ' domestic affairs do not cover these cases of crimes against humanity .
Indeed , from now on , humanity is protected against any abusive exercise of sovereignty .
Let dictators be aware that these things are never over and done with .
The European judicial area , which is effectively being inaugurated with this case , could not have a better beginning .
Judicial cooperation in the defence of the values that are inherent in the construction of Europe is a foretaste of what will happen when the International Criminal Court becomes operational and justice will not have to wait until the dictator of the day takes a trip to Europe .
This is something we should welcome and we should urge the governments to demonstrate their real , as opposed to merely nominal , commitment to those values when the time comes for the judicial authorities to submit the request for extradition .
This does not mean , as the Group of the European People 's Party fears , that we are meddling in the course of justice , but that we are carrying out our political role .
This case offers us the opportunity to show unambiguously to the people which side each of us is on : on the side of human rights or on the side of judicial subterfuges in the interests of those who violate human rights .
As socialists , we are on the side of justice and in this respect we are going to vote in favour of the joint resolution by the Group of the Party of European Socialists and other political groups in this Parliament .
Mr President , there should be no impunity when murder is committed .
General Pinochet has ultimate responsibility for a dictatorial regime that killed , tortured and led to the disappearance of thousands of people .
Impunity cannot and must not exist in cases of such flagrant violation of human rights .
Unfortunately , international law has long protected situations of this nature , but collaboration is increasing every day and we are building a world in which the free movement of persons goes hand in hand with increased police and judicial collaboration that could reduce crime .
Pinochet is also responsible for the murders and disappearance of dozens of Community citizens , mainly from Spain .
In this respect , the action of the Spanish justice system is commendable - and I certainly welcome it - , as is the effective collaboration with the British justice system .
Augusto Pinochet 's arrest is good news , particularly for his victims and for their families .
I hope that justice will give them the victory that history , hampered by crime , denied them .
We will naturally abide by the decision of the justice system , but the Basque Nationalist Party that I represent hopes that it finds the appropriate legal channel to request General Pinochet 's extradition so that he can stand trial in the various proceedings initiated against him in Spain .
I also hope that there will be maximum collaboration between the Spanish and British Governments in the event that the judicial authorities do submit an extradition request .
The poet Neruda might have been able to alter one of his poems in the light of this situation to say that he could write the most joyful verses tonight .
I hope that justice and international collaboration will bear this out .
Lastly , I hope that an extradition request will indeed be submitted and I join those who call for an International Criminal Court with competence in these matters , so that dictators with blood-stained hands may be arrested and have a fair trial , which is something their victims never had .
Mr President , the argument put forward by General Pinochet 's legal representatives that his detention in London pending possible extradition to Spain is a breach of certain legal niceties would not have cut much ice with his administration in Chile in 1973 .
The status of President Allende as the democratically-elected head of government which he , General Pinochet , was pledged to uphold did not deter him from bombing the presidential palace , leading to the President 's death .
The rights of Chilean citizens , including elected representatives , were not respected when they were confined in the sports stadium , tortured and killed .
Over 2 000 disappeared and were never seen again .
Even foreigners or people with dual nationality were not accorded their just rights and many European citizens were woefully ill-treated and some killed .
I helped to organise the first protest demonstration in London against the 1973 coup and I have never forgotten the heart-rending stories told by some of the refugees who came to Britain of suffering , of losses , of relatives barbarously killed .
If human rights are of any importance , there can be no impunity for those who organise a reign of terror .
But General Pinochet 's own rights will be scrupulously respected , unlike those of thousands of his victims as he faces the judicial process here in Europe .
I strongly support the action which has been taken .
Mr President , I am a parliamentarian and not a lawyer .
I want , for a moment , for all of us to consider our intent as we take part in this debate this afternoon .
Are we after individual justice , after collective vengeance , or after finding some way of producing future deterrents against military dictators ?
It seems to me that the political question this afternoon is not the rule of law but the effectiveness of legal institutions at global level .
Do we have a genuine global jurisdiction in human rights ?
Almost .
Do we have the institutions for enforcing that global jurisdiction ?
Probably not .
But if we are going to attach all our longings , all our wishes , to those institutions , then we must make sure that global justice is blind ; that global justice applies to everybody ; that global justice is enforceable ; that it does not look out from under its blindfold with one eye , either left or right .
I am not convinced that we yet have those institutions for bringing such dictators to book .
We had better be very careful that we do not destroy such global justice as we have in the emotion of a particular case , because if we apply this to Pinochet , are we now to arrest Castro the next time he is on European territory ; or the Chinese leadership ; or a dozen African dictators existing or retired ?

I think the British Government will find that it has blundered into a very difficult legal minefield .
If it had had half the wisdom of the French it would not have let Pinochet in in the first place .
I look with interest to see how the British Government conducts itself .
I trust it will conduct itself in line with the rule of law and not in line with the kind of politics of sound-bite that Mr Mandelson indulged in at the weekend .
What matters here is not the reputation of one man or one government , but our future chances of a proper institutional structure for this planet .
Justice can be pursued through the courts .
We can do something as politicians about future deterrence , but vengeance is the Lord 's .
Mr President , the European Parliament is a political body .
Therefore , the European Union should have a foreign policy that is based on the defence of freedom , democracy and the rule of law .
It is for this reason that Parliament promoted the creation of clauses incorporating the condition of democracy in all the treaties signed by the Union with third countries .
Consequently , we support the establishment of the International Criminal Court and , for this reason , our resolutions all maintain the precept that crimes against humanity are never prescribed .
The best antidote , the best way to prevent dictatorial temptations in the future is to put an end to impunity .
It is pathetic to say that actions such as those carried out by the European Parliament against impunity stand in the way of the advent of new democracies , just as it is false to say that this resolution constitutes interference in or pressure on the judicial machinery of a given European country .
This is a political stance that speaks for itself .
It is quite possible that there are others who are tempted to bring pressure to bear on the justice system , either directly or through rules , excuses and interpretations that seek to disguise a political stance , which cannot , however , be disguised .
How can any European president ask that a fact that is political in itself not be politicized ?
To engage in politics is to assume a position , to take sides , to make a choice , and the European Parliament takes the side of democratic reason against obscure reasons of State .
Why is it , Mr President , that when reasons of State run counter to the defence of human rights , we defend a given State , as opposed to the concept of a state 's rule of law ?
Parliament takes the side of the citizens , those who were defeated and humiliated , those who must always give in and those who now , finally , are catching sight of justice - not vengeance - , those who even now in Chile can still not openly express their joy at Pinochet 's arrest for fear of the same old diehards .
To expect them to remain silent now is like asking the victim not to cry out so that his cries do not disturb the executioner .
We choose peace , which is simply to be able to express oneself freely , calmly and without fear .
We are aware of the difficult period Chile is now experiencing , as a country facing its painful reality without subterfuge or cosmetic disguise , but one that is about to end its painful kidnapping and throw open the doors to life and memory .
We know in Parliament that many will accuse us of interference but the fact is that , even if the majority of the population supported Pinochet , that circumstance would not exonerate him of his crimes .
Crimes are not measured by majorities or minorities .
The dead have names , families and friends .
Some even have a diplomatic passport .
It is up to these families and friends to pardon those involved , if that is what they wish to do .
Today we hear an international cry for justice through a judicial proceeding , with the unarmed bobbies standing guard at the door of the old man of death .
Perhaps the broad avenues are opening up for the passage of the free men and women who remember so many Amandas , Manuelas , Victors , Marías , Carmelos and Salvadors who have lived on this earth .
Mr President , as we close this debate , ignoring certain requirements that are as dissonant as they are senseless , what is the leitmotif of this resolution ?
It is that the defence of human rights , Mr President , is the basis of our ideology and the foundation of the judicial order both of the Union and of the various Member States .
It is that the powers and responsibility granted to this institution by the Treaty on European Union today require us to be rigorous .
It is that Parliament must certainly shun any opportunistic voluntarism that detracts from the impact of a statement that , when all is said and done , involves almost 300 million European citizens .
Therefore , it is important to state - and Parliament should certainly do so loudly and clearly - that the rule of law is based on the independence of the judiciary and that this principle , and its corollary of scrupulous respect for judicial rulings , must prevail over any other interest , however legitimate .
Parliament must restate its defence of the principle of universal justice and its commitment to the International Criminal Court and we must also restate our unequivocal support for the society and democratic authorities of Chile in their process of consolidating democracy .
We must certainly raise the level of the debate from that of the petty wrangling of party politics to an expression of a position worthy of this Parliament .
In this respect , we must insist that the extradition procedures fall equally to the Spanish and British Governments and we should therefore address them both .
If I were to be pressed , I would say that it falls particularly to the British Government , since anybody who is familiar with the Treaties knows that the relevant legislation requires that in the case of crimes committed in a third country , the extraterritorial competence invoked by the applicant state may be contested politically , almost at its discretion , by the state to which the application is made .
Is this why the Socialist Group flatly refuses to accept that the term ' British Government ' should appear in the resolution ?
Well , Mr President , if that is New Labour , the third way , then we really are in big trouble .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if I may make something clear from the outset , the European Commission opposes any form of totalitarian government of whatever political hue .
My colleagues and I are firmly convinced that a society can only develop properly on a democratic basis .
It is a universally known fact that human rights were violated during General Pinochet 's 15-year rule in Chile , sometimes flagrantly so .
Our deep sympathy is therefore with all those who suffered or even lost loved ones and those who had to leave their homes to escape wanton persecution .
Under the Treaty on European Union , the European Commission has no jurisdiction in the domain of mutual assistance in criminal matters , which is the sole prerogative of the Member States .
It is therefore a matter for the Member States concerned , subject to their obligations under the applicable extradition treaties and their national legal systems , to make and process applications for extradition .
It should , however , be noted that two conventions on extradition have now been adopted , but because the Member States have not yet ratified them they remain a dead letter for the time being .
Thank you , Commissioner .
As you know , the President of the sitting should not normally make any comment .
Let me say , however , that in my view Parliament was right to put this subject on its agenda , and that the House has used this time to good effect .
( The sitting was suspended at 3.50 p.m. and resumed at 4 p.m. )

Decommissioning of nuclear power stations
The next item is the report ( A4-0354 / 98 ) by Mr Chichester , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on decommissioning of nuclear power stations and other nuclear installations in Europe .
Madam President , the aims of this report are to review the current situation in the nuclear energy industry with regard to decommissioning , to bring a wider awareness of the strategies , techniques and costs of this part of the nuclear cycle and to make suggestions for further action at a European level .
I visited six sites around Europe where decommissioning activities and research into them are taking place .
Before learning about all the expertise and experience that exists in Europe in this field , I shared some of the misunderstanding and concerns caused by the much-repeated myths that nobody knows what to do with nuclear power plants at the end of their working life and that nobody knows how much it will cost .
The fact is that not only does the industry know how to dismantle a nuclear power station but dismantling has been done safely and successfully to ' green field ' status .
The experience gained in the many decommissioning projects already undertaken shows us that the cost is known and calculable at around 15 % of construction costs .
This is a far cry from the public perception .
So what should be done ?
The report calls for action in a number of areas which come under the general heading of public awareness .
The nuclear industry itself must meet its responsibilities to be open and proactive in education and information activities .
The Commission must do more to contribute to public knowledge , to make research results more readily available and to reassure public opinion .
The report also reminds us where the responsibility for decommissioning and its financing rests , namely with the operators within the Member States .
It seems to me to be vital for public confidence that people be aware that there is accountability and that it is subject to rigorous regulation by independent inspectorates .
Much emphasis in the report is placed on requirements for safety and health of the highest order .
People are anxious at the mention of radiation and radioactivity , so it is right to call for the most stringent requirements on protection measures .
Yet the fact is that once a reactor has been defuelled , by far the greater part of radioactive material has been removed and 90 % of what is left of the structure of the power plant is not radioactive and can be recycled safely .
There is a debate about which strategy should be adopted , namely whether to proceed in phases over a longer period of time to allow residual activity to decline and make dismantling even less of a risk or to carry out direct or accelerated decommissioning to reach that ' green field ' status as soon as possible .
There are arguments in favour of both approaches , and we would be wise to refrain from saying that there should be only one way to do it .
Either way , the operators and the regulatory authorities have a duty to see proper financial provision is made for the costs of decommissioning .
The report calls on the Commission to study the various options to see how they might best be applied to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe where most help should be concentrated .
In that context , we must not become complacent about Western European skills and expertise : there is always room to improve techniques to find new , safer and cheaper ways of tackling the task of decommissioning .
This field of activity represents a great industrial opportunity for employment in the decades to come .
It is an immensely important opportunity for European businesses and engineering skills .
The fact is that whatever your views may be on nuclear energy , this part of the cycle cannot be abandoned or shirked .
We have a duty to see every power plant that reaches the end of its useful life decommissioned safely and effectively .
I want that to be the case so as to encourage people to plan ahead for and build new , modern design nuclear power stations for the future .
We derive too much of our electricity from nuclear energy to turn our backs on it .
If we are to stand a chance of meeting those Kyoto CO2 emission targets , then we must continue to generate nuclear electricity , safe in the knowledge that we know how to decommission the power plants .
Madam President , I am rather sorry that Mr Chichester chose to end his contribution with a plea for building more nuclear power stations .
That is not what his report was meant to be about and he has misused his available time on something that is inappropriate .
Back in the 1950s , at the time of the Euratom Treaty , there was an optimism about nuclear power which was , frankly , unrealistic .
It was to be ' electricity too cheap to meter ' .
There were several snags which should have been thought about , but were not .
Firstly , the relatively small risk of a very serious accident with huge implications .
Secondly , the whole question of how one disposes of nuclear waste .
Thirdly , the techniques , costs , etc. and financing of decommissioning .
Had all those things been discussed , the optimism would have been much less .
It is not true to say , as Mr Chichester implies , that this has been completely solved , that everyone knows exactly how to do it and how much it costs .
I would refer him to the area near my place of birth , Trawsfynydd in North Wales .
Here no clear decision has been taken about what should be done : the site of a nuclear power station has not been returned to a state in which it can be used for other purposes , and we have a legacy of nuclear waste which will stay in the mountain for a long time .
Of course we are very much in favour of openness and transparency .
The links between the nuclear power industry and the nuclear weapons industry for many years led to an ethos of tremendous secrecy and a refusal to admit anything could ever possibly be wrong .
There is some indication that is changing , but Mr Chichester is right to say that unless there is openness and transparency , there will most certainly not be any sort of public confidence .
Incidentally , it is not a matter for the European Union to tell Member States whether or not it is appropriate for them to have early decommissioning of their nuclear power stations .
Whether or not nuclear power stations are taken out of operation at the planned date or earlier is entirely a matter for the Member State concerned .
That should not be in his report .
We know how you cut apart pieces of metal and how you transport them ; but we do not have a publicly-acceptable solution to what happens to the radioactive part of nuclear power stations .
Here , in the European Union we have the problem of decommissioning our nuclear facilities at our Joint Research Centre .
We have not calculated the cost of that decommissioning in the correct place , and it is currently , completely irregularly , being put into a research budget .
Decommissioning of nuclear power stations is not research .
That is not the appropriate place for the decommissionining of the JRC 's facilities .
Something which concerns me greatly - and I mentioned it during the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy 's debate - is the use by some nuclear utilities of contract workers for the more dangerous aspects of decommissioning and accident work .
That is deplorable .
If the intention of using contract workers is that the monitoring , which must be long-term monitoring , does not need to take place , this is unacceptable .
I do not see either that it is appropriate in this report to talk about 50 to 60 years ' extension of nuclear power plants .
Mr Chichester may hold those views , but they were not for this report .
His last remarks , as I have said , are about the construction of more nuclear power stations : this is completely inappropriate and nothing to do with the subject he was asked to report on .
Let us solve the first problem before we do any such thing .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate Mr Chichester for two reasons .
First , I would like to congratulate him on taking the initiative to draw up this report , since I consider it to be particularly timely and , second , I would like to congratulate him on its quality .
Moreover , I fully endorse what he said at the beginning and at the end and , in fact , I think that he could have gone further .
We will miss Mrs McNally , whose work I admire tremendously - as I do her beautiful English - , but not the many confused issues she has just raised , which were so mixed up that I was , quite frankly , unable to follow her .
I think that the main issue in connection with the closing down and decommissioning of power stations relates to the closing of the cycle .
I wish , ladies and gentlemen , that we were as clear about what we are doing in other areas as we are about nuclear energy .
Some countries say that they are going to decommission power stations , but I seriously doubt that they will do so for another 30 or 40 years .
The United States is extending the life of its nuclear power stations up to 40 or 60 years .
Europe will also do so , as will Japan .
Why ?
Because it is clean energy , it is safe energy , it is cheap energy , and that is what we need in a liberalised electricity market .
It would be most important to internalise the cost of decommissioning power stations in electricity generation as a whole .
Oil platforms , for instance , are to be decommissioned : a number of such procedures have already been approved for companies in the North Sea and there are several Commission communications on the subject .
Meanwhile , as regards nuclear energy , ladies and gentlemen , in the eight countries of the European Union that generate electricity in nuclear power stations , all costs relating to waste management and the decommissioning of nuclear plants have been internalised and , as Mr Chichester rightly said , the costs are very low , and considerably lower than is claimed by those who have not studied the matter .
And how do I know that they are low ?
I know this because Spain is decommissioning the large , 460 Mw Vandellós 1 power station , because its technology is obsolete - French technology using natural uranium that was not considered very useful - and not because of any nuclear problems as such .
It is a major power station but the decommissioning costs are well below even the 15 % mentioned by Mr Chichester , just as it is well below in terms of waste management costs , despite what is frivolously stated by those who have not studied the matter or looked at it in depth .

I think Mr Chichester hit the nail on the head when he said that this advanced technology that is going to be used represents a further opportunity for our industries . It is a new field of industrial activity that we should all take advantage of , because we will have to wait 40 or 60 years , although there are research centres and power stations that will have to be decommissioned at some point .
Congratulations , Mr Chichester , and I hope that you will continue to work with the same rigour .
Madam President , nuclear power is an outmoded energy technology .
Mr Chichester 's report demonstrates this very well .
He therefore did not need to start talking about new nuclear plants at the end of a statement on a report which describes how decommissioning is gathering pace around the world .
There are major risks inherent in nuclear power , beginning with the possibility of radioactive emissions during the mining of uranium , running through the operating life of a plant , and on to transportation for final disposal - not to mention the danger of the proliferation of plutonium waste for weapons purposes .
The problem of the final disposal of nuclear waste has not been resolved .
In the light of considerations such as operating and transportation risks and the fact that new waste is constantly being produced , nuclear power should be abandoned as a source of energy .
Each country should decide independently on when and how to decommission .
It is also up to each country to take charge of its own radioactive waste .
Sweden - and other countries which , thanks to their research effort , now have sophisticated disposal methods - cannot be allowed to become dumps for the whole of Europe 's reactor waste . States must be in a position to make their own decisions on the import and export of waste .
Nuclear waste has to be taken for what it is ; we cannot afford to pretend that it is just any old product .
The report is a good one in many respects .
I agree with most of what is said about research , preventive measures , health protection , transparency , contact with the public and the export of decommissioning know-how to the Central and Eastern European countries . This latter point is extremely important .
More and more nuclear plants are being shut down .
Sweden has decided to abandon nuclear power , and two of our twelve reactors will be decommissioned this year , 1998 .
The Euratom Treaty will need to be wound up in the foreseeable future and transformed into a treaty for the development of renewable and environmentally friendly energy sources .
I can support all of the amendments , apart from Nos 6 and 9 .
Madam President , in 1997 there were 128 nuclear power plants operating in the European Union and 39 were in the process of decommissioning .
The Chichester report , drawn up on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , highlights the fact that the efforts made at Community level , particularly as regards research on decommissioning nuclear power plants , have allowed us to reach a high level of expertise .
Yet even more effort can still be made , as the report shows , in order to reduce health risks and to promote the recycling of material obtained from decommissioning .
The report also quite rightly shows that the closure and decommissioning of nuclear installations for political reasons , before they reach the end of their natural life , cannot be economically justified .
In my opinion , there are two main pitfalls to be avoided in today 's extremely controversial field of nuclear power : blind faith and irrational fear .
Nuclear power , which generates up to an average of 35 % of the electricity used in Europe - and more than 75 % of the electricity used in France - is an advantage that should not be dismissed but rather developed .
Environmental constraints , especially the importance of decreasing greenhouse gas emissions , have given nuclear energy a new lease of life as it is the least polluting form of energy .
Using technological development and European know-how as a basis , additional efforts must be made in the fields of the environment , safety and public health .
Also , employees in nuclear plants and the public should be more closely involved in this field .
High-level investment is particularly necessary to eliminate radioactive waste and reduce radioactivity levels in order to allow for its terminal storage , without endangering future generations .
Finally , in the face of threats that have become more real due to the liberalisation of the energy sector - set in motion by the directives on gas and electricity - , I believe it is very important that Member States are able to maintain their sovereign right to opt for the energy form of their choice .
I believe this choice should be respected .
Madam President , it is , of course , remarkable and gratifying that after decades of unbridled subsidising of nuclear technology , consideration is now being given to what we should do when nuclear facilities reach the end of their operational lives .
It would naturally have been far better if , before embarking on this whole nuclear adventure , we had given some thought to the disposal of the resultant waste .
It is a fact that no place in the world is safe enough for the final disposal of high- and medium-level radioactive waste .
Experts are even still arguing about the host rock we should choose and the type of matrix in which the waste should be sealed .
Mr Chichester may now claim that some facilities have already been dismantled and turned into green fields , but that is simply not true .
We have demolished one single nuclear power plant in the European Union , namely Niederreichbach , which had only been in operation for 14 days and was not at all contaminated .
Then in Greifswald the Lugmin reactor was dismantled but was not even connected to the grid , and what you perhaps saw in Reinsberg was a research reactor , which cannot be compared with an operational power station .
And so I can tell you quite categorically that we neither know what sort of technology to use nor do we have a final storage place .
To turn the argument round , before dismantling anything we must first think about where to put it , and since we do not know that yet , the decommissioned nuclear plants should be safely sealed off , naturally without removing the fuel rods ; these should stay in the plant , so that a stop can be put to this senseless practice of transporting them around Europe .
What we also need urgently , of course , is a ban on recycling and on the mixing of different contaminated and uncontaminated materials .
It is surely unacceptable that roads , for instance , should be built with contaminated materials .
What are we demanding of workers ?
Let me tell you that the steel industry as well as the entire precision-engineering and light-engineering industries cannot do anything at all with contaminated steel .
That is another constraint .
Moreover , we need an amendment of the European regulation on protection from radiation , because it is possible to make progress through this regulation as far as the sorting of decommissioning waste is concerned .
This also means , of course , that we urgently need a decommissioning fund , which should be based on the polluter-pays principle .
I do not wish to suggest that we should suddenly have to fork out this money .
Certain parties have been amassing huge profits over all these years at the taxpayer 's expense , because they had a monopoly ; their prices had to be paid , and they built up enormous reserves with their tax-free billions . That certainly must be halted .
But we do need a decommissioning fund to ensure that the population is protected from radiation .
We could also take the money from the ECSC budget , which runs out in 2000 and still amounts to more than ECU 100 million .
So there are possibilities .
But this does not alter the main point : if we create waste , we must decide where to dispose of it .
That decision is your problem , and it still needs to be solved .
You always tell us everything is fine , they will all be turned into green fields , it will cost nothing , and recycling is no problem , but the reality and the truth of the matter look quite different , otherwise there should not be overfilled interim storage facilities everywhere , and we should not have great mountains of nuclear waste at the reprocessing plants .
I believe it is high time we faced up to reality , instead of constantly producing more and more waste .
Madam President , anyone listening to the debate here between the supporters and opponents of nuclear energy would certainly think that there will never be agreement between them .
Yet we have before us a report drawing attention to a common need to ensure that power stations are decommissioned safely , because people 's health is at stake .
I have to say , Mr Chichester , that your reassuring words about Belgium are not entirely accurate , because the nuclear waste problem is being passed from one office to another like a hot potato , and a genuine solution has yet to be found .
Thanks to pressure from a strong nuclear lobby , nuclear power stations were built all over the place , despite the fact that there is no way of disposing of highly radioactive waste , as the previous speaker tellingly described .
Nevertheless , a number of stations are going to have to close over the next few years , and now that the Cold War is over , we no longer need military installations - in fact , in my opinion we do not need them at all - and there are hopes that we will switch to other methods of electricity production , and so on .
The working life of the power stations is also limited , though opinions differ as to just how long that life is .
But in the end they all have to be decommissioned , and there are unfortunately no general rules about how this should be done .
The report refers to the possibility of direct complete dismantling and of staged decommissioning , where dismantling to ' green field ' level takes 135 years - none of us would even live to see it .
I feel that this is totally irresponsible .
Financial arguments are bound to be raised , because despite all the warnings , the cost of decommissioning has never actually been included in the price of the power stations or the electricity .
Critics of nuclear development have always pointed out the financial risks .
Nevertheless , decommissioning must be done very carefully , and we support the report on this point , although we have to say that any decommissioning will automatically generate further mountains of waste , some of it highly radioactive .
At this point I would just mention the irresponsible risk of having old , disused installations next to others which are still in use .
International rules must continue to be applied and short- or long-term storage monitored until the risk is completely eliminated .
Experience with the Third European Programme in the Field of Decommissioning indicates that this is technically feasible for 15 years after shut-down .
It is a difficult job , and funding needs to be made available for it .
This is why we want to make international bodies face up to their responsibilities , and we have tabled an amendment for a European decommissioning fund .
We support most of the recommendations in the resolution , but we still felt we needed to table a number of amendments , although not all the members of the ARE Group are prepared to vote for them .
But as democratic nationalists and regionalists , we would stress that we are preparing for a future without nuclear power stations and we are therefore also against recycling , because it is still not a real solution to the problem of highly radioactive waste .
I am sorry , Mrs Maes , but I really do have to stop you there .
You have already gone one and a half minutes beyoond your time .
Madam President , during a previous debate on nuclear power , I expressed a certain number of concerns about this form of energy . One of these worries related to what I then called the economic risk , that is , the temptation to push the usage of such power stations beyond their natural life expectancy in a crisis situation .
On reading paragraph 14 , I realise that I had underestimated the truth as this temptation is already emerging , here and now , in a situation of relative prosperity .
We must show staunch opposition to this unacceptable aim .
A few years ago , certain negligent airlines were the victims of a series of disasters .
Very old-fashioned Boeing aeroplanes , well beyond their use-by date , were crashing then with alarming frequency .
If we make the same mistake with nuclear power stations , we would inevitably have similar results .
So , for goodness ' sake , do not let us go down that path .
It would also be an excellent idea if we were to better inform the people and I would even go as far as saying to train people on how to act in an emergency .
It would be an excellent idea , for example , to begin preventive distribution of iodine tablets to combat the risk of thyroid cancer .
Transparency in terms of the cost of nuclear power is also a fundamental issue , because we cannot carry out a fair comparison with other forms of energy until the cost of nuclear power has been accurately calculated .
I regret the fact that recital N defends , and I quote , ' the future development of nuclear power ' .
Yet the French version of Amendment No 4 goes to the other extreme by referring , as if taken for granted , to - and again I quote - ' l 'abandon obligatoire du nucléaire ' , that is , stating that it is an obligation .
This may well be a mistake in the translation since one might have expected something along the lines of ' l 'abandon souhaitable ' , a term I would have accepted in that it would represent a wish rather than an obligation .
If this is not a translation error , then I would be grateful if Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz would clarify exactly what obligation she is referring to .
Finally , Amendment No 7 by the same author is quite excellent , as we must be resolutely opposed to the release of radioactive materials , and even low-level radioactive materials , into normal commercial circulation .
That would mark the beginning of a process that would both spread radioactivity and make it a commonplace phenomenon .
Madam President , when archaeologists comb the countryside today and find the bones of prehistoric dinosaurs , they are delighted and can prepare and exhibit these finds in perfect safety . I do not believe that it is quite so simple with the energy dinosaurs of today .
Future archaeologists cannot be let loose on them willy-nilly , nor can we give any reassurances about their safety . On the contrary , we have to be extremely cautious with these nuclear dinosaurs , because they carry a real danger , posing a risk not only to ourselves but also to succeeding generations .
In other words , today 's dinosaurs have to be treated very differently to those of bygone ages .
I thank Mr Chichester for having taken the initiative to compile this report , even if his ideas diverge markedly from my own .
It is clear that we need to get down at long last to disposing of these energy dinosaurs in a way that will not endanger future generations .
I am pleased that this need is being increasingly recognised .
In the European Union we have about 130 nuclear power stations , 19 of which are in Germany .
Happily , the new Federal Government has decided to proceed with the longoverdue removal of these hazards .
There is an additional need for decommissioning techniques , for safe methods of closing down these plants , but so far no one has developed the appropriate technology .
For that reason we need research , and we also need decommissioning techniques for different types of nuclear power station .
I must stress that we really do need new techniques .
We should not merely try to find some sort of hiding place , Mr Chichester .
That is why I cannot subscribe in any way to the idea that extending the remaining useful life of a nuclear power plant is part of the decommissioning process .
No , we must be resolute in our intention to condemn this prehistoric technology to the same fate as the dinosaurs .
There is , of course , the additional matter of reaching agreement as to who should foot the bill , and we need to let honesty prevail here .
There are energy supply companies which have been profiting from these power plants for years and even decades .
The plants will be written off , and the companies will invest the proceeds in telecommunications and suchlike .
Now that disposal is on the agenda , we are supposed to create yet another fund from the public budget for decommissioning .
No , I say , that is not an option !
Those who have made money from nuclear power stations must be handed the bill for decommissioning them .
Of course , the most awkward question is basically what happens to the waste .
This question has not been resolved .
Final disposal is the key question we have to study .
We must stop focusing our attention on the development of new safety technology designed to ensure that the nuclear plants will still be operational in 100 years ' time .
No , we must examine which final-disposal technique is the safest .
One reason for this , I need scarcely say , is that we can no longer afford to send nuclear waste back and forth across Europe like coachloads of tourists as a way of deferring the decision on final disposal .
On the contrary , we must get down to creating specific arrangements for safe final disposal .
That is the crucial problem .
Not until we have done that , for the sake of generations still to come , for the sake of our children , can we be sure that future generations will be able to practise archaeology without anxiety .
Madam President , I would like to draw your attention and that of the House to a number of outdated Soviet-design nuclear reactors which are still in operation and now constitute a threat to the people of Europe .
For example , the continuing operation of the Koslodui nuclear station in Bulgaria is a permanent nightmare for my own country , but also a direct threat to the whole of Europe because of the huge risks related to its operational safety .
The plant has 6 high-pressure water reactors of Soviet design , numbers 1 to 4 of which are of the VVR 440 230 type and are among the most antiquated and the most dangerous .
The other two reactors , numbers 5 and 6 , are VVR 1320 reactors which are considered less dangerous because stricter safety criteria were applied during their construction .
Despite that , problems have been identified even with those reactors too , and experts estimate that even after they have been upgraded to western standards , they will not be able to operate safely for more than two years without continual safety checks .
It should be noted that the most recent incident at the station took place only last May and was provisionally classified as a level-2 incident .
Since 1991 the European Union has granted more than ECU 50 million from PHARE for improving the station 's nuclear safety , and more than ECU 70 million for the adoption of short-term urgent measures in the traditional energy sector .
There is therefore a clear need to shut the station down immediately and to decommission the more dangerous reactors 1 to 4 .
In any case , the Bulgarian government committed itself to that in the agreement on subsidies from the European Investment Bank for the upgrading of units 5 and 6 .
Any appeal for more time or to change this commitment would be an extremely dangerous development , and would undermine Bulgaria 's efforts to join the European Union and dramatically worsen its relations with it .
That has already been made clear in a letter from President Santer to the Bulgarian authorities .
However , the EU must be ready to assist Bulgaria , taking an active part in the reduction of its dependence on nuclear energy .
For that purpose , instead of standing by and watching huge sums from the PHARE programme accumulate unused , the Commission should take immediate action to develop and fund appropriate measures .
Risks are presented even by uranium mining and processing facilities , nuclear fuel production plants and plants for the processing of spent fuel and the storage of waste from Koslodui .
Capacity for the storage of radioactive waste has already been exceeded , with the result that it is now being stored temporarily at the site where the Koslodui station is located .
Furthermore , the cross-border radioactive contamination of the river Nestos is an indisputable fact .
The Commission must approach the Bulgarian government with a view to securing its cooperation in eliminating cross-border radioactive pollution .
Madam President , today nothing is more important for Europe 's citizens than avoiding another Chernobyl , which is what could happen if the dangerous reactors at Koslodui continue in operation , not to mention other Soviet-design nuclear reactors still operating in Europe today , with all the dreadful consequences we already know so well .
We must therefore act very promptly before it is too late .
The Commission should tell us what it intends to do about Koslodui and all the other Soviet-type nuclear reactors , and more generally , nuclear reactors whose working life is over and which pose a deadly threat to the people of Europe .
Madam President , the proposal we are debating contains some very useful suggestions about what must be done when the time finally comes to decommission a nuclear station .
Yet , the basic problem that concerns me is the level of support for nuclear energy , the dangers involved , and the real costs .
On those questions Mr Chichester 's report provides only indirect answers .
It contains some views which seem odd , to say the least , such as that the nuclear industry should educate us so as to increase our awareness , and that the decommissioning of unsafe nuclear stations should be encouraged .
But how safe are the rest ?
And not just those of Soviet design .
What is the ' proven ' probability of accident , at what ' cost ' and with what hopes of recovery , in how many hundreds or thousands of years ?
What does the Commission have to say about all that ?
I also think that this report underestimates the cost of decommissioning .
We have information from France and Spain which puts the cost at tens of billions of francs , and which indicates that possibly as many as ten years may be needed for decommissioning , which is a further cost factor and one that cannot be calculated .
It is therefore high time , Madam President , to find a different strategy which will replace all nuclear stations and promote other sources of energy for which modern technology exists and for whose development investment is required .
That investment will certainly be much smaller than was required for the development of nuclear energy , which is ultimately proving not to be cheap .
I think we must applaud the governments in the Union , or at least those which say they are coming round to this view , as happened recently in Germany .
Madam President , I welcome this report by my colleague Mr Chichester .
The Chernobyl disaster changed the public perception of nuclear energy , and many of those who live in the shadow of nuclear power plants are apprehensive about current levels of safety .
This is particularly worrying for European citizens who share a border with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
It does not help that the industry itself acts in a secretive way when a problem occurs .
If it were more open and more transparent , it would be more reassuring to those who have legitimate cause to be concerned .
This debate about decommissioning comes at an opportune time , and in our discussions with the applicant countries in the enlargement process we must press for the decommissioning of plants that are unsafe .
However , I would like to point out that this applies as much to the Member States of the European Union as it does to countries that share our borders .
In particular I would like to reiterate the concerns of my fellow Irish citizens regarding the Sellafield-THORP plant .
There have been too many incidents , too many scares and too many coincidences of health problems along Ireland 's eastern seaboard .
With the change in government in Germany , as you would know , Madam President , Germany 's nuclear policy will obviously be re-evaluated .
This could mean that the reprocessing shipments that have normally gone to Sellafield-THORP will be discontinued , thereby raising questions about the economic viability of that plant .
As well as the concerns that have already been expressed , I should like to draw the Commission 's attention to paragraph 15 of my colleague 's report which calls on the Council and Commission to encourage the closure of unsafe nuclear power stations in Europe .
In that regard I would ask the Commissioner to examine seriously whether or not Sellafield-THORP would come into that particular category .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to express my sincere thanks to Mr Chichester for his detailed report , but I should also like to thank the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy for dealing with this report and particularly for their very close cooperation with the various departments of the Commission , which has done much to promote understanding of the current problems in what is undoubtedly a highly sensitive area .
The Commission is well aware of the industrial and ecological challenges that have to be faced in our Member States in connection with the decommissioning of nuclear power stations or other nuclear facilities .
At the present time , some 110 nuclear installations in the European Union are being decommissioned , although the preparations for decommissioning are at widely differing stages .
Looking at the existing nuclear facilities in Western Europe , we cannot but conclude that the first decades of the new century will see the decommissioning of an ever-increasing number of nuclear installations .
By the year 2020 , it is expected that at least a further 150 installations will have to be wound down .
The planned enlargement of the European Union will further exacerbate the problems , because there will then be a need to decommission nuclear plants that do not necessarily meet the generally recognised safety standards .
According to initial estimates by the Commission 's services , after enlargement about 50 more installations in the new Member States will have to be decommissioned .
By that time , decommissioning strategies will have ceased to be adopted on a case-by-case basis .
The fact is that an industrial-scale process will then be in place , a process in which tens of thousands of European workers will be engaged and which will involve considerable amounts of material , especially low-level radioactive material .
In view of the large quantities involved and in an effort to develop more and better cooperation among the Member States and harmonisation within the Union , the Commission advocates the establishment of some general guidelines for the decommissioning of nuclear facilities .
For that reason , the Commission is in general agreement with the views on decommissioning expressed by Mr Chichester .
Let me deal in more detail , however , with some of the points that were raised .
In paragraphs 3 and 5 , the Commission is called on to preserve a high level of expertise in the European Union and to take steps to ensure the dissemination and transfer of know-how in this domain .
On that point , I can tell you that , within its present framework programme of research and technological development , the Commission will continue to set up and develop databases in order to simplify exchanges of information on technology and costs between current decommissioning projects .
In paragraph 6 , the rapporteur stresses how important long-term technical aid is to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
In this context , the Commission is presently funding a whole series of studies which deal with the strategic and technical aspects of decommissioning in the Central and Eastern European countries and the newly independent states ; these studies will be of great assistance to the governments concerned as they strive to develop their own strategies .
On paragraphs 8 and 11 , let me say that the Commission naturally shares the view that the public have to be kept informed .
The Commission will continue to play its part in the pursuit of that goal .
The fourth Commission report outlining the present situation and assessing future prospects with regard to the disposal of radioactive waste in the European Union should be published by the end of the year .
Like you , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission takes the view that the question of funding as well as the possibilities of reducing quantities of waste and cutting the cost of decommissioning are among the main related issues to which paragraph 8 refers .
The Commission will take these facts into account in the preparation of its communication on decommissioning .
At the present moment , however , the Commission is not in a position to make any forecasts about extending the useful life of nuclear power stations , the issue that is raised in paragraph 14 .
However , studies into the question of extending the useful life of nuclear reactors will be conducted as part of the fifth framework programme of research and technological development .
I hope that the results of these will help the Commission to arrive at an accurate assessment of the present situation and of future prospects .
Thank you , Mr Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
Agricultural production and the environment -Forestry measures - Mountain areas
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :

A4-0345 / 98 by Mr Iversen , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the application of Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 2078 / 92 on agricultural production methods compatible with the requirements of the protection of the environment and the maintenance of the countryside ( COM ( 97 ) 0620 - C4-0075 / 98 ) ; -A4-0346 / 98 by Mr Otila , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the application of Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 2080 / 92 instituting a Community aid scheme for forestry measures in agriculture ( COM ( 97 ) 0630 - C4-0076 / 98 ) ; -A4-0368 / 98 by Mr Santini , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on a new strategy for mountain areas .
Madam President , I think we have achieved a good compromise on this report .
Our task here in Parliament is , after all , to ensure that what happens is what we wish to happen .
On the one hand , we have to put resources into programmes which promote environmentally friendly production methods .
On the other hand , we have to look at whether we are getting enough for the money we spend .
Are we getting enough environment for the money we allocate to these schemes ?
Indeed , we are not talking about small change .
A total EU budget of ECU 3.8 billion has been allocated to this programme for 1997 , on top of which are the Member States ' contributions amounting to ECU 2.5 billion .
So we are talking about significant amounts , and of course we need to look at how we spend this money .
Are we getting enough environment for the money ?
It is EU taxpayers ' money we are talking about . It is therefore important to ascertain how well this programme works in practice .
We may complain that there is no actual evaluation report , but that was not the intention anyway - that should be said in the Commission 's defence .
But , in these circumstances , it was difficult for me as rapporteur to draw any final conclusions as regards the environmental effects of this programme .
I understand from the Commission - with whom , moreover , I have had excellent cooperation during the drafting of this report , for which I wish to say thank you - that it is still waiting for two of the national evaluation reports and that it will have a general report ready by April next year .
That is good , but it would obviously have been much better if we had been able to produce our report on the basis of an actual evaluation from the Commission .
It is indeed difficult to evaluate a programme such as this , because it lacks actual objectives or criteria for success .
What is it that we want ?
How far do we want to go ?
What do we need to have before we can say that it is good enough ?
I think it should be borne in mind that a good evaluation requires explicit evaluation criteria , and I also think that in the future the objectives should be stated more clearly than has been done hitherto .
I will also say that the Commission 's report contains a number of very , very positive effects in a large number of areas .
Amongst other things , many farmers have been encouraged to switch to organic farming , and that is no bad thing after all .
But the figures we already have also show that there has been insufficient take-up of the programmes .
There may be many reasons for this .
The Member States have indicated that it may be attributable to factors such as start-up difficulties , incomplete information on the programmes , lack of national cofinancing , and it may be due to a lack of willingness on the part of farmers to commit themselves for such long periods ahead as are necessary to take part in these schemes ; there have also been complaints that the remuneration arrangements did not cover expenditure during the conversion of production .
The Commission should therefore , in my opinion , present proposals on how the scheme can be made more transparent for farmers in the future .
There are currently three different support arrangements for environmentally friendly production methods , and it may be difficult for the individual farmer to decide which scheme is the most economically viable for him in a given situation .
I would therefore call on the Commission also to bear in mind that information on the scheme is an important prerequisite for successful implementation in the Member States .
But publicity and information are not necessarily enough to ensure that potentially interested farmers choose to take part .
The low take-up rate is most pronounced - and I greatly regret this - in areas where agriculture is most intensive .
We are thus in the situation that nothing is really happening in those areas where these schemes are really needed .
We are seeing that there is no real scope for converting intensive agriculture to extensive agriculture .
I think that is a serious deficiency in the programmes , since it is in those areas that there would have been the greatest environmental effect .
The problem with the present scheme is that it clearly cannot pay farmers applying intensive farming methods to avail themselves of these programmes .
I believe we need to think again about what success criteria we should be applying and what objectives we should be pursuing .
On a somewhat more critical note , I must say that , on the basis of the information I have received from the Commission , which has been very open on these matters , I get the feeling that a number of the things that have been carried out as a result of these schemes , for example conservation measures , would have been carried out anyway .
This means that some people have received money for doing something they would have done in any case .
I therefore think that we need - as I said before - to do some thinking about success criteria and objectives .
I also feel that there must be a possibility of graduating the support so that there is a stronger link between the amount of the support and farmers ' expenditure in relation to environmental effects .
Our job as a Parliament in this context - and I will make this my last point - is , on the one hand , to look after the environment and to check whether we are getting environmental improvements .
I think that we are getting them .
On the other hand , we must also carry out investigations to determine whether the environmental improvements we get show a reasonable relationship to the expenditure we incur .
It may be difficult to tell exactly whether that is the case with these schemes , so I will say once again that we look forward to getting a proper evaluation .
I was pleased at the cooperation we have had , and I also hope that Commissioner Fischler can confirm here today that he will give the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development an initial evaluation even before the peace of Christmas descends upon the Union .
Madam President , Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 2080 / 92 was a flanking measure introduced as part of the 1992 CAP reform .
Its main aim was to organise afforestation as an alternative use of agricultural land , so that surpluses in agricultural produce , which are politically and economically harmful to the Community , could be reduced .
There was a stipulated amount to pay to farmers in compensation for losses of income resulting from lower prices and reductions in output .
At the same time the Community would improve its stock of afforested land , while restoring the ecological balance in its efforts to combat the greenhouse effect .
There were thus two aspects to the scheme : the reduction of agricultural production , and increased afforestation and improvement of woodlands in the Community .
Aid is paid to compensate for the costs of afforestation and the initial maintenance of saplings , and for the improvement of woodlands on farms .
Community co-financing in the Objective 1 area is 75 % , and 50 % elsewhere .
The Commission 's activity report submitted to Parliament does not , however , answer the question as to whether the general aims of the regulation have been achieved .
There is no information in the report on reductions in agricultural production or on losses of income incurred by farmers as a result of the reforms which have been compensated for with forestry aid .
The report states that agricultural land has been reduced in three countries by around 0.95 % to 1.35 % , and in other countries the amount is noticeably less .
In the absence of such information the European Parliament is unable to give a clear evaluation of the effectiveness of the measures taken , which have cost the Community approximately ECU 0.8 billion over the period 1993-1997 , and which , if we include the contribution made by the Member States , totalled around ECU 1.8 billion in all .
Only a short time has passed since the creation of the scheme , so I understand that it has not yet been possible to give an overall evaluation .
As rapporteur for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development in this matter , however , I am asking for a proper evaluation to be made on the implementation and viability of the scheme .
In my opinion , the Court of Auditors should submit a report to Parliament of the costs and benefits arising from the Council Regulation so that we can get a comprehensive picture of the viability of a scheme that has paid out billions of ecus in the European Union .
In addition , a comparative analysis should be made in particular of the possible advantages of the forestry regulation and Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 2078 / 92 relating to agri-environmental measures .
My colleague , Mr Iversen , has produced an excellent report on the latter .
Perhaps the most noteworthy feature of the scheme is its uneven distribution of aid .
Member States are obliged to observe the regulation within the framework of the principle of subsidiarity , but they apply it according to their own priorities .
In practice the regulation has had a significant effect in four Member States : Spain , the United Kingdom , Ireland and Portugal , which account for 81 % of the total EU hectarage quoted , or approximately 500 000 hectares .
During the implementation period , the total area covered by the whole of the EU forest improvement programme was around 185 000 hectares , and 7 312 kilometres of lumber truck track were constructed .
It would seem that Member States have applied the regulation according to their own forestry and environmental policies , without paying attention to the original purpose of the regulation or its policy on agriculture .
It seems odd that the Commission should have wished to produce this activity report at such an early stage and with insufficient information .
Most Member States did not approve the scheme until 1994 .
Furthermore , I found the figures given in the activity report to be incomplete or even wrong while I was drafting the report for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , mainly perhaps because of the delay in the implementation of the regulation .
This , however , is not an indication that the costs of the scheme were any less than was believed , but that generally the scheme had not worked and does not work as programmed .
I believe we are entitled to enquire whether the action the regulation calls for should continue in the way it now does , as the desired aims , with few exceptions , have not been achieved .
We must return to this issue again when discussions are held on the legislative proposals for Agenda 2000 .
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on forest strategy in the Community in January 1997 , which states that forest policy is not mentioned in the Treaty of Rome and therefore does not fall within the jurisdiction of the Community .
I would like to remind everyone of this important fact .
I believe that in the future agriculture has to operate primarily according to the dictates of the market economy and that there should not be any new aid schemes .
There is a heated debate going on at this very moment at EU level on a possible forestry strategy and the different systems of certification there are with forests .
In this debate we have to keep our feet firmly on the ground and face facts , and not join the environment organisations in calling for finance mechanisms .
Madam President , I wish to say first of all that this own-initiative report on a new strategy for mountain regions in Europe goes back quite a long way and picks up on previous work which clearly needed updating .
It also goes back a long way as far as this term of Parliament is concerned .
I would recall that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development held a hearing on mountain regions , and in particular on hill farming , on 27 January 1997 .
Since then , Parliament 's Directorate-General for Research has produced an extremely useful update study .
This is a very recent document , published less than a month ago , for which I should like to thank all those concerned .
I am holding up this volume now , and as you can see it is an extremely weighty one : it is most enlightening for anyone wanting to find out about Europe 's mountain regions , and not only in respect of agriculture .
Lastly , another major incentive was the attention devoted to this matter , and the studies produced literally in the last few days , by the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions .
So we in the European Parliament were keen to make our own contribution to this range of analyses , and above all proposals , geared to putting some order into measures in favour of mountain regions .
Here we should be careful to avoid any misunderstanding , since mountain regions form part of what are generally known as disadvantaged or less-favoured regions of the European Union .
But I shall return to this matter when I comment briefly on the amendments which have been tabled .
This study - and indeed this initiative - starts from the premise that mountain regions account for 30 % of the territory of the EU and 20 % of its usable agricultural area , a sizeable proportion where life is extremely difficult , moreover .
I would just remind you of some of the reasons why : altitude , first and foremost , gradients which make it hard to use mechanised farming methods , land fragmentation , poor soil fertility , depopulation and the ageing of the resident population , difficulties for communications and transport , remoteness from centres of habitation , constant environmental risks - making it difficult to plan for the future - and the need for basic infrastructures , roads , schools and general services .
Mountain regions have a cross-cutting role which not only affects those who live in them : environmental protection and land management , hydrogeological monitoring , the promotion of agri-tourism , improved utilisation of resources , stabilisation of low-lying areas - it is not a commonplace to say that , in many instances , city defences lie in mountain regions - and also , where appropriate , cross-border cooperation and the management of forestry and grazing activities .
These considerations give rise to certain proposals , not to say pointers for reform , which in general terms lie within two spheres of prime concern to the European institutions as a whole : the first is safeguarding jobs - given that we have undertaken to create new employment , let us try not to lose existing jobs - and the second is environmental protection , a commitment which underpins all the reforms .
But if this approach is to succeed , it must above all be global , integrated , coherent and sustained , not based on one-off measures .
As I indicated earlier , the European Union has already adopted a strategy for lessfavoured areas , which include not only mountain regions but also Arctic areas and coastal areas threatened by desertification .
This own-initiative report paves the way to two other possible in-depth studies , attesting to the fact that the legislator 's job is to design a broad avenue , from which pathways branch off into the real heart of the matter .
Mountain regions are one aspect of the matter ; Arctic areas are another , and are the subject of an own-initiative report to be presented very shortly by Mrs Anttila .
At some future date , perhaps during the next parliamentary term , someone might turn their attention to coastal areas threatened by desertification .
Thus it is quite unnecessary to address ourselves to the issue in its entirety on every occasion : that would be a retrograde step , a pretext for more solemn declarations of principle and sweeping proposals , but without indicating in practical terms and in detail how to get to the very heart of the matter and produce tangible measures .
So , what tangible measures do we mean ?
I shall briefly mention a few of them .
First and foremost , an integrated approach is required .
The rural population should be encouraged to stay on the land by granting them fixed - not unpredictable - additional income for ecological and social services over and above what must remain their main activity , namely farming .
The main regulations having an impact on mountain areas should be published in a single volume , thereby creating an EU mountain code .
Seminars should be held to explore the issues in greater detail , the Commission should draw up a communication for the Council on EU mountain regions , and on that basis a Community action plan for mountain areas should be produced .
Lessons could be drawn from pilot projects under the TERRA and LEADER programmes , and a whole series of other initiatives is required .
They can be examined in detail by Commissioner Fischler , to whom I - as rapporteur - now hand over this study , so that it may be taken into account when charting the new course of rural development in the context of Agenda 2000 .
Madam President , our group welcomes these two Commission reports on Regulations 2087 and 2080 .
Mr Otila said that both reports were drawn up too hastily ; I fear that the opposite is true , and that they have come along rather late in the day .
The regulations on the CAP accompanying measures date back to 1992 ; now , in 1998 and six years on , this is our first across-the-board assessment of these measures .
I think that such innovative initiatives , which were so full of significance when they were first presented , would benefit from more regular monitoring , bearing in mind that this is a fastchanging area , in constant need of updating and revision .
As Mr Iversen said , the problem is the lack of critical assessments of the effectiveness of these measures : this loophole must be closed , and such assessments must be made public .
We must have all the necessary information on how these substantial financial resources have been used , not least because we must now start to look at new proposals . I am sure that those who advocate the greening of the CAP need very sound facts and arguments , because many people object to a renewal along environmentalist lines of traditionally market-oriented policies .
I would encourage the Commissioner to proceed on the basis of these initial experiences .
The new regulation on rural development does include the actions contained in Regulations 2078 and 2080 , and yet we have three areas of doubt .
Firstly , as Mr Iversen says in his report , the financial allocation for the new accompanying measures is still somewhat meagre .
In certain circumstances , the compensation paid will probably be too limited to meet the need , which is why we should perhaps consider cofinancing these measures at differential rates .
Secondly , Regulation 2080 is still overshadowed by the ambiguity concerning Community actions relating to forestry per se - it is true that the Community has no direct competence here , but we said in the Thomas report that a whole series of measures could be introduced at Community level - and compensatory allowances for non-food production , for example that of timber .
I believe that this reminds the Commission of the need to present specific proposals on forestry policy .
Thirdly , the new Agenda 2000 proposals provide for cross-compliance which is left rather too much to the Member States ' discretion .
Subsidiarity is all very well , but should not be taken to such lengths .
The track record of Regulations 2078 and 2080 should be assessed , maintaining some common rules which leave scope for independent initiative by the Member States .

Turning to mountain regions , I should like to compliment Mr Santini : his report paints a picture of mountain regions which is more than just a postcard view , and which we now need more than ever before .
Many points are set out , and I would merely add that these initiatives should not be taken at Community level alone .
Indeed , I always fear that we expect rather too much of the Community .
They must be carried out in tandem by the Member States and regions , because the new thinking behind the CAP is to give the regions greater freedom of planning within their own confines , taking account of all the areas which have physical and natural handicaps and therefore need special help and consideration .
Madam President , Commissioner Fischler , the agricultural environment programmes of the European Union have met with widely varying responses from one Member State to another .
A scientific analysis conducted in Germany to assess the approval rating of the EU agricultural environment programmes highlights this very clearly .
In your home country , Commissioner , 86 % of farmers welcome such programmes .
The acceptance rate in Germany stands at 30 % , while the figure for France is 17 % .
Three years after the entry into force of this environmental regulation , the Commission has now presented the European Parliament and the Council with an assessment of the way in which the regulation has been applied .
The rapporteur , Mr Iversen , on whose report my remarks are chiefly based , has generally tended to adopt a somewhat critical tone , to my mind , in his report .
He points to weaknesses in the aims of the regulation , which he feels should be more stringently defined , as well as calling for clearer details of the quantitative improvements to be achieved by farmers when they implement the programmes .
One of his demands is that the agricultural environment programmes should be far more strongly result-oriented .
This may mean that further increases in grants and incentives will be needed in particular sectors , and perhaps a little more democracy too .
At the present time , there are ceilings on the grants that can be cofinanced from Community funds .
However , it may be necessary to adjust these ceilings in accordance with actual requirements .
In my view , Member States which developed and implemented their own agricultural environment programmes even before the reform of the common agricultural policy have a certain advantage in terms of experience .
The main reason for the varying acceptance levels of agricultural environment programmes in the EU is not a lack of willingness among some farmers to take part in the programmes , but rather the financial priority and organisational resources that the Member States feel able to assign to the creation and planning of such programmes .
In my home region , the farmers already have quite some experience of these things .
There was undoubtedly a great deal of resistance to begin with , but I believe that the subject has now been aired as thoroughly as possible .
The greatest quantities of newly formed groundwater have been found under farmland .
Who has ever mentioned that ?
In areas where the whole countryside is under cultivation , the production of drinking water is another major contribution of the farming community , alongside the other contributions - food production and care and conservation of the agricultural landscape - that we never tire of citing .
That is why I believe it makes sense for us to deal jointly with these reports on forest and mountain regions in terms of these factors too .
For these important reasons , I too am committed to ensuring that agricultural activity is maintained in naturally disadvantaged regions as well as in good farming areas .
To that end , transfer payments are necessary and warranted .
In conclusion , may I say that one of the aims of the agricultural environment programmes is to strengthen the farming economy , with its wealth of useful functions , in peripheral areas too .
In that respect , Regulation No 2078 / 92 makes a very important contribution to the stabilisation of rural areas .
Madam President , Commissioner , congratulations to my colleague on an excellent report .
Agreements under measures contained in the CAP reform have been signed with only 17 % of all EU farms , and environmental aid is only going to five countries .
The scheme must be made more attractive , such as by making it a condition for receiving aid .
Environmental aid in the future can also be used to lessen the burden production places on the environment .
Environmental protection and sustained development are becoming ever more important to consumers when they choose the food they buy .
Sound principles are required for Europe 's agricultural production if we are to achieve a sustainable base for high-quality European food , as Mr Mulder states in his report on food quality .
The European Union will only succeed in the global food market in the area of high-quality produce .
Mr Otila 's report shows that the afforestation scheme has not worked out as expected .
When Finland and Sweden joined the Union the northern coniferous zone became a brand new part of the area . Sustainable use of the forests , and their reform , have been the backbone of our economy for decades .
As Mr Otila said , forestry in the future must operate according to the principle of the free market .
Community policy must be responsible for coordination in order to produce benefits and added value for the sustained use and exploitation of forests in the EU area .
EU action is needed to ensure , for example , that WTO negotiations cover the free access of the timber industry 's products to global markets .
The Union must also define the criteria for sustainable forest maintenance and reform for forestry products in the EU area , as only then can we prevent the introduction of certification that would increase the power of environmental organisations which are biased .
Certification schemes are being developed all the time by Member States , and that is why we need an umbrella scheme at EU level to cover the individual systems .
Proposals on this have already been put to you , Commissioner , and I would like to ask you this : when will you come up with a proposal for such an umbrella scheme ?
Mr Santini 's report deals comprehensively with the special problems of mountain areas .
I can see that mountain areas and the Arctic region have very many problems in common with agriculture : a short growing season , vast distances , a sparse population , difficult growing conditions , and so on .
The European Union can function in a sustainable way only by acknowledging differences , and taking greater notice of the different needs of the regions .
I believe these reports now under discussion will be an excellent opportunity to give more weight to the whole question of differing needs in the regions , which undeniably exist in the vast area of the Union , and the report on mountain areas covers this in detail .
Madam President , Commissioner , I have been given a mountain of minutes but I do not want to reach the very summit because I do not want to tire everyone else out if I climb that high .
Nevertheless , I am going to be speaking about three reports : the Iversen , Otila and Santini reports .
The Iversen report , of course , reveals extensive knowledge , especially of those agricultural areas with the luxury of being able to carry out more intensive forms of agriculture .
That is not the case in my country , or in Greece , where in certain areas it is impossible to carry out intensive farming even if you wanted to - unless you want to set up industrial pig farms .
There are , however , environmental differences and huge environment-related differences between the various countries .
How can all of that be assessed ?
By means of studies and asking university institutes and others to assess the situation as a whole .
There is no doubt some countries cannot combine development with environmental protection .
In others development only harms the environment .
So who can decide ?
That problem will not go away .
Is some bureaucrat always going to decide what is good farming practice for me ?
Of course , I do agree with Mr Fantuzzi when he says that we must have general rules for Europe as a whole .
As for the Otila report it deals with an extremely useful aid measure .
We all know that this is not enough to solve the forestry problem in Europe but it can , at least in countries like mine , withdraw certain marginal areas from production .
But a study must be carried out into this , too : to see which varieties are planted in poor areas , whether those varieties will be of any economic value in the future and who should take decisions about those varieties in conjunction with the farmers themselves or about which marginal areas should be withdrawn from production .
Who actually decides ?
Money is needed and we must assess what has been done in each country .
I am completely against the notion of taking under-used funding away from one country and giving it to another country that makes better use of it , because I feel that the Commission should also play an educative role and work in conjunction with the national governments .
As far as my friend Mr Santini 's report is concerned I have to say that Mr Santini is more Tyrolean than Italian .
There is no doubt that he is much closer to Commissioner Fischler 's land of yodelling than he is to the country of Italian ballads .
That is why he has produced a report for the mountains - not for the Tyrol but for the Italian mountains that are an extension of the Tyrol .
I know the poor mountains , the dry mountains , snowless mountains , mountains where farmers cannot double up as skiing instructors .
That is why , out of my friendship for him and my great respect for his work in the European Parliament , I proposed that he should also look at mountains in arid and semi-arid areas .
I succeeded in tabling some amendments and he kindly took them on board .
Of course , in a previous parliamentary term , Mr Görlach drafted a report on the arid and semi-arid areas .
But I think that they should be paid more attention because , as a rule , science pays attention to the rich areas because it is paid to do so .
Science does not pay any attention to the poor areas because they do not have any money to pay for it .
That is why I would call on the Commission to think about much more comprehensive studies of the real situation in Europe .
I have now reached the top of the mountain and I do not want to go any higher .
I shall stop there even though I have one more minute to go - but I did not want to bore you all stiff .
Madam President , Commissioner , I believe that the three reports that have been presented to us are particularly important when considering the Union 's policies .
In fact , they question which agricultural and forestry policies would be more ecological and would ensure the best use of land , as well as the maintenance and development of human activities .
These issues are major concerns for our societies .
They came to be of such concern through the rejection of productivity-based policies that weakened the quality of production and of the environment , led to job losses and to desertification in fragile areas .
Every effort should be made to allow these alternative policies to succeed , but this is not the verdict handed down by our rapporteurs , in spite of the lack of information from the Commission .
In fact , they note that the objectives have not been achieved .
The decline in agricultural activity has often transformed agricultural areas into fallow land and wild forests , which are not valued and are extremely prone to fires , particularly in southern Europe .
Difficult and mountainous regions continue to see their populations drift away .
Areas of intensive production that threatens the environment have not been affected by the agri-environmental measures .
This failure is the result of a CAP that put agricultural and forestry produce at the mercy of a market that tramples on prices and on human beings .
Alternative policies do exist .
Both the Cunha report , which was adopted by this House , and the basic law on French agriculture , call for a reform of the CAP that would use public funds to develop high-quality production that encourages land use , that respects the environment and that develops employment .
In difficult mountain areas , prices and premiums should guarantee a reasonable revenue for small production structures .
In all areas , premiums should have a fixed upper limit per operation in order to slow down the productivity race and to finance production contracts that work towards quality , employment and environmental protection .
In the largest cultivated forest in the Union , in the south-west of France , as in Mediterranean forests , implementing new resin production techniques could bring people back to the now deserted areas .
These are only three specific projects that reflect the spirit of a policy that would allow the financial resources committed by the Union to be used to meet the needs of our society .
Madam President , thank you for the ten minutes .
I already had one from my honourable colleague , so that makes eleven .
I shall begin with my own three minutes .
First point : We must remind ourselves clearly of the aim of these accompanying measures under Regulations 2078 and 2080 .
Mr Fischler , you were not yet the Commissioner at that time , and Austria was not yet in the EU .
The aim was not to create an innovation programme , but rather , as the term ' accompanying measures ' suggests , to establish mechanisms to accompany price reductions . These reductions had not been properly implemented and , as a result , certain farming activities outside the high-performance areas had been pushed to the brink of unprofitability .
The intention was to compensate for this , which is why Regulation 2080 gives farmers the opportunity to afforest land that has been taken out of production .
That was the aim behind these environmental measures .
The fact that it has now developed into an innovation programme - and this is my second point , Mr Fischler - has nothing to do with its aims , but rather with the way it has been used by interested parties .
Austria is a good example .
The Austrians joined when the scheme was already operational and soon began to use the special production methods dictated by these environmental requirements as a cachet of quality for marketing purposes .
The same applies to the organic farmers , some of whom are not even based in less-favoured areas , who have also joined this scheme and have been able to live with these rather small compensatory payments because the environmental tag has secured higher prices for their produce .
It says here in Mr Iversen 's report that the farmers and regional authorities in the more favoured areas have not otherwise availed themselves of this scheme , but that is precisely because these measures and the payments granted for them would not have compensated for the loss of earnings in these areas .
So it was an accompanying programme , and the interested parties have turned it into an innovation programme .
My third point concerns the funding issue .
This scheme , of course , came under the heading of compulsory expenditure .
I recently spoke to the Basque Agricultural Minister .
He had visited Austria and was quite astonished to discover how much Austria obtains under this scheme .
And so I asked him why the Basques had not been doing the same over the past few years .
It was a notifiable Commission programme .
Measures would have had to be paid for , because it was a compulsory scheme and was covered by the guarantee section of the EAGGF .
In this way these funds could have been increased , we should have had a higher budget today , and there would have been no need for us to press for this increase .
My final point relates to the future of this programme .
Here I agree with you .
This programme must be incorporated into the second pillar , and the way to do this is to take what has actually been done , to take this scheme that was launched as an environmental programme and turned into an innovation and marketing programme for special organic produce , and to combine it all with a structural programme for the integrated development of rural areas .
So I am in agreement with you here .
What I do not agree with , of course , is that you as a Commissioner are making the mistake of ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , we should set this debate back in the general context of the reform of the CAP .
Existing regulations on agri-environmental and afforestation measures should be made top-level priority in this area .
In so far as it is true that in 1992 these regulations represented real attempts to better incorporate less production-orientated attitudes , it is also worrying to see today that they have had mixed , even negative , results .
With Agenda 2000 , a fundamental reform is necessary to improve food safety , particularly in meats .
With animal nutrition lacking 70 % protein , the European Union is still running the risk of possible international embargoes .
At the same time , a growing number of farmers are becoming involved in new high-quality production , land-based production , which shows more respect for the environment and which promotes regional markets and areas rather than producing vast quantities for export .
There is also a need for some basic questions to be asked so that agricultural jobs , food safety , the quality of production and the protection of the rural environment remain at the heart of the reform of the CAP .
We should no longer settle for accompanying measures , which are often no more than a scanty cover-up for an agricultural policy geared towards productivity , the constant reduction of prices , deregulation and the world market .
The CAP must incorporate both economic and social considerations as well as aspects relating to the environment and rural land-use planning in the Union .
Yes , Mr Iversen , you are indeed right to regret the fact that the Commission has decided to merely provide a summary , and not move on to a true assessment .
The Commission did not wish to draw the operational conclusions that are necessary for the future .
Agri-environmental measures could not be reduced to mere supplementary income for farmers .
Making European agricultural producers sell their produce at a price that is below production costs does not create sustainable development .
Rather than increase the number of environmental constraints imposed on farmers , let us include proportional aid in the specifications for payment conditions from the outset . Society would derive health , social and environmental advantages from a revitalised agricultural industry with , for example , special measures for mountainous regions , as Mr Santini suggests , or even for less-favoured areas .
As for industrial-type operations , which often cause pollution , let us steer them towards the ' polluter pays ' type systems , with environmental conditions and an upper limit for aid .
Lastly , the same , rather worryingly , applies to the relative failure of forestry aid schemes in agriculture .
As it was very unevenly applied depending on the country , there was no real effect in terms of rural development , even if it did achieve its goals in terms of land use and decreasing the amount of cultivated land .
A simple European forestry strategy would be sufficient to encourage us to produce wood in Europe in a sustainable manner and to reject imports from tropical or boreal forests that often come from felled areas .
We must , of course , fight for a substantial increase in financial resources , but we need the European Union to demonstrate a true political will in order to ensure the success and widespread adoption of these measures .
Madam President , the promotion of more environmentally-friendly farming is not easy .
It becomes even more difficult when profit margins are in question .
It takes extra money to develop into new areas of production because of the cost of new buildings .
So we have to be realistic and sensible in what we hope ultimately to achieve .
It is also very clear that if there is an opt-out clause then many national governments will not make available the matching funding , with the result that the proposal is not put into effect .
This is the real problem that will have to be remedied when we look at the reform package .
We are in danger , I believe , of creating a very uneven playing field .
We must ensure this does not happen within the European Union .
Mr Santini 's report - which I welcome - focuses on mountain areas .
That is fine .
I do not have any problem with that .
But it strikes me that these mountain areas are very similar to the less-favoured areas .
Parliament and its committees seem to be developing new ways of getting support into areas like the islands , peripheral regions and mountain areas now , but we could be in danger of spreading ourselves too thinly and not really helping them .
Surely the general structures that are provided should be able to handle this .
Action for the peripheral regions must be more broadly based .
The future of the less-favoured areas is extremely bleak at the moment , with a serious drop in income .
That is what we have to address and that is where we have to target our proposals in the future .
Thank you .
We shall now suspend the joint debate , which will be resumed after the votes .
VOTES
Madam President , I have the honour to be the spokesman for the five groups which have drawn up this resolution , namely the Socialists , the Greens , the GUE and ARE Groups and , of course , the Liberals .
I would like to inform you that these groups support only two amendments tabled by the PPE Group , Amendments Nos 5 and 8 , and we will support the latter only on condition that this new text becomes paragraph 2 .
Madam President , I would like to make a reference to the Rules of Procedure pursuant to Rule 102 , as the amendments relating to this resolution are not available in French .
I am quite happy to say that I would willingly vote in favour of this resolution but I believe it is absolutely impossible to express an opinion when the amendments are not available in all languages .
I waited for 10 minutes where the documents were being distributed .
I was told there were no amendments left in French , that it was impossible to find any and I was advised to wait .
I waited as long as I was supposed to and stopped waiting when I came into this sitting .
Therefore , we do not have the amendments available in one of the languages in use in the European Union .
Madam President , together with Mr Dupuis and others , I signed a number of amendments calling for action to be taken against numerous other dictators and ex-dictators .
I cannot find any of these amendments in our documentation , and now I hear that the administration has declared them inadmissible , as it were .
Let me ask you this : since when has the administration had the power to decide which dictators and ex-dictators we may and may not pursue ?
You are labouring under a misapprehension , Mr Posselt .
The administration does not decide whether or not an amendment is admissible , but the President himself .
In this context , we are dealing only with the arrest of General Pinochet , and nothing else .
Consequently , all the amendments which go beyond that subject are inadmissible .
The authors have also been informed of this in writing , to the best of my belief .
Madam President , I never questioned the existence of a French version of the amendments .
I simply said that this version was not available .
But thanks to the goodwill of one of our colleagues who has now become an usher as well , I received the document in French after I had taken the floor .
I am delighted by this .
But , besides all this , I question the reasons why we are deciding , and I wonder on what authority we are deciding , that the amendments relating to certain dictators are admissible , whereas amendments relating to other dictators are not .
( Applause )
You may table as many motions for resolutions as you wish , but this time we are dealing only with a single person , and nothing else .

Madam President , I accept Mr Bertens ' proposal but , when we vote on this text , I would like to table an oral amendment , which I am sure will be accepted by the Socialist Group and , therefore , I would ask you to allow me to state it now .
Before the vote on Amendment No 8
Madam President , when we make mention here of our commitment to the principle of universal justice and , consequently , call on the competent authorities to interpret it in accordance with the principles of the Treaty on European Union , I would like to add after ' competent authorities ' the words ' in particular those of Spain and the United Kingdom ' , which are the authorities involved in this matter .
I am sure that the Socialist Group will understand , since it is entirely logical , that both the Spanish judicial and government authorities - the latter having the authority to convey the judges ' request - and the British authorities - which have the authority to grant extradition - are those involved in this case and , consequently , will accept this obvious reference to them .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
That was recital G. We asked for a separate vote on each part .
May I question Mr Chichester on one point ?
It may be that something has been mistranslated here , but the German version says that the radioactive waste which is currently produced is principally medical waste .
That , of course , is entirely wrong from a factual and a technical point of view .
If it has been mistranslated , fair enough , but if not , we shall naturally have to delete the reference to ' principally medical waste ' , because that is not true ; it is nonsense , as everyone knows !
Madam President , this was an amendment which was originally introduced by the Green Group at the committee stage so I do not know what they are on about now .
Surely , we have not quite reached the vote .
We are having a separate vote on the three parts of Consideration G , so why do we not just vote ?
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , we are very pleased with the substance of this report , in which Mr Chichester gives a realistic and objective description and assessment of the problem .
We were therefore happy to vote for the resolution .
The decommissioning of nuclear power stations is going to become an increasingly important industry in the future .
The report rightly stresses the need to protect public health through prevention in all the activities associated with decommissioning .
Because of the huge range of differences inside and outside the Union , it is not feasible to harmonise decommissioning , and the responsibility therefore falls to the Member States and the power station operators .
It is up to them to choose whether to go for direct , complete dismantling or staged decommissioning , and the cost of decommissioning should , of course , be included in the cost of the electricity produced .
Exchanges of knowledge and experience should be encouraged , as should research , education and information activities .
Giving the general public clear information on why and how nuclear power stations are decommissioned also gives them greater insight into the problems associated with decommissioning and the storage of nuclear waste .
However , there is one small criticism we would make about recital N : requiring social acceptance of decommissioning and the storage of nuclear waste as a condition for the future development of nuclear energy seems a little excessive , which is why we voted against it .
According to its title , this report should be dealing with decommissioning nuclear power stations , but it looks more like a defence of nuclear energy .
I find that unacceptable .
Nuclear power is not safe and should therefore be abandoned .
The report ought to be focusing more on how decommissioning is to be organised and , fundamentally , on the technical measures required to ensure that it happens safely from the radiation point of view .
I am sorry that the majority of the House felt unable to support the important amendments tabled by the Green Group .
Several EU Member States , including Sweden and Germany , have decided to begin decommissioning , but this is not mentioned in the text .
I therefore voted against the whole report .
Representing a constituency in a region which has for many years played a leading role in the civil use of nuclear energy , I welcome the initiative of Mr Chichester in producing this report on the future of decommissioning nuclear plants .
Nuclear energy inspires both strong support and strong criticism .
Here perhaps is a nuclear issue - how to retire nuclear plants safely as they reach the end of their useful life - which can unite us all !
I acknowledge the skills of nuclear energy workers such as the many people in the north-west of England who work in this sector and help the modern economy to function .
I have faith in their ability to manage the decommissioning of old plants in the future , just as they have risen to the challenge of reprocessing spent fuel in the past .
I back the principle of this report that such work is best left to national authorities and the industry 's expertise rather than the EU .
However , the report is also right to ask that , as in research , where the EU can play a useful role in decommissioning , its work should as a matter of course include the many Central and Eastern European nations whose communist-built nuclear plants need help to decommission safely .
That concludes voting time .
Agricultural production and the environment -Forestry measures - Mountain areas ( continued )
We shall now continue with the joint debate that was interrupted earlier .
Madam President , in the context of agriculture and the environmental impact in different terrain , I have to say that all the arguments put by Mr Santini apply equally to less-favoured areas .
Rural depopulation is a problem , particularly in my country of Wales .
Young people - parents - are leaving the rural areas for the towns and their place is being taken by retired people or those who use rural areas as dormitories while their economic activity takes place in the town .
This has disastrous effects .
The economic vitality of youth is replaced by the recreation of the elderly .
Schools and shops close and bus routes close down .
We have to devise new methods to keep young people in rural areas .
We have to ensure affordable public services in all these rural areas .
One way we can help is to find better methods of compensating rural inhabitants for the provision of environmental services .
The Hill Livestock Compensatory Allowances should be used to compensate for natural handicaps and not to achieve environmental goals .
Separate schemes to encourage intensive farming , like Tircymen in Wales , should be funded through separate agri-environmental schemes .
The identities of people in sparsely-populated areas must also be respected .
We must not think of rural areas as the playground of visitors from the towns .
We want the economic benefits of tourism , but we need investment in bread-winner jobs as well .
We must always beware of the environmental impact of all development .
But we must also evaluate the economic impact of all our environmental considerations .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I speak from experience when I talk about this programme , because we have been working with this Regulation 2078 scheme on my farm since 1993 .
So what I tell you here is drawn from practice , and I should also like to deal with a number of areas in which we could perhaps make improvements .
In my own federal state of Baden-Württemberg , this programme has gained wide acceptance , but the level of regional cofinancing is very high at 50 % .
Our regional government is groaning under this burden .
It also maintains , and I can only agree , Mr Fischler , that it has far too little say in the scheme .
Because it bears half the cost and is responsible for inspecting the scheme , it should have a greater say .
I certainly wish to endorse that view .
This is an opportunity to put subsidiarity into practice .
The local authorities used to have more scope to decide how to implement the programme .
The Commission , however , is always imposing new requirements and more red tape , and in particular its new authorisation policy is tending to focus far more sharply on nature conservation and less sharply on the management of poor farmland .
Commissioner , I am sure you will agree with me when I say that the Black Forest and our central German upland farms with their typically high proportion of grassland should be preserved and should not be altered .
You will also agree with me when I say that extensive farming is far cheaper than the management of industrial land .
That is why we should support it .
Farmers participating in the scheme must commit themselves for five years .
Apart from anything else , this will provide a sound planning basis .
In our part of the world , however , there are farmers who have a great many leased fields and have no influence over the fluctuation of these leased fields .
That is why there should be some scope for local adjustments to improve the effectiveness of the scheme .
The farmers in our region fulfil certain prior conditions , which nobody has mentioned .
They refrain from second cuts and from late fertilising , because these restraints really protect the countryside and safeguard groundwater .
Above all , we forego maximum yields , and we hoe our maize .
That costs more , and it means that we dispense with plant protection .
That is what I really call environmentally friendly farming , but it is not taken to extremes .
Let me mention four more points .
Regulation No 2078 / 92 has proved its worth .
Greater regional flexibility should lead to wider acceptance of the scheme , and its benefits must be recognisable at the local level .
Secondly , the Commission 's restrictive authorisation practice tends to neglect the important role of extensive farming as a means of caring for and preserving the agricultural landscape .
Thirdly , in some areas of farming , more flexible rules of application should be devised , with a view to promoting regional adaptations .
Agri-environmental measures should not exclude statutory environmental requirements .
Fourthly - and this is very important , Commissioner - the strict limitation of grant income to 20 % of total earnings , as imposed by Regulation No 746 / 96 , reduces the level of acceptance of some measures .
Greater flexibility would therefore be welcomed .
Thank you very much , Madam President , for your indulgence ; I did continue beyond my allotted time , but I just know so much about this matter and want to impart that knowledge , at least to the Commissioner !
Madam President , Commissioner , it is absolutely vital to discuss the Commission 's report on forestry measures promoted as an alternative use of agricultural land , before taking a decision on the proposal for a significant increase in afforestation aid as part of rural development policy under Agenda 2000 .
The rapporteur , Jyrki Otila , is absolutely right when he says that the Commission has failed to address the essential question of whether the objective of reducing agricultural production has been achieved with the enormous amounts of aid spent .
At the end of the day , what we require is a comprehensive , detailed report on the cost-benefit ratio of the afforestation programme , the actual amount of money spent and how it was allocated , and giving an in-depth survey of the impact on the environment .
The vague and weak aspects of the scheme have to be put right before aid policy is extended in any way .
I genuinely hope that the Commission will now give a clearer response to the questions posed than it did , for example , in the reply I received a couple of weeks ago to a written question of mine on the evaluation of forestry aid .
In the explanatory statement of his report the rapporteur refers many times to Parliament 's proposal on forestry strategy .
Parliament 's proposal emphasises that forestry must continue to operate according to market forces , without aid that would distort competition , and primarily under State guidance .
The added value of the role of the EU in forestry policy has to be strictly limited to action that supports the multi-functional use of forests and economic exploitation in accordance with sustainable development .
For example , there could be support for the certification of European holdings engaged in forestry that promote the use of wood , as an alternative to the FSC scheme , which strives for monopoly status .
Madam President , the Community has no common forestry policy , not only because none is mentioned either in the founding Treaties nor in their later revised versions , but also because practical experience over 30 years proves as much . The Community - its institutional bodies - always comes up with improvised and random measures , trying to patch up the deficiencies .
In my view this Community policy on forests and forestry is responsible for the destruction of our forests .
Tens of thousands of hectares are destroyed every year throughout the European Union , especially in southern areas and more disastrously still in Greece .
The Otila report , which attempts to address the issue , adopts a similar view , Madam President , but negatively so because it says that reforestation is an alternative use for agricultural land . In other words , reforestation should spread to areas used for growing crops .
This is sheer hypocrisy because thousands of hectares are still awaiting reforestation in vain , and now we want reforestation in areas where the land can be cultivated !
Unless we decide to adopt an organised forestry policy with the necessary resources for the research , science and technology needed to prevent and combat fires , what we are debating today is only so much hot air and there will be very painful economic , social and ecological disasters .
Disasters which may prove to be totally overwhelming .
Thank you , Mr Santini , for a very good report .
Mountains cover one quarter of the EU 's surface area .
Soil quality is poor in these areas , and very few people live there .
In Sweden , the figure is a mere five inhabitants per square kilometre . Holdings are small , with a mixture of farming and forestry activities to make ends meet .
Often , people farm only part-time , because they cannot earn a living from the land alone . The migration rate away from such regions is high .
There are many elderly people , and the young move away to escape the tough living conditions .
Not to mention the climate - winter lasts seven months in Scandinavia ; it is dark for four months of the year , and vegetation survives a bare 160 days .
Yet these environments are unique , with rich biological diversity .
The agriculture that does exist is environmentally friendly , the natural world is full of variety , there is a strong culture and much else besides .
We have to acknowledge that mountain farmers cannot compete with those in flatter places .
Specially designed and flexible measures are required , and account needs to be taken of the real circumstances in mountainous districts , which are so different from other areas in which agriculture is practised .
Madam President , Commissioner , the promotion of farming methods which are not harmful to the environment , nature or the countryside deserves serious attention .
The Union 's agri-environmental measures can provide an incentive here .
Agreements had been concluded with 17 % of the Member States ' holdings by halfway through the 1997 budget year , and the scheme has grown into a major policy field within the CAP .
The Commission report indicates that the scheme is facing a number of teething problems .
Spending has been far less than estimated , partly because the programmes started late , and a number of Member States are making little , if any , use of the scheme , which is worrying .
We need to analyse the reasons for this , and in particular to find out whether the fact that the Member States themselves also have to provide funding has anything to do with it .
I feel it is important to find out about this , especially in view of the possibility currently being mooted of introducing cofinancing for income support as well .
The Commission report unfortunately does not analyse the beneficial effects of the agri-environmental measures on the environment and the countryside .
If , as the rapporteur suspects , agricultural activities are being subsidised which should not be receiving subsidies , then the scheme needs to be reviewed .
I would therefore urge the Commission to produce a detailed evaluation report as soon as possible , and certainly before any final decision is taken on a new programme .
The agrienvironmental subsidies must not be allowed to become a form of disguised income support , and I feel it is extremely important here to clarify the requirements in the regulation and to monitor compliance more closely .
A report on the effects of the agri-environmental measures is also needed for the forthcoming WTO negotiations .
The Union must be able to prove that the subsidies bring advantages for the environment , so that they can stay in the ' green box ' .
So there is every reason to ensure that the fullest possible use is made of these subsidies in restoring the environment and the countryside .
Madam President , it is probably appropriate today that we have a group of visitors in the gallery from the lovely country of Scotland , which is our key forestry area in the United Kingdom .
I would just like to put a tiny question mark against Mr Otila 's report , and that is that we always take it for granted that we want more trees .
I have trees in my garden , I have planted trees in my garden and I like to see trees when I am driving around .
I would like to ask the simple question : are we really certain that we will need those trees in the future for the production of wood ?
It is quite obvious in my constituency of Shropshire and Herefordshire that , at the moment , our wood industry is under tremendous pressure .
In fact some people responsible for saw mills say that it is the worst situation they have experienced in 45 years in the industry .
The market for British wood - and only a tiny part of the British market is actually supplied from within the UK - has actually contracted by some 25 % .
In southern England eight saw mills have closed in the last three months .
There is real concern for the future of our wood industry .
It seems that part of the problem arises as a result of the raising of the Iron Curtain .
It seems that the former Soviet Union is dumping wood at ridiculously low prices simply to get foreign exchange .
I would like to say yes , by all means let us plant more trees but let us at least have some concrete idea as to whether in the future there will be a market for the wood produced .
At some point in the future it might be necessary to place a moratorium on trees under this scheme being put on to the market so that we do not in the future damage the wood industry .
Perhaps we need an import levy from non-EC countries to ensure that we protect our own market .
I am concerned that we are following this path and are in danger of overproducing , and I would certainly like to hear the Commissioner 's response to that point .
This might be the very first time that anybody has stood up and questioned whether we should plant more trees .
In the light of current circumstances , faced by at least the British wood industry and wood industries in other parts of the EU , it is a question we need to ask .
Madam President , I want to welcome all three reports and say that these schemes are all complementary to the overall goals of agricultural policy .
The environmental scheme serves the purpose - as I believe it should - of providing supplementary income in regions where incomes are so low people would move out in greater numbers if that scheme did not exist .
It serves a purpose in relation to tourism , in helping to make the countryside more attractive , and from my experience of the scheme , it is certainly beginning to take effect .
It was slow to start , as Mr Iverson pointed out , at any rate in Ireland , but this was because we did not have enough training or experience and we needed to get people who could advise farmers .
The scheme has taken off and is beginning to have a remarkable effect on the countryside .
It also has an effect on farm income .
I am not one of those people who believe that we ought to direct our resources towards producing organic food .
I do not believe that organic food is automatically healthier and better than food produced in more intensive situations .
I do not believe that it necessarily improves the general environment to reduce everything to the organic levels that we had in the past .
I remember the time when nearly all farming was organic .
It was not a pleasant world - there were more hungry people around then than there are today .
If , for instance , you plough a hectare of land to get four tonnes of wheat , then that is more environmentally-friendly than if you plough four hectares of land to get four tonnes of wheat .
We should not automatically assume that , because we use more energy , use tractors and have more erosion in intensive agriculture , it is less environmentally-friendly .
If you extrapolate from the Dutch example , you only need an area the size of France , Holland and Belgium to feed all the people of Europe and therefore you have all the rest of Europe for environmental purposes .
I am not suggesting it should be done that way , but it is not necessarily dangerous or bad for the environment .
As regards afforestation , some aspects of afforestation are popular with rural dwellers .
In Ireland we lamented the loss of our forests 200 years ago , and today farmers resist afforestation as some sort of evil .
Nevertheless the forestry scheme that has been introduced by the Commission has encouraged forestry in the farming sector and has improved - and will continue to improve - the environment , as well as helping to reduce surpluses in all parts of the Community .
Madam President , the package of three agri-environmental reports under discussion is an extremely interesting one .
I wish to thank the rapporteurs for their thoroughness .
For now , I only want to refer to Mr Otila 's report on forests and woodland .
The word ' forest ' carries with it different images in different parts of the European Union .
In Finland and Sweden the forest is the normal natural environment .
Cultivated fields just appear as odd patches in the midst of the forest .
The forest is also a very valuable renewable resource .
Rural regions that remain uncultivated become afforested naturally , which is also the case with areas of woodland that have been cut down or burnt .
In central Europe the forests are mainly recreation areas and parks , where people can interact with the countryside .
The forests of the Mediterranean region are a key factor in protecting the landscape and nature in general .
Forests help prevent soil erosion , they make for more evenly occurring precipitation and regulate its effect , and they improve the climate .
For these reasons , forest maintenance varies from country to country .
It is influenced by ecological , social and economical factors , which is also why forestry policy differs from country to country .
The basic aims , philosophy and methods cannot be the same , so forestry policy cannot be harmonised , because different conditions call for different policies .
This may also be the main reason why the Treaty of Rome does not bring forestry policy under the jurisdiction of the EU .
For all these reasons I cannot agree with paragraph 8 of Mr Otila 's report , which advocates efforts to harmonise national forestry policies , but I support his Amendment No 3 in the same way as I support his other amendments .
Joint development of the forestry sector must be promoted , but if it were part of Community policy the sector would be subject to much bureaucracy and would be a shambles as far as funding is concerned .
Madam President , I have read Mr Otila 's report and what he says in it has made me very worried .
My first concern is that this regulation seems to enjoy varying and rather disappointing degrees of success in different countries , as I think is only natural given that it was designed to reduce agricultural production and to use the development of forests as a vehicle for doing so .
In other words , it was the main vehicle for increasing the incomes of certain farmers .
In that sense , I think that its success was limited from the start so far as forests and their development in the European Union are concerned .
My second point is that it is a pity the European Union does not have a forestry policy and unfortunately , in the absence of an EU policy , there are countries such as Greece whose forests are being devastated and which also have no forestry policy .
The last speaker said that situations vary .
Of course they do .
But , for example , the EU has a policy on islands .
The United Kingdom is an island , Ireland is an island , and so is my small island in the Aegean .
This does not mean that the same policy will apply to all islands .
And it is a serious omission , especially when Mediterranean forests are now being destroyed and the environment of half of Europe is being degraded , with consequences for tourism , civilisation , and the development of Europe itself .
In that sense , I cannot agree with Mr Otila 's report , and in particular paragraph 8 in which he seems to assume that there will not be a forestry policy in the European Union .
On the contrary , I believe we ought to try to include the issue of forests in the Treaties .
That , of course , does not mean that the same measures would be adopted in Finland and in Greece !
Madam President , I have a few points about the accompanying measures designed to promote environmental protection and conservation .
The Member States are making increasing use of these types of measures , which pay farmers for protecting nature and the environment by using extensive farming methods in particular .
Austria , Finland and Sweden are all countries making above average use of them , and their attention must clearly have been drawn to them during the accession negotiations .
An important condition for using this form of Community aid is that considerable national cofinancing also has to be provided .
Not all countries are equally prepared to do this , which explains why the take-up of EU funding available also varies .
This is actually a good example of an area of shared political and financial responsibility between the EU and the Member States within the CAP .
The aid benefits farmers making an extra effort to help the environment and nature , but it is also a matter of agricultural policy in that it is also about the fairly widespread use of extensive farming methods .
We could well imagine that , if the support we are discussing today is maintained , the idea of sharing political and financial responsibility between the EU and the Member States could also apply to some of the income support provided for under the 1992 price support reductions and subsequently under Agenda 2000 .
In that case , the environmental criteria would not need to focus so much on extensive farming , but would cover all farms applying what we now call good agricultural practices .
Social criteria could also be added .
This is a lesson we can learn from Regulation 2078 : it is better to have a custom-built system of cofinancing subject to national environmental and social desirability criteria than to have a uniform system of income support allocated centrally by Brussels alone .
Actually , even Regulation 2078 seems to have been inspired not just by environmental criteria , but by social necessity too .
Such an approach will also automatically qualify these sorts of measures for the WTO green box .
Mr President , Commissioner , what is sadly lacking in European policy is the ability to confront the problems faced by citizens living in a rural environment , and mountain regions are part of this environment .
Amongst other things , it does of course cost a great deal of money to maintain a farming population in these difficult areas .
But there is also a high price to pay for the exodus of these citizens , who leave their poorer regions to move to towns and their suburbs , where they find very few jobs .
The more poor people there are in the towns and their suburbs - often called shanty towns - the more insecurity there is and the more police officers or security guards are employed , and this also comes at a high price .
The decline of agriculture in mountainous regions has also led to an increase in the number of avalanches , particularly in northern areas .
And look at the human tragedy this entails : every year , avalanches claim many victims .
Neglecting pasture land and not maintaining undergrowth increase the risk of forest fires . These fires are causing more and more damage and are becoming more and more frequent , mainly in southern Europe .
Imagine how much all this must cost .
We should pay shepherds for services to the environment , we should pay them in order to save a considerable amount of money .
We must also consider farming forest areas with a view to producing alternative green energy sources par excellence .
Research must also be carried out on how to obtain rapid growth species , such as eucalyptus , and on developing power stations for such plant matter , or on producing methane , which could be extracted to be used for other thermal power stations .
And perhaps , rather than saving money with no positive outcome , the general rule should be to better organise the integration of less-favoured areas into the economic development area by making considerable financial efforts , as indeed you do so well in Austria , Commissioner .
What is more , nowadays , given the amazing developments in communication and exchange technology , it would be possible to encourage high-quality job creation in these areas , through remote working , for example . And why not send some of the staff of the Commission 's various Directorates-General to these troubled areas , where they can do routine office work ?
Commissioner , I am also counting on you and on your collective intelligence to achieve this and so allow the rural world in general , and less-favoured areas in particular , to be transformed from the dead weights they were to a catalyst for the harmonious development of all our peoples , throughout Europe .
Madam President , I want to say something briefly about the reports by Mr Iversen and Mr Otila .
It is notable that although both argue for alternative agricultural activity , both rapporteurs conclude that there has been no evaluation by the Commission .
That is unfortunate because it is difficult to promote them as measures before we have some sort of evaluation .
As far as environmentally-friendly farming is concerned , I certainly would support it . However , I suspect that part of the problem is that it is quite expensive to set up .
Maybe the Commission should look at the levels of grant aid .
As regards forestry , I have always supported it .
The reason I have supported it is that I saw it as an opportunity to supplement the incomes of farmers , especially those with poor land .
But one must ask the question if that was the intention , are they the ones currently benefiting ?
It seems to me that a number of the forestry schemes that operate in Ireland most of the benefits go to speculators , particularly from outside the country .
I question whether that is a sensible direction for forestry policy .
I would much prefer that the income went to farmers themselves .
There are also some serious questions relating to planning because some of the afforestation is also unsightly .
Perhaps that is something that our local authorities should look at : whether or not forestry schemes should require planning approval .
Those are the comments I wanted to make regarding those two reports .
I urge the Commission to carry out an evaluation in these two areas to see if there is more potential in them as initiatives in the field of agricultural activity .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , for the sake of simplicity , I shall deal with each of the three reports in turn , in other words beginning with the Iversen report , moving on in the second part of my remarks to deal with the Otila report , and finally stating our position on the Santini report .
The Iversen report testifies on the one hand to a thorough understanding of the complex issues involved .
On the other hand , though , it is also a highly critical report , and its criticism is levelled both at the Member States ' authorities which produce and implement the programmes and at the Commission .
The main focus of the report is certainly on the question of evaluation .
That is also the principal concern of the Commission itself .
Before I deal with these matters in detail , I should like to draw your attention to some basic facts of agri-environmental policy which are also recognised and confirmed in the Iversen report .
First of all , the main principle underlying our policy is that we should pay the farmers for their environmental contributions , not in the form of so-called income-support grants but as remuneration for the work they do , as reimbursement of their increased expenditure and as compensation for loss of income .
Secondly , because the programme has been monitored , we now have concrete evidence that successes have undoubtedly been achieved through our environmental measures in cutting back on the quantities of nutrients introduced into the soil and in protecting the natural world .
These successes are acknowledged in the report too .
Thirdly , further improvements are needed in the format and administration of the programmes .
Fourthly , the various rural development measures and the market measures contained in the common agricultural policy must be more effectively integrated and coordinated in general terms , just as we have envisaged in our Agenda 2000 proposals .
To these central points enumerated in the report I should like to add a few more . A fifth point would be that the ecology of the European countryside is determined to a great extent by agriculture and forestry .
New research findings show that biodiversity and the landscape which has developed over centuries can only be preserved with the aid of appropriate systems of land and forestry management .
Point number six : attitudes in European society , including farmers ' attitudes , will have to change . We must make our position clear on the need to improve the protection of the environment , since that is the only way in which we can justify the cost of such measures now and in the long term .
In principle , our strategy for the future is based on two considerations .
The first of these is that farmers must attain a certain minimum standard in order to qualify for compensatory payments .
This is taken for granted in any industry , and is no more than the population expects .
In my view , the minimum standard must be good farming practice .
The other consideration is that , if farmers go beyond this minimum standard and do more to improve the environment , society must compensate them for the loss of earnings or additional expenses this entails .
In a world that is increasingly ruled by competition , farmers must necessarily minimise their costs .
This could mean that the contributions to the protection of the environment which they used to provide virtually free of charge as part of normal farming routine will no longer be possible in future .
That is why we need to provide remuneration for agri-environmental measures .
Many farmers are prepared to enter into a contract to provide these protective measures .
But the fact is that they will only do so if they are adequately recompensed .
Let me now deal with the question of evaluation to which I referred .
I welcome Parliament 's interest in this matter , because that really does help us to impress our positions more forcefully on national and regional authorities .
The Commission has already taken important measures with regard to the evaluation of agri-environmental schemes .
We have been vigorously urging the national and regional authorities to have such evaluations carried out as a first step .
We have also provided these authorities with appropriate guidelines .
And in addition , we have included in the implementing regulation a provision which unequivocally lays down the Member States ' obligations in the field of evaluation .
Lastly , we have been working continuously on evaluation-related questions by investing research funds under the PHARE programme and by commissioning other studies .
Of course I understand the sometimes critical stance of the national and regional authorities .
Most of the programmes they are implementing were not launched until 1995 or 1996 , and it is only logical that a certain time has to elapse before measurable results actually start to emerge .
Moreover , it must be admitted that environmental protection is a complex business and that the monitoring of biodiversity and the monitoring or recording of nutrient input , for example , are physically and technically difficult tasks .
Nevertheless , we have received no fewer than 158 evaluation reports from the Member States , although 53 of these were only completed this year or are only available in draft form for the time being .
We therefore expect another large batch of reports in the coming year .
As far as the findings of these reports are concerned , I can well understand why Parliament is becoming impatient as it awaits the results of these important measures .
However , I can inform you today that this additional report will be completed within the next few days and will then be transmitted as quickly as possible to the chairmen of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on Budgets .
Mr Funk indicated that he wanted the Member States or regional administrations to have a greater say .
I must point out to you , Mr Funk , that responsibility for drawing up these programmes already lies with the Member States and regions .
It is in fact the Commission which merely has a say here , while the actual programming is done by the regions .
That is how it is , Mr Funk !
This brings me to the second part of my remarks , which focuses on the Otila report .
This report contains numerous relevant points , some of which have already been incorporated into the Commission proposals for Agenda 2000 .
In its proposal for a new regulation on rural development , the Commission has considered a number of amendments to the aid regime which correspond to some of the conclusions set out in the Otila report .
In particular , the Commission proposes an end to the distinction between full-time and part-time farmers that is made in the present regulation , since this differentiation has frequently obstructed the successful application of the aid regime .
The Commission also proposes that the implementation of the measures in the Member States should cease to be compulsory and become optional .
However , the Commission cannot endorse all the conclusions of the parliamentary report .
We believe that caution should be exercised in formulating the final conclusions regarding the application of Regulation 2080 .
As we argued in our report , afforestation of farmland is a lengthy process .
It is almost certainly too early to judge after so few years how the regulation is working and , in particular , the extent to which it is helping to reduce agricultural production and improve forestry resources .
May I also take this opportunity to state that timber supplies in the European Union are not diminishing but are increasing from year to year .
So no one need fear that our forestry stocks are being depleted . We take the view that the farmland afforestation schemes will contribute to rural development in the long run by promoting diversified employment opportunities , a dynamic land-use strategy and proper conservation of the rural landscape .
Moreover , we firmly believe that this regime will have a beneficial impact on the environment .
The Commission agrees with Parliament on the need to assess the implementation of Regulation 2080 .
I can also assure you that we shall go all out to complete this task and to submit the results to Parliament .
To do this , however , we must first have reliable and representative data .
With regard to the forestry strategy of the Community in general , and in particular the question whether forestry activities should be governed by Community legislation , the Commission will also shortly reach a decision on such a forestry strategy , which will likewise be communicated to Parliament .
Without seeking to anticipate the view of the Commission , let me say now that I personally am not in favour of forestry policy becoming a Community responsibility .
And so to part three , on Mr Santini 's report .
I believe Mr Santini has addressed a very important subject , and I should like to express my sincere thanks to him and to all the other rapporteurs .
It is now over 20 years since the subject of mining and mountain regions was first addressed in the Communities , and back then a framework was created for less-favoured areas .
Mountainous areas were given an especially prominent position within that framework .
The difficult conditions in which farmers work in mountain regions also warrant special consideration in the common agricultural policy .
However , we must not overlook the fact that there are other regions which have to struggle with specific problems , such as Nordic regions , dry areas and places with various other types of natural disadvantage .
We must not therefore make the mistake of examining the needs and wishes of farmers in mountain areas in isolation , without reference to all the other less-favoured areas .
This is clearly reflected in the wish expressed by individual Members that this report should be extended to arid and semi-arid or Arctic zones .
Moreover , an excessively individualised approach to the features of any specific type of rural area would run counter to the need to simplify our policy .
Allow me , in response to this report , to outline to you the way in which we intend to approach the problems of mountain areas in Agenda 2000 and the solutions we are offering .
We want to introduce greater degrees of flexibility and subsidiarity into rural development policies so that the Member States will be better able to achieve their objectives in terms of supporting rural areas .
In my opinion , the two principles underlying this approach open up interesting prospects for our mountain areas , because in the future it will be possible , by combining the existing subprogrammes and measures into a single programme , to set clear priorities in order to select from the many options those which guarantee the most fruitful development .
In this way the whole can become greater than the sum of its parts , and the specific needs of mountainous areas can be more effectively addressed .
Restructuring and topping up the compensatory allowance also create greater scope to reward specific contributions made by the farmers living in the less-favoured areas .
The place of mountain areas in the new provisions on rural development is therefore secure .
Madam President , Mr Fischler has said nothing about the question of funding .
We have tabled an amendment which states that cofinancing by Member States should be fixed at 25 % , with a 75 % input from the EU ; similarly , we have this discussion about the other premiums , the compensatory premiums , which have always been paid in full , as you know .
It seems to me that the political assessment of these measures we are discussing here is often dependent on this figure of 50 % , and we should agree here on a lower national and regional cofinancing rate , so that the programmes will actually be accepted .
Madam President , may I begin by reminding the House in quite general terms that environmental policy and environmental measures in the agricultural sector cannot be a matter for the Community alone , but must also be a concern of the Member States and regions .
After all , these regions are where the people of Europe live .
With regard to cofinancing , then , let me point out that we already have 75 % Community funding in Objective 1 areas and 50 % in the other areas .
Since we are seeking to extend these measures , and since I also have the impression that the Member States are availing themselves of these schemes more and more frequently , we have laid down in the Agenda 2000 proposals , under which these environmental measures would be integrated into the overall rural development programme , that the cofinancing of environmental measures should at all events remain at 50 % , because in other situations , for example development aid for the less-favoured areas or mountain regions of many countries , the Community cofinancing rates fall considerably short of the 50 % mark .
In that respect , environmental measures outside the Objective 1 areas will certainly attract a higher cofinancing rate in future than other rural development measures .
Thank you , Mr Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
EAGGF : 26th financial report
The next item is the report ( A4-0298 / 98 ) by Mr Rehder , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the twenty-sixth financial report concerning the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund ( EAGGF ) , Guarantee Section ( 1996 financial year ) ( COM ( 97 ) 0589 - C4-0112 / 98 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , while it is certainly true that anyone reading this rather cryptic title will be taken aback , the report before the House is considerably more interesting than the title would suggest .
This report was drawn up because the European Parliament , representing the taxpayers of Europe , has the right and the duty to carry out exhaustive checks on the management of Union finances .
And the precept of good housekeeping - a virtue in men and women - enjoins us to ensure that taxpayers ' money is being used economically and that any misuse of funds is identified and penalised - to ensure , in short , that something is done here to stop such abuses .
This agricultural budget attracts particular public interest because it accounts for almost half of the entire EU budget and because , sadly , sufficient care has not always been taken in the past to comply with this housekeeping principle of economical and proper use of tax revenues .
We know that not only the Court of Auditors of the European Union but also the national audit offices of the Member States apply very stringent criteria .
For all their necessary rigour , glaring errors do still occur .
Some of the objections and defects undoubtedly result from the impenetrable application jungle , which causes many applicants to make unintentional mistakes .
There , now , is a task for you , Commissioner - to cut a swathe through this forest of bureaucracy ; this would be one type of deforestation that every environmentalist would support .
We could then plant freeflowering vegetation there which would create its own natural environment and would not have permanent links with the waste-paper bin .
Please have pity on the people who have not been trained to fill in forms but are entitled to aid by virtue of their farming activities .
A major part of these shortcomings , however , is down to subsidy fraud and often - and we sometimes forget this here in our parliamentary discussions - to a lack of willingness on the part of the Member States to prosecute and , if necessary , punish those who misappropriate EU funds with quite the same vigour as they apply to breaches of national law - despite the fact that the European Union even makes funds available to the Member States for verification purposes .
This is an utterly untenable situation .
It is also intolerable , as the European Court of Auditors noted , that a mere fraction of wrongfully received support funds is actually reclaimed , thanks to the continuing inadequacy of the statutory instruments available .
If this were to occur in the average small municipality , in the treasury of a county town or in any other town hall or city chambers , the mayor or members of the administration would face suspension from office in countries where the law so provides .
In this context it would be advisable , if only for educational reasons , to prescribe cofinancing in future in the realm of the EAGGF .
I say ' educational reasons ' because it would be a means of bringing home more clearly to the Member States that it is basically their own money or the money of their own citizens and taxpayers that is being managed so casually and - I have to be blunt - often sloppily too .
Another point which merits criticism is that a significant proportion of allocated budgetary funds are still not being used .
When we examine this report , we see that in the reporting period , the year 1996 , this sum only amounted to ECU 1.3 billion . That , however , was a result of the BSE crisis , which created a demand for considerable extra resources ; in 1995 a total of ECU 3.5 billion went unused .
To the taxpayer , that is an enormous amount of money .
And that brings me back to forestry policy , where we could surely have put those funds to far better use in Germany over the past eight years .
These vast surpluses show that the contingency planning which is necessary in every political domain has been overdone in this case .
The present legal position - and this is the crux of the problem with this whole business - is that these funds have to be returned to the Member States .
For many Member States , including my own , the agricultural budget has developed into a sort of cash box which offers governments an annual opportunity to plug revenue gaps which their own policies have created and to convey the impression that national fiscal policy can more or less ensure survival .
But the agricultural budget is not a cash box ; it is the principal means of preserving the rural areas of Europe for those who inhabit them and for everyone else .
Every penny is needed for that task , because we must also try to reverse the sins of the past .
For that reason , I have proposed in the report that an annual reserve of ECU 1 billion should be created from the agricultural budget .
If there is a surplus at the end of the year , this reserve should be used to improve the rural infrastructure in general and above all to fight unemployment , which naturally exists in rural areas too .
Mr Mulder took up this idea and , being a experienced budget specialist , perfected it .
Thank you , Mr Mulder .
This demonstrates that such joint efforts across the party-political divide are effective , and that we can achieve progress if our minds and our work are not dominated by these divisions .
The European Parliament is far more agreeable in that respect than is sometimes the case , unfortunately , in other parliaments .
On the downside , however , there are other Members of this House who have been fighting tooth and nail - unsuccessfully , thank goodness - to prevent any further public identification of the real problem within our agricultural support policy , namely the fact that about 80 % of agricultural subsidies are still being paid to only 20 % of all farmers and that the beneficiaries are the most prosperous farmers rather than those whose need is greatest .

There is not an ounce of social justice in that , Commissioner , and I am certainly grateful to you for having replied last year to a written question from a doubting Thomas - his real name is not Thomas - in the PPE Group , by reaffirming that there has been no fundamental change in this intolerable situation .
Not until we have eliminated this problem shall we obtain the support of the European taxpayers for a new and sustainable policy for rural areas .
We need that , not least because of our 20 million unemployed , and we need a support system that will put an end to this lunacy whereby a farming millionaire - whose millions I do not envy him , because he and I will meet the same end - to this ludicrous situation whereby this farming millionaire receives tax subsidies he does not need while there are others in rural areas who need them desperately : smallholders , for example , who basically have no option but to work themselves into the ground to eke out a living .
We then need an effective support ceiling , which should only be raised if we resurrect old solidarity requirements , and I refer specifically to the requirement that everyone should have the right to a decent job .
If this additional requirement is fulfilled , we can think further ahead .
We also need - and this , of course , is something we have been discussing today - a new integrated policy for the less-favoured areas .
I emphatically endorse everything , Commissioner , that you and some of the Members of this House have said about the danger of starting to think again in terms of several little money jars - one for mountain regions , one for maritime regions , one for moorland regions , one for wetland regions .

All of these regions do deserve help , but they deserve help because they all have a shared problem : they simply cannot compete with the economically stronger regions , but they still have to be kept alive .
That is why I would warn everyone against a continuation of this piecemeal approach .
The basic elements of the Commission 's ideas which I have read about are undoubtedly sound .
An integrated rural policy must also ensure that new jobs are created in rural areas .
By that I mean not only employment in agriculture or related sectors , but also high-tech jobs .
Advanced technology does no harm to rural areas .
That is why the microchip factory in Untermagerbein , which is near my home , must be basically feasible .
These things need not always be in the centres of population ; they can be located elsewhere .
We have actually talked enough about all these principles .
In 1996 , we adopted my report by a large majority , and I should be pleased if all my fellow Members were prepared to vote for these things , not for the sake of bringing the discussion to an end , but so that these proposals can be turned at long last into concrete policies in your own countries .
For some of those who were sitting here just a short time ago , it would serve as a timely reminder to do that in their countries .
The gradual demise of many villages in your countries and in mine will ultimately lead to the decline of rural areas in general .
These areas account for 80 % of our European territory .
And our Europe will only have a future if its rural areas have a future too .
That will only be the case if we finally stop producing new paperwork .
Let us create a future for our rural areas , and then we shall preserve Europe .
Madam President , I think that Mr Rehder has produced a splendid and very interesting report on the financial report of the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund .
It is always important - we also talked about this earlier today - to ensure that the EU taxpayers ' money is spent prudently .
I also think it is crucial that we in Parliament adopt the position of those who take a critical line on what we see .
That must be our task as democratically elected representatives , and that is the approach adopted in Mr Rehder 's report .
The Commission 's report on agricultural expenditure for the financial year 1996 is in many respects an excellent report .
It gives an account of factors which have affected the expenditure on agriculture in the year in question : enlargement of the Union to 15 countries , implementation of aid during the 1992 reform and expenditure associated with the BSE crisis .
In addition the Commission also reports on the implementation of a new factor , which I think is very important , namely a plan to avoid fraud against funds for agricultural support .
The plan involves the setting up of a database , registration of control systems , identification and more detailed registration of stocks .
All well and good !
There are of course some who get into difficulties , in my country too , as a result of what is called excessive bureaucracy , but it is good that we have these things .
When we pay out money , we must also be sure that there is proper control .
On the other hand , I do not think that the Commission 's report pays enough attention to the way the funds are used in the Member States .
The problem with control is that it varies from one Member State to another .
In other words , one cannot expect that people will be treated uniformly in the various countries of the Union , even though uniform rules are actually applicable .
That is not good enough !
That cannot continue indefinitely .
We need to have proper control over the use of all these resources .
Of course I know exactly what the Commission will say : do you want more bureaucracy ?
Do you want to make things even more difficult ?
And of course that puts us on the spot .
We need to create a system that can also function .
It is thus clearly also necessary to ensure that the agricultural reform points in the direction of a more transparent system than we have at present .
I want to say to end with - and Mr Rehder also had something to say about this - that social imbalances are manifest in the way the funds are distributed .
We can see quite clearly - and the Commission 's report says nothing about this , but we can see - that 80 % of the funding goes to 20 % of the farmers .
What is the reason for that ?
No doubt there are many explanations , but I really think the Commission owes us an answer as to what it considers the explanation to be .
Madam President , first of all , let me say that I welcome the fact that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has delivered an opinion on agricultural expenditure in 1996 , since this is normally the job of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I think that it is extremely important for the agricultural sector itself to do everything it can to ensure that the agriculture budget is spent correctly , because when we talk about irregularities and fraud in the farming sector it is not primarily the farmers or growers who are responsible , but other areas of agriculture .
If we want to increase support for farmers in Europe , which is what all of us in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development wish to see , we must ensure that money is spent correctly , and I think that Mr Rehder 's report makes a significant contribution here .

The previous speaker has already thanked Commissioner Fischler for staying here for such a long time , and I would like to pay him another compliment , even though this is something he is not exactly used to receiving here in the Chamber .

We very much appreciate the fact that the Commission has complied with the Budgetary Control Committee 's demands relating to the 1992 discharge , which come up again indirectly in the 1996 report , for 15 extra officials to be appointed to improve monitoring , and for an extra 25 % fine to be imposed if Member States do not implement agricultural expenditure correctly .
I think this is one way in which controls can be improved .
Regarding the rest of the Rehder report , I agree with the previous speaker - and it has nothing to do with the kind words he said about me - that there are a number of points which actually have nothing to do with the financial report for 1996 .
Over the next few months , we shall be looking in detail at all the problems associated with Agenda 2000 - and whether the 80 / 20 ratio is fair or not , I think it is inevitable that some sectors will always receive more than others , because some sectors will always be close to the soil .
If we want to maintain the countryside we must , by definition , give it more money than we give to a greenhouse , or whatever .
You cannot just say that all sectors must receive an equal percentage of the agriculture budget .
I cannot agree with this approach .
One final point about the accompanying measures .
I have just heard that the report is to come out any day now , perhaps as early as next week .
This is excellent news .
I think that one of the main points in future discussions will be how to combine the environment and agriculture .
I would be curious to know exactly why it is that only five of the 15 Member States are making use of the accompanying measures .
Austria is a good example , but that could have something to do with the Commissioner here .
However , I would really like to know why certain environmental measures are successful in some countries but not others .
If we can find out the secret of how they should be applied in countries where they are not successful , I think we will be on the right road in spending the agriculture budget .
Madam President , I do not want to over-egg the situation but I would like to follow on from Mr Mulder and pay tribute to the Commissioner for his patience and fortitude in staying to this late hour to listen to us going on about him .
I congratulate the rapporteur on bringing forward a thought-provoking report on the EAGGF .
Mr Rehder calls into question many important points and we can quite readily take them on board this evening .
One of the things referred to which struck me immediately is the complicated life the farmer now leads because of the number of forms he has to fill in .
Most farmers are prepared to fill in as many forms as necessary to get whatever support or aid they require but there is an argument that the forms could be easier to complete .
I am sure the Commissioner is aware of forms which are highly complicated and technical .
I know these forms assist in controlling fraud but there should be a greater degree of flexibility at local level .
I receive regular complaints from constituents who have made genuine , innocent mistakes in their application or claim form resulting in the refusal of a grant .
They come to me as their MEP because they have been told that at local level there is no discretion to recognise what is a genuine mistake .
That is one area we could look at to make the system more user-friendly to the farmer .
At the moment in Northern Ireland there is no structural support .
The relevant programme was so popular that it was oversubscribed and no more applications could be accepted .
That shows the importance of such support to rural communities and farmers especially at this very difficult time .
We have to try to address some of the points Mr Rehder and Mr Mulder have made with regard to the long-term future of the reform package .
Mr Mulder raised the interesting point of why some national governments are more successful than others in bringing in the environmental measures .
The answer is that some governments just do not want to introduce these measures .
It is as simple as that .
They are not prepared to put up the matching funding that is required to get the measures started .
We heard about this in the earlier debate .
So there is a good opportunity for us to debate and find the best way forward .
Madam President , I wish to thank Mr Rehder for his report .
He emphasises the cost of the common agricultural policy .
Yes , it is about 40 % of the Community budget at the moment but that reflects more on the size of the Community budget than on spending on agriculture .
When you consider the size of the European Union , the number of farmers involved , the area and the problems , we are spending 0.4 % of GDP on the common agricultural policy .
This is the price we pay for the policy of seeking to maintain the population of the European Union in the rural areas .
If the policy did not exist , if we left it entirely to market forces , there is no question but that the flight from the land would have been very much accelerated .
It is disappointing , of course , that we have not succeeded in stabilising the number of people living in rural areas .
Similarly , today we are spending about the same amount of money on the policy as we spent 15 years ago , but only half the number of farmers are involved .
I predict that in ten years ' time - say , at the end of the next programme - instead of the seven million farmers we have today , we will probably have four million farmers , and yet we will be spending more money .
When you consider that , along with the point that 80 % of the money is going to 20 % of the farmers , then we have to say that perhaps at the moment it is time - I do not want to decouple it from production entirely - to consider a greater variety of schemes - and certainly now the money can be spread more widely .
Too few people may be receiving too much money as the whole industry becomes restructured , and some very big producers get the compensation foreseen in the reorganised policy .
I am a little concerned about it .
I would like to see a variety of policies that are based more on programmes such as the Leader programme - I know it is going to be retained and strengthened .
But to maintain the population in the rural world we need to do a bit more than just relate it directly to volumes of production .
Madam President , Commissioner , I am the last speaker this evening , but I do wish to use my two minutes and to thank you for staying with us .
What are we talking about this evening ?
We are talking about the support measures , about compensatory measures for our farmers in Europe .
The guarantee section of the EAGGF mainly finances expenditure in connection with the common agricultural market and pricing policies .
A large percentage of the fund is used for interventions to regulate the markets for agricultural produce .
In the 1996 financial year , the agricultural budget ran to ECU 40 828 million , which represents 50.5 % of the general EU budget .
We did have a rise in the agricultural guideline , precisely because the reform of the CAP , with the aforementioned new criteria , resulted in the aid available to the Member States being fully utilised for the first time , and because the European Union increased in size from 12 to 15 Member States on 1 January 1995 .
However , if we measure this rise against the increase in the general budget , we find that agricultural expenditure has declined by 1.2 % .
When it comes to dealing with public money , thrift is always a virtue , and expenditure must be seen in the light of the task in hand .
Turning over the complex field of the common European agricultural policy requires adequate finances , and agriculture is the policy sector which is most comprehensively supported , and indeed monopolised , by the European Union .
Besides compensatory support schemes for productive holdings , the European Union also provides accompanying measures which reflect its responsibility for the environment and for the victims of structural change .
These measures are important , and I welcome the proposals in this area , Commissioner , which you have made in the Agenda 2000 framework .
I support the rapporteur 's call for greater transparency , and above all for the simplification of the complex application procedure .
We shall no doubt have ample opportunity here in Parliament to discuss the future shape of the EAGGF in the framework of Agenda 2000 , and I therefore take the view that points 11 and 12 do not belong in this report on the financial year 1996 .
Thank you , Mrs Klaß .
I have seen something quite remarkable during my spell in the Chair this evening .
Everyone has shown a respect for their speaking time tonight which could hardly be bettered .
In conclusion , I now give the floor to Mr Fischler .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too have no wish to try your patience at this time .
Let me begin by expressing my sincere thanks to Mr Rehder for the report and to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for the interest that has been taken in this twenty-sixth financial report on the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF .
I also wish to thank the rapporteur for supporting the reform of the common agricultural policy .
In the present context , however , I believe there is no need for us to engage in a debate on Agenda 2000 .
We shall have many more opportunities to do that , and the same applies to the own-resources report .
But when I am asked why the environmental measures and the accompanying measures have been so successful in the country with which I am undoubtedly most familiar , my reply is that there seem to be are two decisive reasons for this .
The first is that we began back in 1987 with comprehensive fact-finding and discussions on the need for multifunctional agriculture , and that we perhaps developed a few things rather earlier than was the case elsewhere .
Let me give one small example from my time in charge of the agricultural portfolio .
When I was appointed Minister of Agriculture in 1989 , I inherited a budget of two million Austrian schillings for the promotion of organic farming , and when I left the Ministry a few years later some 270 million schillings had been earmarked for that purpose .
The second significant reason is simply the fact that there is a social consensus in the country on the need to take an appropriate degree of national responsibility for conserving the countryside and safeguarding sustainable forms of agriculture .
Raising the requisite funds to cofinance these measures has never really been a problem in Austria .
But now to the business in hand .
I should like to limit my remarks to a few main points that relate directly to the financial report .
First of all , there is the matter of the unused funds .
Let me place on record that the volume of unused funds was halved from 1995 to 1996 , and in the following financial year , 1997 , it has been further reduced to about ECU 400 million .
This is equivalent to the Community 's financial obligations in the agricultural sector for about two days in the year .
As far as the expenditure estimates in this sector are concerned , because of various imponderables there will always be a certain margin of error , since nobody can forecast the weather or market trends with absolute certainty .
As regards checks on expenditure , I fully subscribe to the view expressed by the rapporteur .
As for the rejection of considerable amounts of expenditure during the clearance of accounts , I will concede that this is partly caused by complex application procedures and by inadequate checking in the Member States .
Many of the rejections , however , are also due to the fact that the Member States ' interpretation of the CAP implementing provisions has differed from that of the Commission . We want to eliminate these problems and have adopted a number of measures to that end .
We are trying to simplify the provisions in question and formulate them more clearly , so that these dubious interpretations can be avoided as far as possible .
Part of this effort is being made in the Agenda 2000 framework , but there are other vehicles too , especially the SEM 2000 project .
Then we are supporting the Member States as they try to solve their verification problems ; this support is provided through measures covered by budget chapter B1-3600 .
In addition , we are trying to improve the procedure for the clearance of accounts , and we shall continue to apply flat-rate corrections and guidelines to the clearance of accounts .
On the question of imbalances in our financial support , a point raised by several speakers , I should like to emphasise that we have addressed this problem in our reform proposals .
We shall simply no longer tolerate a situation in which a small percentage of farms receive the bulk of the grants .
Let me stress that one of the aims of the common agricultural policy is to ensure that producers receive appropriate incomes .
To achieve this goal , however , farms must not rely solely on grant aid .
We need more market orientation , primarily so that enterprising farmers and processing businesses can take full advantage of the opportunities available to them .
The market situation is good and well balanced for many products I can think of , particularly wine , fruit , vegetables and other - mainly specialised - types of produce , and producers can secure an appropriate level of income by selling in these markets .
As for the more technical issues concerning the budget guideline and the expenditure forecast , I am interested in the proposal for the establishment of a general budgetary reserve covering the estimated funding requirement but within the guideline framework .
When it comes to the matter of repaying unused funds to the Member States , the bottom line is that the EAGGF appropriations are only provisional estimates .
To that extent , the repayment rule contained in the regulations is justified , and it would no doubt be very difficult to have this rule amended .
Thank you , Mr Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.45 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I have nothing to say about the Minutes , I am perfectly happy with them .
Yesterday , however , an amendment by the Liberals on the Viola report was rejected for some incomprehensible reason .
It was all about making the institutions more environmentally friendly .
I would therefore like to put the following request to you .
If you wish to promote the use of bicycles here in Strasbourg , you need to ensure that there are adequate covered bicycle racks , but if you look in the garage , the racks are by no means sufficient for the Members and their assistants .
Could I ask you to increase the number of bicycle racks in the garage at the expense of perhaps two car-parking spaces ?
Thank you , Mr Eisma .
I have taken note of your request and I will pass it on to the Bureau and , in particular , to the College of Quaestors so that they may examine this matter in the most positive light possible .
Mr President , regarding the Minutes on my speech yesterday , I want to raise a point .
I mentioned at the end of my speech on Pinochet that I feared that the British Government was about to do a deal to let him go .
In this morning 's Guardian it is reported that precisely that is going to happen .
I just want to confirm that my prediction was correct .
Mr Kerr , you are aware of the leniency of this Chair , particularly on Friday mornings , which are peaceful days .
But this has nothing to do with the Minutes .
I see that there are no comments on the Minutes .
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , on a point of order .
I have , on a number of occasions on a Friday , raised the fact that this sitting , which is often a very good sitting , is not televised .
It is not available for television companies to use and it is not available for archives .
I should again like to press the point and ask when this sitting is going to be properly televised and treated like any other .
Mr Hallam , I note your concern , which I share because , being in the Chair , I could appear more often on television but , in all events , Mr Hallam , I will not forget to pass this matter on to the appropriate authorities .
VOTES
Mr President , I merely asked for the floor to make a brief preliminary remark concerning the amendments which have been tabled .
This report was adopted unanimously in the Committee on Agriculture , after which a compromise was reached with certain groups which had tabled amendments on a point of substance .
The report on a strategy for mountain regions is a more thorough examination of one aspect of a general report , submitted during the last parliamentary term , on less-favoured areas in the broader sense .
Mrs Anttila , who is here with us today , is to present a report on Arctic areas within a few days from now .
During the next term of Parliament , someone will be presenting a detailed report on arid and semi-arid zones , a subject already dealt with many years ago .
I now have to put to the House some amendments from a single group , the EDN Group , the same amendments on which we had reached agreement in the text of the report , and which seek to generalise the issue once again , thereby taking us a step backwards .
We have the opportunity today of exploring one specific aspect of this subject , while other aspects are dealt with in other reports .
This means that we have a possibility at last of getting right to the heart of various problems , without restricting ourselves on every occasion to grand declarations of principle which everyone can endorse but are neither down-toearth nor practical .
That is why I can accept only some of these amendments : those which do not detract from the concrete , pragmatic nature of this report and , above all , do not conflict with its title .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr Wijsenbeek has a point of order .
Mr President , as this week has been rather heavy with its three voting sessions , I am not asking for a secret ballot pursuant to Rule 121 , but for a more discreet vote .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would refer to the Rules of Procedure and ask your respectful silence to give Mr Wijsenbeek and also this Chair a degree of peace .
Mr President , I feel that I must comment on the result of this vote .
It was a fine exercise in parliamentary democracy , without a doubt .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy was right : we were simply voting on the addition of four words , the usual four , in all the amendments .
These are the four words which distort the original intention of this report , intended to cover mountain regions exclusively , given that - I repeat - arid areas have already been discussed and Arctic areas are to be discussed at next month 's plenary .
It would be as if I were to resubmit all my amendments on mountain regions next month , on Mrs Anttila 's report .
This has been another case of indulging in grandiose declarations , but yet another total failure to get to grips with the real issues .
Nothing changes , the report is perfectly valid - that is why I did not ask the chairman of my group to vote against it - but once again we are talking a lot of hot air .
We are incapable of producing down-to-earth legislation with which our citizens can identify .
Mr Santini , it is not the Chair 's practice to cut speakers short , but please bear in mind that your statement is virtually an explanation of vote and re-opens the entire debate .
But I do not intend to reopen this debate .
We have already voted on this matter and the vote is the most democratic expression of our Parliament .
It is important for farmers and foresters to be able to maintain their livelihoods when soil conditions change .
One option is to switch from farming to forestry , while preserving enough farmland for food production .
Soil is a natural resource that needs nurturing .
Changes in land use must be accompanied by environmental and natural resource analyses , and a woodland certification system will be required to ensure forestry sustainability .
It will be necessary to involve organisations representing the farming and forestry sectors in this work . And overhead costs , changes in income , and the effect on the environment will all need evaluating .
I voted in favour of the report .
Despite their differences , diversity and individual features , the Union 's mountain areas have one thing in common : conditions that make development difficult .
The very areas which concentrate the Union 's greatest ecological heritage and biodiversity - an incalculable environmental asset - as well as traditional activities are facing increasingly acute problems of isolation , underdevelopment , desertion and decline .
Mountain areas are suffering the consequences of terrible political decisions which are accelerating their decline .
The natural , demographic and economic problems of these areas have been and are being tackled by inflexible , fragmentary and above all ' symptomatic ' policies .
For example when , thanks to the CAP and GATT , policies are implemented which lead to the continual decline of farming , which is one of the main sources of employment and population maintenance in the countryside and in mountain regions , which is essential for the conservation of the natural environment and which does much to preserve nature and the countryside , how can it be possible to maintain and encourage the development of the countryside and of mountain areas and regions ?
When quota restrictions are constantly being imposed on the production of basic mountain agricultural and livestock products , a problem which is particularly acute for southern products which cannot be replaced by others in the primary sector for reasons related to soil and climate , it is impossible to keep people and especially young people in those areas because of the lack of jobs , adequate incomes and a decent standard of living .
It is not by chance that Epirus in Greece , which is predominantly a mountainous area , is the poorest region in the EU , with Objective 1 status .
And all this at a time when the ' Agenda 2000 ' proposals are preparing further cutbacks in the agricultural economy and are advocating major changes which restrict the aid provided by the Structural Funds .
At the same time , the large distances which as a rule separate those areas from urban centres , their particularly difficult climatic conditions , the lack of infrastructure and appropriate technical support , and their inadequate and inappropriate road network , lead to isolation and restrict the potential for making the most of local products and for the proper operation of local markets , for the development of new economic activities , for the maintenance of satisfactory health levels , for education and for cultural activity .
Those problems are not only not being addressed , they are becoming worse .
Indeed , they tend to be regarded as permanent , inherent , even natural ' geographical ' disadvantages .
Current policies need to be redirected immediately , and new policies must be developed which are capable of addressing and reversing the dangerous rate at which the Union 's mountain areas are being abandoned and deserted , and providing real incentives for the development of those areas - incentives for the maintenance of population , jobs and income , for the development of primary and secondary production , the upgrading of infrastructure , improvements to the road networks and transport facilities , and for the organisation and provision of goodquality health and education services .

Agricultural support is very unevenly allocated .
Big farms and holdings in well-to-do agricultural regions receive large amounts of aid , while small ones in peripheral and sparsely populated areas receive very little .
The support system is complicated , and trying to understand it uses up farmers ' and society 's time and resources .
We need to gradually move towards paying more for what is produced and imposing less regulation and control .
It would be a mistake to do as the rapporteur suggests and further extend the system of checks carried out by the Member States .
The whole philosophy of increased surveillance and greater zeal in combating infringements of ' EU law ' is misplaced , and will simply bolster the existing suspicion of both EU and national agricultural administrations .
We should strike out in the opposite direction , with less rules and controls , working for more market penetration and rewarding quality .
We were not able to vote for the Rehder report for the following reasons .
Firstly , and most importantly , because of what the report says about the ' outstanding ' EAGGF appropriations .
The rapporteur proposes that we should examine the possibility of keeping this available for the CAP , instead of repaying it to the Member States .
If by ' outstanding ' appropriations he meant money that had been entered in the budget for a particular year but was then not spent , I would agree .
But this is not the case in this report .
Recital F indicates that , for the rapporteur , ' outstanding ' appropriations means the difference between the agriculture guideline and agricultural expenditure , and he wants to use all of this margin for the CAP .
What this really means is that he regards the expenditure ceiling for agriculture as a spending target , which is something we cannot agree with .

Furthermore , this report is not the right place to be making statements of this kind , and it contains even more sweeping statements about the future common agricultural policy and how it should be financed .
Such matters should be dealt with in the context of the Agenda 2000 proposals , not in this report .
Finally , we cannot agree with the description that is given of possible imbalances in the CAP .
According to the rapporteur , the current agricultural system is socially unbalanced because 80 % of the support goes to only 20 % of the farmers .
This gives the impression that the aim of the agricultural policy is to give all farmers equal support , but this is not how it is intended .
One sector may find it perfectly easy to operate profitably in the single market , whereas others desperately need State support .
Role of libraries
The next item is the report ( A4-0248 / 98 ) by Mrs Ryynänen , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the role of libraries in the modern world .
Ladies and gentlemen , before giving the floor to Mrs Ryynänen , could I suggest that you follow Mr Wijsenbeek 's advice ?
I would ask you to be quiet , because we should like to hear what Mrs Ryynänen has to say .
I now give the floor to the rapporteur , Mrs Ryynänen , for five minutes .
Mr President , Commissioner , in the information society knowledge is a vital resource and information the most important raw material .
It is high time libraries were made the cornerstone of the debate , as their significance and their potential as meeting points for many phenomena relating to the information society have not yet been fully grasped .
One of the greatest threats with the information society is the growth of inequality .
It is libraries that can guarantee that all people have the opportunity to make use of the information and cultural input they require , irrespective of the form in which it is packaged , from the traditional printed word to the newest on-line data .
As on-line data becomes more common , the role of libraries is changing , but not declining .
They are becoming especially important as expert organisers of data obtained off the net .
In the deluge of information available we need guidance and signposts , so that anyone can get the answer they require .
Democracy , openness and active citizenship can only come about if everybody is able to access data such as legislation , decisions taken by other countries ' governments , including EU data , and , for example , the press with up-to-date accounts of events .
There have been good reports about European information points at libraries .
More generally , we must make sure that data accessibility continues to be funded with the aid of tax revenue , and that the service remains free .
Producing on-line versions of catalogues , maps and statistics can ease the general process of accessing such information considerably , as it can be done very cheaply in terms of distribution costs .
The free-of-charge policy that exists for the basic services that public libraries offer is contained in the Unesco Public Library Manifest , yet reports indicate that lending charges have started to be introduced in many places .
The result has been a drop in the number of readers , that is to say the accumulated educational capital has a poor take-up rate , and the economic problems that libraries face will not be solved with the meagre revenue from charges .
The question of funds for libraries is something that has to be rethought all over Europe .
With current resources they will not be able to rise to the challenges of their task to provide diverse and traditional cultural and information services as well as the challenges of the information society .
However , lifelong learning in the information society puts even greater demands on libraries for the efficient utilisation of all manner of data and professional knowledge .
Further and complementary training in the library and information sector is a major challenge , and it is here that European cooperation can produce results .
Investment in information technology for libraries has to be seen as a major part of the basic infrastructure of the information society .
As information gets to be an ever more essential factor in production , it is worth investing common resources in its dissemination .
Pressure on the economy of libraries is due , for example , to fees they have to pay for housing electronic data , and converting catalogues and original data , in other words all their vast cultural heritage , into digital form .
When they are most effective , libraries function as networks that transcend all borders , including national ones .
Unfortunately , networking has barely got under way in Europe .
It is important that the Telematics for Libraries programme which was launched in 1990 and started a splendid process of cooperation should be extended in the fifth framework programme of research and technical development .
We need an EU library know-how centre to coordinate developments in the European library sector and to promote research and complementary education in the field .
At present we also lack comparisons of services offered by libraries in different parts of the Community .
Cooperation between libraries is rising high on the agenda in the information society strategies of central and eastern European countries , and in their endeavours to strengthen democracy .
In the current debate on copyright , libraries , archives and museums represent the view of the citizen and the user .
Safeguarding the institution of copyright and prevention of the illegal dissemination of information is only right , and is an important objective for libraries too .
The present balance that exists between the copyright-holder and the user of material should be maintained .
It is important , therefore , clearly to define the exceptions to exclusive copyright that safeguard the rights of libraries and users .
The ban on the use of digital information and cultural input should not be allowed to expand .
Unnecessarily tight restrictions on the use of a library , for example , by excluding private study , is at odds with the principles of lifelong learning .
Copyright legislation that is too stringent may , contrary to its aims , impair intellectual productivity in Europe .
I hope the Commission , when preparing its green paper on the role of libraries in the information society , considers the views expressed in this report and takes them on board in order to promote a democratic information society for our citizens .
Mr President , Mrs Ryynänen , thank you for a splendid report .
Our main concern about the information society is that we will become divided into those who can afford to access information and those who cannot ; that is to say , the information-rich and the information-poor .
This gap must be narrowed by all the means available to us .
In Finland and other countries we have done this with the aid of the institution of the library , and we have been very successful .
We are the best-read nation in the world .
The essential task of the nation 's libraries is to safeguard the framework of the educational and cultural system , and this is especially important with the minority language groups , which are difficult for the majority language groups to understand .
Under the Copyright Directive , electronic data may not be viewed on a computer screen by library users , meaning ordinary people , unless a special agreement is made with the copyright-holders .
This poses a threat to the modern library service , and is a big problem for the issues of equality , education and culture in the information society .
I consider this to be a stupid mistake which threatens to ruin the work of an institution that has proved particularly cost-effective in the culture sector , since libraries would then not be able to fulfil their task as providers of information .
They are free of charge to each citizen , and that helps those who cannot afford to purchase all the products needed .
This is something we have got used to .
The library has become a sort of church of information .
People need it and use it .
If its work is now to be impeded because of digitalisation and reproduction , then we will , depressingly , be taking a step backwards in the field of education , whereas we should all be doing our level best to develop it .
As I believe that this is rooted in ignorance , my position is that we change the Copyright Directive to enable libraries to continue their work and increase their educational role as a promoter of equality , and one that represents wisdom and justice , in today 's information society .
Mr President , I would like to express the full support of the Group of the European People 's Party to the rapporteur , Mrs Ryynänen , for her excellent report , and I will confine my remarks to a single point . Although we generally transmit only good news on Fridays , and particularly when Commissioner Fischler is present as a representative of the European Commission , today , Mr President , when discussing libraries , we must inform public opinion that our libraries are dying a slow death .
Millions of books in our libraries are being destroyed little by little .
Our libraries are seriously ill , particularly the younger ones .
It is no exaggeration to say that we have an obligation to save our libraries .
Let me remind the House , Mr President , of the well-known fact that one third of the books published during the last 150 years are self-destructing .
The problem lies in the type of paper used .
Until 1803 , paper was manufactured using linen or cotton fibres , which were stable and long-lasting .
In the middle of the 19th century , the heavy demand for paper led to the introduction of the so-called acid papers , which used a cellulose pulp base obtained from wood .
Experience shows that this type of paper only lasts several decades .
The extent of the deterioration of library collections is alarming .
It is estimated that approximately one third of the volumes in the collections of major libraries are in a bad condition .
We are talking about libraries such as that of the Congress of the United States , or the National Library of Paris , with 11 million volumes .
Therefore , this is a serious problem .
And the problem is by no means new .
Since 1990 , we have been asking the Commission for equivalent resolutions and standards relating to the use of permanent paper and information for consumers .
Commissioner , we would like to know what is happening with these requests that we have been making to the Commission for almost eight years .
Mr President , Mrs Ryynänen 's report , now under discussion , gives us a very clear picture of the role of the library in modern society .
At the same time it maps out , in excellent fashion , the huge potential and the challenges to be faced on the part of the institution of the library over the coming years .
The report was put together with care and skill , in accordance with the best Finnish traditions of culture and education , and I wish to convey my warmest congratulations and thanks to Mrs Ryynänen for her work .
Education and culture are geared to development .
They are also small countries ' only protection .
When , for example , the EU puts together its development programmes , they might well flounder in recipient countries as a result of poor levels of education .
Libraries have always been powerful aids when it comes to national education , allowing the whole spectrum and all the best of human culture to be enjoyed by the entire nation .
They have supplied comprehensible and varied information , and provided information on skills and new discoveries , as well as applications in different sectors .
The importance of libraries in raising the education and living standards of western countries is enormous .
On the other hand , knowledge is power .
Control of information means power , and a lack of information means a lack of influence .
If national standards of education are not attended to , the result is a critical level of social inequality .
The key to library development is the definition of incorporeal rights .
Copyright is a very important part of the western judicial system , safeguarding the rights of inventors , science and scientists .
It also safeguards development in many fields .
Mrs Ryynänen 's approach in this matter is the right one .
While it keeps the institution of the library user-friendly and recognises it as the best cultural institution with such limited funding , it also puts forward an appropriate solution for the future development of copyright .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mrs Ryynänen on this own-initiative report , which I think reveals the European Union 's great potential for adopting initiatives in a range of areas relating to knowledge and civilisation , both now and in the future .
We fully support Mrs Ryynänen 's views .
I would like to mention two points concerning the situation in Greece .
First , the possibility of providing libraries is not just a matter of economics .
Very often , the educational system too can play a major part , encouraging the young or even older people to make use of libraries . Very often too it can lock them out , imposing prohibitive restrictions on the use of these great repositories of human knowledge .
Greece is a typical example of the latter , and I confess that I felt a certain envy when listening to what happens in Finland .
In Greece , typically , all highschool students , as they approach their examinations for admission to university education , have to memorise one book , just one book in each subject !
If a student quotes from any other books , then he or she is sure to fail .
A student who can put all the commas , full-stops and dashes in the right places gets top marks .
The characteristic picture in Greek families with students finishing high-school is that in the evening , when the father or mother get home from work , the 17- or 18-year-old child sits there reciting the book to them from memory , because self-testing is not good enough .
Consequently , where the use of books is concerned , the educational system can contribute much , either positively as I believe happens in Finland , or negatively as I believe happens in Greece .
The second point I want to mention concerns the special effort we must make to promote libraries in the European Union 's major cities which specialise in the culture , civilisation and knowledge of other peoples and languages of the EU .
I say this because , unfortunately , in many university faculties which have their own libraries , such as in Modern Greek studies in large cities such as Berlin , Munich and other cities in Germany , all that fund of knowledge is now declining , vegetating and at risk of disappearing completely .
In that sense , I think a general impetus to promote libraries , one which would attach special importance to those concerned with the languages and cultures of other EU countries , would be a very positive development .
Mr President , one of the earlier Finnish speakers said that libraries were very important in Finland .
I hesitate to suggest that this is because in their long dark winters there is nothing else to do but read books .
I know in fact from my visits to Finland with Mrs Ryynänen there is much else to do , not least go to the wonderful Savonlinna Opera Festival .
I was very impressed with the library provision and the importance of libraries in Finland and I commend Mrs Ryynänen 's report .
It is an excellent report from an excellent member of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media .
We have had many good discussions in the Culture Committee on this report and I hope due notice is taken of it by the Commission when it brings forward its directive .
It is an excellent basis for the green paper .
Libraries are extremely important for our civilisation and culture in Europe .
Personally I have benefited enormously from them .
I left school at 15 , went to university at 20 as an adult student and was able to do this because I had a friend who was a librarian .
He gave me a private space in the local library , supplied me with books , found reports for me and helped me to reconstruct my studies .
It helped me to go on and take several degrees and eventually become a university lecturer .
In Scotland I shall be standing for the new Scottish Socialist Party - I thought I would get a mention into the Rainbow , we launched it last month - and I have made sure that we have a strong commitment to public libraries in the policies of that party .
This is important in Britain because in the last 18 years we had cuts in library resources and provisions by the Conservative Government .
And I have to say that this is continuing under the New Labour regime which pays lip service to knowledge and education but continues to cut local authority library resources .
Libraries are under extreme pressure in the UK .
So I hope this report will have its significance .
On a lighter note , I would conclude by saying that library cards are sometimes very useful sources of identification .
My Scottish colleague Hugh McMahon tells me he got into Hungary once using his library card as the source of identification .
But he did have Otto von Habsburg with him at the time , so maybe that helped .
Thank you , Mr Kerr .
You have just mentioned Mr Otto von Habsburg .
Most unusually , he is not with us today because he is ill .
I take advantage of the fact that you have mentioned Mr von Habsburg to wish him a prompt recovery , on behalf of the House .
On Fridays , we need him here .
Mr President , I agree with all the recommendations contained in the report , which gives an accurate picture of the current problems .
Listening to the debate here , I can see that the situation varies greatly between the Member States , and I must confess to being a little disappointed with the text of the actual resolution after the recitals .
I am still a fervent supporter of the principle of subsidiarity , and I therefore feel that the European Parliament should not be pointing a critical finger where it has no instruments and no powers to change anything .
Quite the reverse is true , of course , when it comes to the recommendations for the Commission , which I have to say is doing very little in practice .
I would therefore like to ask the Commissioner responsible for culture what progress has been made on harmonising copyright and the concerns expressed in this report .
We all know that libraries have changed : they are no longer just places where books are stored , they have become information centres with Internet connections for the public , and they are becoming the focus of the learning society in which we will all soon be living .
I am therefore very pleased with the report and its recommendations , though I am not so happy with the rather critical tone it adopts , implying as it does that things are not going as they should be anywhere .
I think that what we actually need is some sort of exchange of information to show just how much progress some countries have made .
Mr President , the role of libraries in modern society has changed enormously .
In the past , when you went to a library , there were impressive long rows of books that you could take off the shelf , have stamped and take away with you .
Nowadays modern university libraries do not have books any more , but computers where you can look a book up and request it using keywords .
Fifteen minutes later you can take the book away with you .
In the near future , more libraries will have become virtual libraries providing people with information in every possible form .
All this is described in an accurate and informative way in Mrs Ryynänen 's report , and I welcome the fact that we are anticipating these developments .
I agree that libraries need to work with each other at European level , and for me the main question here is which institution should deal with this .
It is not clear from the report why the Commission and Parliament should take this on .
Is it not more obviously a job for the Council of Europe and UNESCO ?
Is there not an overlapping of responsibilities here ?
I think the arguments for dealing with this own-initiative report here in the European Parliament are rather weak .
The motion for a resolution also talks about a modest approach and organisation , so this is obviously an area where Europe does not want to arouse high expectations .
In view of all this , my main problem is with the passage in the resolution which calls on the Commission to speed up the production of the green paper on the role of libraries .
Subjects such as copyright , royalties and a European library network are important , but here again I feel that they are more a job for the Council of Europe or UNESCO .
If these issues were dealt with by the Council of Europe , there would be an even broader basis for cooperation because of the number of countries involved .
On the subject of copyright , the report fails to make any reference to the copyright convention of the World Intellectual Property Organisation , the WIPO Convention .
I agree that there is a problem with acid paper , and I would welcome European regulations promoting the use of ' permanent ' paper .
I would support a Parliament recommendation on this , but calling on the Commission to produce a directive on the subject before the green paper is even out seems to be going a little too far at the moment .
In my view , the European Parliament does not need to make resources available to promote cooperation .
Cooperation between libraries is an excellent idea , but I think that it is really up to the Member States to encourage it .
There are a lot of very valuable ideas in the resolution , and the report rightly stresses the importance of libraries for society .
As it says , libraries are important cultural centres , repositories of knowledge , information-providers and social forums .
We need to take care of them .
Libraries also have to move with the times .
It is a big step to switch from just books to all possible forms of information such as cassettes , CD-ROMs and networks .
I doubt whether the new media will completely replace the old , as the explanatory statement says , and I myself would stress the importance of the printed book .
This is part of how I envisage the transition from the bibliographical age to the visual or virtual age .
The American cultural philosopher Neil Postman has some very interesting things to say about this in his book ' Amusing to Death ' , which was published in Dutch as ' Wij amuseren ons kapot ' .
What could be nicer than to sit by an open fire with a glass of wine and a good library book ?
That seems more appealing to me than sitting at a desk looking at all sorts of electronic documents on a screen .
But as I have already said , libraries need to move with the times .
My conclusion is that this is an excellent report with a very informative explanatory statement , but it is really something that the Council of Europe should deal with now , and Parliament could review at another time .
Mr President , this report is an important and extensive piece of work on the role of libraries .
As a member of PEN , I am always glad when Parliament deals with these subjects that are on the periphery of major world politics .
But I must call into question the historical roots behind the library idea , two of which were very important .
The first is to make it possible for the general public to read without having to buy the book , and the second is to enable them to find books which simply could not be found at that time in the many small bookshops .
But both these circumstances have since changed .
Today , books are in the main cheaper and , in what is known as the modern mega-store , every book is in stock anyway .
The challenge is therefore not merely a quantitative one - and this is the weakness of the report - but has more to do with making a qualitative contribution towards solving the problem .
We lack the ideas which would respond to modern consumer needs .
We must ask ourselves why fewer and fewer people are going to libraries .
If consumers no longer need them , then it is the job of libraries , and libraries alone , to win them back .
The report also mentions that libraries are probably never going to be a profit-making undertaking .
They are responsible , though , for arousing interest in consumers , so that they want to come back again and read .
Perhaps not just to read : maybe in future the library could be an intellectual database at the population 's disposal .
With the modern techniques of electronic networking , the modern library could be linked up to all the libraries and archives in the world , thereby giving worldwide access to documents , articles and books , as well as all the other publications available .
This for instance would be a service that no bookshop , however large , could provide for consumers , and it would raise libraries ' ability to compete .
We come back again and again to the problem of lifelong learning .
It is a right that we are going to have to prepare ourselves for .
Economic differences today are no longer a result of whether individuals can afford a book or not .
That was long ago .
Today , it is more to do with access to electronic information media , and by making learning generally available , modern libraries could help to open up lifelong learning to everyone .
Mr President , I also wish to congratulate Mrs Ryynänen on a most comprehensive report , and especially for focusing on the question of the future , because if the institution of the library does not respond to the new , its importance will wane .
Libraries must keep abreast of the times and , preferably , be ahead of them .
Everybody must be able to use libraries to obtain with ease the information they want .
The basic principles of public libraries must include a service that is free of charge to users .
I disagree with the previous speaker that charging for books would not cause people problems in seeking information .
In Finland , at least , books are so expensive that only a few people can afford to buy everything they need for study purposes , or for cultural reasons , for example .
The word library conjures up images of shelves full of books and lending facilities , but for decades it has served as a place to store records in ever-changing forms , and new electronic services and networks are increasing all the time .
Knowledge is to be found on the Internet these days , rather than on library shelves .
This form of information must also be available to everyone on exactly the same basis of equality as other data .
The Copyright Directive and other systems in place to protect people 's rights must not prevent ordinary citizens from accessing the information they seek .
For example , in Finland , which has provided examples for other issues we are discussing here , we have what we call library compensation scheme , under which copyright-holders are paid royalties , on an equal basis , for works of theirs that are available to the public .
The adoption of this practice and its extension to other areas of information might be worth considering .
The institution of the library is based on serving citizens in their varying quests for information .
The library is also an institution used by the majority of citizens , an information bank for every man and woman .
This is vital from the point of view of society 's objectives of social equality and for democratic development .
I hope that in the future there will be still more cross-border cooperation in the area of library development ; the new technologies already require it .
Cooperation must above all be based on an endeavour to discover ways of working that can be applied in different countries .
Mr President , may I firstly thank you for your kind words regarding my father .
I will telephone him in a few minutes and pass on your greetings and those of the House .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur very warmly for her report , which I believe has been drawn up at a particularly important time , as Parliament is currently giving more comprehensive thought to new technologies and to copyright issues .
I also think that it is very important for this report to be dealt with during this Parliament , before the Barzanti report is discussed in plenary at the end of this year , and before my own report on the World Intellectual Property Organisation .
The amendments that I have tabled to the Barzanti report are concerned specifically with library issues .
I believe that in this regard we simply cannot forget what a remarkable role libraries have played in history .
If we consider the loss that the destruction of libraries , from Alexandria through to Sarajevo , have represented to humanity , then I think it is safe to assume that today 's libraries will also play a very large role in future .
I think that Mr Valverde López was right to talk about the very real death of libraries .
I think we have to be aware of one thing . A library which is dying probably cannot be brought back to life by more money .
What is needed is better ideas , and these do exist .
A whole range of studies have been done , for instance by the MIT ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology ) , or the ZKM in Karlsruhe .
Not least , a conference was also organised by the ARCH Foundation in Salzburg at the end of last year , which gave scientists and contemporary artists the opportunity to express their views on how the works of the past can be passed on to the future , how they can be better preserved , how they can be protected .
I think we have a whole series of ideas here , and Mrs Ryynänen 's report of course also makes an important contribution to them .
Mr President , I have learnt from my southern colleagues in this Parliament that half of every speech is dedicated to congratulating the rapporteur , and the speech proper then begins with a ' But ' .
So I will do likewise this time , and congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Ryynänen , on the work she has done in the name of education and culture .
Working together in Parliament as we have been doing now for a long time , I have come to know her as someone who conscientiously applies herself to the issue of education .
The tradition of reading in the Nordic countries is founded on being able to read , and deciding what to read .
Libraries help to spread education and culture more evenly among the population .
The fact that they are free of charge is important , but it conflicts with a current , alternative economic policy : the neo-liberalist pay-to-study phenomenon .
Neo-liberalism is barbaric .
According to its doctrine , great wealth is needed to qualify for health and education .
This kind of economic policy is the death knell for libraries .
Libraries , however , are helping in the struggle against this alternative approach and the electronic hullabaloo .
If people are to have a basic right to access information , they must be able to distinguish between order and chaos .
Library staff have the important task of teaching people to distinguish between education and sensation .
This was by way of congratulating the rapporteur .
Now comes the ' but ' .
The rapporteur is calling for the adoption of a panEuropean report on libraries .
I do not think that is wise .
It is simply a way of officialising Europropaganda .
The European Parliament is an example of indoctrinated communications .
For example , financial assistance is provided for Euro News , which is used to produce electronic Europropaganda .
When I have followed different reports produced in Parliament , the Secretary-General appears to be the head of Parliament 's propaganda section .
Libraries must be kept independent from the European Union , the European Parliament , and the other official institutions .
People themselves must have the opportunity to become aware of the options .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with the comments made by the rapporteur and earlier speakers : of course public libraries will continue to occupy a key role in social and information policy in the information society of tomorrow . We should continue to remind people of this , just as we should continue to call for libraries to retain their role of providing greater democracy and political education , for access to them to be free for everyone - this is a very important point - and for quality to remain high in rural areas too .
That is why in the discussion on the Directive on copyright , it was right to insist that libraries should be granted generous copyrights . In contrast to the previous speaker , I would like to emphasise two points in particular .
Libraries also have to assume new roles .
Looking at our own patch for example , public libraries could be much more involved as independent bodies providing information on the European Union . I would point to the very well organised network of Public Information Relays in the UK , which link up public libraries specifically offering EU information .
I hope that as we decentralise the public relations work of the EU , we can also induce libraries to take some of it on .
I also think libraries could already be doing more in terms of acting as transfer points in communicating contemporary European culture . In practical terms , this could be by way of mutual consultation , by acquiring books and videos from other countries and by directly exchanging stocks of books and multi-media publications with libraries in other countries .
This would be an important step , in keeping with the spirit of openness and tolerance .
I think that lending libraries could also quite easily be small Internet centres for schoolchildren and young persons who want to build up small communication networks on European culture , and here of course it is important that access to the networks for educational purposes is free of charge .
Finally , allow me to make one brief point : if libraries are to continue to offer reasonably-priced access to the cultural wealth provided by books , then in some language areas the tried and tested means of price fixing will be essential to protect the diversity of what is on offer .
I ask you : should only paperback American bestsellers be available in European libraries in the future ?
So , I would really urge the Commission not to sink into its dogma of liberalisation and competition , which is not in the citizen 's interest , but to give greater thought to private methods of selfregulation in future decisions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by complimenting Mrs Ryynänen on her excellent work .
Libraries merit special attention within the European Union 's cultural strategy , with particular reference to the information society .
They must be put in a position to play an active role in guaranteeing access to information and in communicating knowledge .
One fundamental task of libraries is to provide all citizens with basic knowledge and essential information , through works which contribute to an awareness of different identities and origins , fostering the cultural integration to which we aspire in the unique venture of building Europe .
Furthermore , libraries make a significant contribution to the depositing , organising , compatibility and transmission of information which , in the age of computer networks , should receive generous financial support from every one of the Member States .
Of course , the establishment of the telematics networks is still at an early stage , even though some cooperation does exist between national and parliamentary libraries , and between associations of European libraries , as is clear from the Telematics for Libraries programme .
It is necessary to further develop this cooperation and examine the possibility of different types of library services , so as to find out what opportunities there really are .
One means of doing this is to promote smaller libraries , which play a special role and have a strong local identity : they are a public meeting-place for users , where a variety of social activities can take place .
In the fifth framework programme of research and technological development , the Commission should consider establishing a network of European libraries . One of its aims would be to cooperate on a technical level and to conduct targeted research into the manufacturing of permanent paper which does not deteriorate with age , so as to safeguard for the future our present library stocks , so rich in books and archives .
Finally , a European Centre for Libraries should be established , with well-trained staff , and entrusted with coordinating this sector . An additional benefit here would be the creation of new jobs .
Mr President , I welcome the opportunity to discuss this report on the importance of libraries for the European Union .
I agree with the rapporteur when she states that libraries represent one of the most important systems which afford access to knowledge and culture .
The report contains a number of interesting recommendations , some that are complex and , obviously , will cause problems , others that are more straightforward .
I wholeheartedly support the proposal that Member States incorporate public libraries in their general initiatives concerning the information society .
We are doing this in Ireland , and the Information Society Commission clearly recognises the value of public libraries .
The recommendation that the Commission unequivocally takes account of libraries and their role as an information source for members of the public when resolving copyright disputes , may well be opposed by some Member States .
Also the proposal for a multinational approach to legal deposit may also run into linguistic difficulties .
However , the call to the Commission to boost its input to the library sector by establishing a focal point to coordinate library affairs and to oversee developments will be universally welcomed .
I congratulate the rapporteur on her report and , certainly , it is an opportune time to discuss it , particularly in advance of the Commission 's green paper on this subject .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Ryynänen on her own-initiative report , without adding any ifs or buts .
The report shows considerable understanding of the technical , economic , cultural and education-related problems with which libraries are faced .
The role of libraries in organising access to knowledge is becoming more and more important and is particularly worthy of our attention .
In the face of the fast-growing supply of all types of information there is indeed a great need to link up public libraries in the whole of Europe into a network which is accessible to citizens and which conveys knowledge and culture just like schools or other institutions .
As the rapporteur has underlined , the Commission has actively encouraged the development of new library services , particularly within the context of the Telematics for Libraries programme .
It is gratifying to see that many Member States are now , partly as a result of pan-European cooperation , beginning to set up modern , networked library services , which are easily accessible to their users .
As the rapporteur 's analysis shows , libraries are confronted with a very wide range of problems .
The fifth framework programme of research should place us in a position where we can support research work into many of the technical issues that were indicated , especially in terms of standards for processing , conserving and transferring information and the creation of links through Community projects .
Other aspects , for example issues of copyright or universal access , should be placed within a wider context .
The fact that the Directive on copyright is currently under discussion within several parliamentary committees should for instance contribute to preserving the balance on copyright between the various parties , as called for in the report .
The report asks the Commission to push ahead with its work on a green paper on the role of libraries in the information society .
Since March 1997 , when the Morgan report was adopted , we have made good progress in identifying and classifying relevant developments in the Member States and in gathering background material on most of the subjects raised .
The Commission therefore thinks it ought already to draft a communication on the role of libraries , which could serve as a basis for coordinating all the important issues which affect modern library and information services and citizens ' access to them .
The communication would therefore address a number of subjects of specific importance for libraries , such as lifelong learning , copyrights , the promotion of reading , regional information services , and extensive cooperation between public libraries in access to knowledge and culture .
Also , this communication could give additional impetus to including libraries in the ' User-friendly information society ' chapter in the fifth framework programme of research and pave the way for future actions aiming to help citizens of all age groups and all sections of society to make proper use of digital information and services .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
I would congratulate the rapporteur on the fact that her report has been unanimously adopted .
Mr President , it cannot have been approved unanimously .
I registered a symbolic abstention .
Thank you , Mrs Maes .
I see now that there was not complete unanimity .
I intended to abstain during the last roll-call vote .
Perhaps I was late coming in , or maybe my voting machine did not work .
I should like that to be recorded in the Minutes .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is no further need to explain abstentions .
It is sufficient to say that the resolution has been adopted by a broad majority .
I lay your consciences at rest .
Mr President , the vote was not unanimous as I voted against the resolution .
I have corrected my initial euphoria , Mr Striby , and said that the resolution was adopted by a large majority , which takes account of the two abstentions which have been mentioned and your own vote against .
Sign language
The next item is the debate on the oral question ( B4-0489 / 98 ) tabled by Mr Hughes , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on sign language .
Mr President , 10 years ago , when Mrs Lemas presented her report on sign language to the House , she had a group of visitors in the gallery who were following our discussion through a sign language interpreter .
It was very impressive to see this , and it substantiated the demands made in the report and allowed us to experience what they involved .
I must admit that I myself have not yet learnt sign language , although we Members were offered the opportunity to do so by the European Union of the Deaf .
That was in connection with a project on sign language , carried out in 1996-97 , which culminated in a conference in September 1997 and an extensive report on sign language in the EU .
This project was , incidentally , financed by the EU within the context of the HELIOS II programme . The result of the project , and the 16 exemplary national reports which were drawn up to provide a complete overview , are proof once again of how important and helpful the HELIOS programme was .
I would just like to ask the Commission to use its imagination again and find a solution , or legal basis , within the framework of the new Amsterdam Treaty , so that in future useful programmes or projects such as these , which are not concerned with employment , may be supported .
At the end of the foreword to the report on sign language , it says that the project will need to be followed up if the results are not to be wasted .
The European Parliament called for sign language to be officially recognised as an independent language 10 years ago .
There have been some developments in the meantime , and the Commission 's financial support for the project is certainly a step forward , but it is not enough .
As we try to achieve equality for all the Union 's citizens , the question arises of whether it is not the job of the Commission to draw up a directive on the official recognition of sign language .
I no longer accept the term ' subsidiarity ' in this context , as unfortunately for a large number of our Member States , it is merely a good pretext for preventing European action and then doing nothing themselves .
While on the subject , I do see a small ray of hope in my own country , Germany .
There the situation as regards the recognition of sign language has been and still is extremely difficult .
In the coalition agreement of the future new German Government though , there is a sentence which says that it will look at how German sign language could be recognised and given equal treatment . Of course , with a directive the Commission could go further than simply undertaking to have a review .
However , even if sign language were to be recognised and enough interpreters were available everywhere , there would still be a great many problems .
The easy part would be to ensure that a minimum number of television programmes are broadcast in sign language .
But we know that television is not the only modern information system .
In our Member States there are seven different systems for text telephones and these are not compatible .
The Commission could also do something here by introducing framework legislation .
It is up to the Commission in any case to ensure that , from the very beginning , multimedia equipment is designed in such a way that the hearing-impaired are not excluded from using them .
I would like to give the example of mobile telephones to illustrate this point .
In the USA , thanks to their anti-discrimination act , mobile telephones are compatible with hearing aids .
But in Europe , devices have been authorised which , when used with a hearing aid , convert it into a jammer .
Technical barriers have to be avoided , but so do bureaucratic barriers , for example those which prevent the participation of the hearing-impaired in EU programmes .
Yes , there is financial support to go and learn the language of the exchange country , but there are no funds provided for an interpreter during the exchange , and that applies to sign language interpreters too .
Such things have to be sorted out .
This example also shows that a great deal still remains to be done when it comes to bringing down the barriers , not only those that tangibly exist but also those that exist in our heads , and which we have to work on ourselves .
But we ask the Commission to actively put forward legal frameworks and to break down the bureaucratic barriers in order to make it possible for us all to live together without discrimination , whether we have a disability or not .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is fully aware of the significance of sign language for hearing-impaired people .
It was emphatic in supporting the Birmingham University research project carried out as part of the follow-up to Parliament 's Resolution .
This study showed that there are considerable differences between Member States as far as the state of development , the availability and the official status of sign language are concerned .
There is without doubt a lot of room for improvement here , and the Commission will continue to become involved where Community measures can be of additional use .
However , the Commission 's view is that the main responsibility lies with the Member States , and that is why it is not planning any specific proposals on this .
In the field of education , however , there was for instance the Lingua-Surda project , which was supported within the context of the former Lingua programme .
Further cooperation projects on general or vocational training for people with special needs may be developed within the framework of the Socrates or Leonardo programmes .
As regards television programmes , the legal framework that currently applies in the Community has its legal basis above all in the ' Television without Frontiers ' Directive , and in Article 57 ( 2 ) and Article 66 of the EC Treaty , which provide for coordination of the legal and administrative provisions of Member States , to ensure that differences between them do not hinder freedom to provide services .
Currently though , we have individual state provisions on television programmes in sign language .
Turning now to the different text telephone systems used in the EU , in fact there are compatibility problems .
The Commission 's view is that the easiest way to remedy this deplorable state of affairs is through agreed standards and it therefore supports the work that is being done on this .
The European Union of the Deaf has made clear its view that there has to be a uniform standard for text telephones in the whole of the EU .
Already in 1996 the Commission communication on equality of opportunity for handicapped people had spelled out the advantages of the ' Design for All ' idea in connection with multimedia applications .
The Commission services are currently doing a study on ' Design for All ' and on the integration of handicapped and elderly people into the information society , and this includes the accessibility of multimedia applications .
I am glad today to be able to tell you that on 22 September of this year , the Commission adopted a code of conduct for its own employment of handicapped people .
The arrangements for the application of this code include , amongst other things , sensitising Commission staff to the problems of the handicapped , and that includes the hearing-impaired .
Sign language interpreters will be provided on the same basis as other interpreters in order to make meetings accessible to the deaf .
But it is clear that , because everyone learns their own language , there are going to be as many sign languages as there are spoken languages .
If we were to request the hearing-impaired to make themselves understood in a single common language , then that would obviously be further discrimination .
At any rate , the Commission will continue to back a wide range of measures to protect the interests of the deaf , in particular by supporting the European Union of the Deaf .
Mr President , you can tell how civilised a society is by the way in which it treats its vulnerable members , not its strong ones .
Like so many others with restricted possibilities , the deaf have a distinct energy , they overcome their limitations and their senses are highly developed .
They often look more closely and that is why they are in a better position than most to see things properly .
But participation in technological developments , like text processing devices or videophone technology , and use of multimedia applications and increased communications , have been made more and more difficult for them over the years .
The European Parliament could lead the way by good example , and for instance have a special monitor up there in the gallery to transmit debates to the deaf or hearing-impaired .
We can see how alive sign language is when what is being said and done in a television programme is interpreted on a split screen or in a window placed on the screen .
Though of course this is mostly restricted to information programmes which are banished to the afternoons , when not many people are watching .
What does the Commission think of a quota system with a significantly higher volume of programmes , and how could this be implemented in Member States , Commissioner Fischler ?
People who cannot hear are not speechless as a result of this .
That is why the Group of the European People 's Party appeals to the Commission to fully recognise sign language as an EU language and to prepare a proposal for a directive along these lines .
The Commissioner has just pointed to some of the difficulties , for instance the different sign languages that have to be considered .
I am very well aware of this but I think that to start with one language would be the most sensible approach that we can take .
That would definitely also contribute to more equality .
And it would also clear the way for us to train more skilled interpreters in sign language and to provide adequate EU funding .
Then we could prove once again that there is a European added value , and minorities , as we call them , must of course also benefit from it .
Mr President , we are told that sign language - the language of those with hearing difficulties - does not enjoy official recognition in some Member States . The logical conclusion to draw is that people do not see any reason for the deaf to have their own language .
And that does in fact appear to be the case in some places . Yet it is not enough simply to acknowledge the need for sign language .
That language has to be used in everyday life to a much greater extent than is the case today .
Those with hearing impairments must be given a chance to take part in public debate . This means both providing them with information on what is happening and ensuring that they can truly participate in an up-to-date way .
The first step is to increase the numbers of trained sign-language teachers and interpreters .
The news is now interpreted into sign language in Sweden , as is live TV coverage of important debates in the Riksdag .
This is excellent , of course , but there is scope for many more programmes with signing .
Television companies should be expected as a matter of course to offer sign-language interpretation of political debates and news broadcasts .
Such a requirement should , I believe , be included in TV companies ' licence agreements .
The most valuable contribution the Commission can make is to offer the Member States support and urge them to act . The main responsibility does , after all , lie with them .
We can of course also do a good deal in the European Parliament . With a little help and encouragement from the Commission , let us hope that more Member States will recognise sign language , promote the use of signing during TV programmes and televised debates , and train more teachers and interpreters .
Perhaps we might set them an example here in the European Parliament .
Mr President , on behalf of our group I should like to express our support for the various issues that Mrs Schmidbauer raised at the beginning of this debate .
I listened to the Commissioner very carefully , and I think we can agree that the main responsibility does indeed lie with the Member States .
Nevertheless , as you yourself said , Commissioner , there are a number of measures that could be taken in the field of coordination , harmonisation and in particular the alignment of text telephone systems .
I think it would be extremely useful if you were to implement these practical measures .
I feel , however , that the Commission too should consider giving symbolic recognition to the Union 's sign languages so that the deaf do not feel discriminated against here in the House , and so that the necessary measures can be taken to ensure that they can communicate with Parliament in their own language .
For too long now , sign language has not been given proper recognition , and now that the situation is changing we must be quick to ensure that it is officially recognised and applied in practice .
Thank you , Mrs Maes .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 18 November .
Late payment by the Commission
The next item is the debate on the oral question ( B4-0490 / 98 ) tabled by Mr Pex , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on damage caused by the Commission as a result of late payment .
Mr President , the fact that I am asking this question in the Chamber today may be rather surprising , because as committee chairman I am naturally in regular contact with the Commission and often have the flexibility to deal with all sorts of things myself .
But there are now so many organisations that are having problems that I thought it best to bring the matter out into the open .
In my view , the purpose of granting subsidies is to enable work to be carried out that we regard as desirable , not to keep a number of civil servants busy all year until they finally grant the subsidies as an act of generosity .
It is the duty of the authorities to provide and maintain legal certainty .
This means that any subsidies granted must be notified in good time after the application has been received , and payment must be made as quickly as possible after notification .
Let me give you two examples .
The first was a small project in the United Kingdom in 1997 .
ECU 15 000 was finally paid out in December 1997 after I myself had intervened .
The people concerned were not able to carry out the project because they had no money to pay for it .
The second example is an organisation with a number of staff which has been receiving subsidies for several years .
The sum in question here was ECU 500 000 .
On 30 July this year , they received a letter telling them that they would be receiving a subsidy - on 30 July , when half the year was already over in which they had had to support themselves .
The first instalment was paid at the end of August , again after I had intervened , and the second was paid very soon afterwards .
The interest charges for this second project came to ECU 24 000 .
I could give you dozens of other examples , but I will not mention any names , because companies beg me not to do so in case it harms their position in future .
I think it is important that if people are forced to borrow money to fund activities because they trust the Commission to honour its promises , they have to be sure about their situation .
If they have to pay interest , which we hope is not the case , then they have to know that they can recover it .
This year the situation is even more serious than in previous years , because after the Court of Justice ruling , the decision was taken not to make any further payments at all .
Just imagine what happens .
An organisation goes to a bank with a letter signed by the European Commission and is granted a loan on the basis of that letter .
After a few months , the bank starts to become nervous .
It asks the Commission what is going on , and the Commission says it is making no further payments .
Organisations are getting themselves into enormous difficulties , not just in terms of liquidity but also with their banks .
According to what I have been told , a number of organisations have had to stop work because of this .
I think this is absolutely scandalous , and I would therefore , in short , ask the Commission to guarantee Parliament two things in the 1999 budget , in other words for next year : firstly , that the budget promises will be honoured in the first quarter and , secondly , that payments will be made immediately afterwards , so that projects can start on time .
The budget lines are fixed here in Parliament .
The organisations concerned know about them as soon as the second reading is over , they submit their applications by the end of the year and expect to be able to start work very quickly .
We are the ones who commission all these individuals , private organisations and sometimes businesses to do this work , because we want them to implement our policy for us .
It is too ridiculous for words that we do this in a way which makes it impossible to guarantee that our plans can actually be implemented in the budget year for which they were intended .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the payment of subsidies for measures in the cultural field that Mr Pex raised in his oral question did indeed have to be deferred until September .
The Commission had already published a call for proposals in January , with a view to granting these subsidies .
However , because of the judgment on the legal bases from the European Court of Justice in May , the Commission was forced to suspend the procedure .
For the budget line concerned , created by the European Parliament , the requisite legal basis had not been enacted and this was confirmed at the trilogue meeting in the middle of July .
The trilogue decided that the Commission could pay out the appropriations to recipients selected before the judgment was pronounced , on the basis of legitimate expectations .
Because the call for proposals was issued before the beginning of the year , the Commission was therefore able to grant these subsidies .
We fully realise that the organisations concerned were in difficulties as a result of the funds being blocked .
The payments though were made as agreed within 60 days of the contracts being signed .
Compensation was not therefore deemed to be justified , and no money has been set aside for it in any case .
This problem will no longer arise in the coming year , because we hope this type of blockage of funds will not occur again .
At the trilogue , it was clearly established under which conditions budget lines can be implemented without a legal basis , and we are going to respect these .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , ladies and gentlemen , as a Member of the Committee on Budgets , I welcome the decision reached by the European Court of Justice and the Commission .
Since the earliest days of European integration , the European Court of Justice has always played an important role .
It has protected Community law and developed it further .
It has made many far-reaching decisions .
On 12 May , the European Court of Justice decided on the basis of complaints from several Member States , especially the UK , and I think this is worthy of note , that two things are required to release funds from the EU budget : the first is financing with commitment and payment appropriations , and the second is an adequate legal base .
As a result , the Commission stopped all payments that did not correspond to these criteria , and I think it was absolutely right to do so .
The Commission blocked 100 budget lines , in the region of 920 million euros , in order to examine their legal bases .
56 lines , that is EUR 390 million , were fully released , 19 lines , or EUR 170 m , were partly released , and some 16 lines , or EUR 340 m , were in the pipeline , that is to say they had been approved by Parliament .
NGO projects in the areas of family , children , the elderly and especially culture were particularly affected .
My congratulations go to the Austrian Council Presidency first of all , and also to the Commission , under whose chairmanship , on 17 July of this year , we managed to reach interinstitutional agreement , release the funds and arrive at a workable decision on the legal bases .
Let us not forget though that the European Parliament , and the Committee on Budgets in particular , has been calling for such a regulation for the past 16 years .
Considering that for 16 years we have concerned ourselves with this essential demand , and now within a few days it is ready to be implemented , you can see how much of a contribution the Court 's decision has made to placing the arrangements - and ultimately also the decisions - between the institutions on the appropriate legal basis .
After the publication of the judgment and until the compromise was reached , the Commission 's position was certainly not a simple one .
Many of the budget lines affected programmes already mentioned , in the fields of culture , education , youth and family .
We in Parliament received many pleas from organisations affected , which of course could no longer be certain that they would receive the money on time .
Therefore , and particularly after today , I am happy to be able to say that most of the appropriations have now been released again .
But the Commission cannot be alone in bearing the consequences of its conduct .
After all , it was only following EU law in complying with a judgment from the highest court in the Union .
And as the Commissioner has just explained to us , the payments were made within 60 days .
I am also of the opinion that the discussion on this , and the quick solution , represent clear progress for the EU .
In parallel to this , there is also a directive on late payment , which deals with the payment period , and I think that will also be good for the Union .
We should not just be an example when it comes to bringing money in , where we are very quick to take action in the form of legal sanctions and harsh instruments , but as the EU we should also be exemplary when it comes to paying out .
We should be a reliable partner and an example for Europe .
Mr President , as president of the Friends of Music in the European Parliament I regularly get requests , urgent telephone calls and pleas from organisations in the musical field who are waiting for their payments from the Commission .
The European Court of Justice case made it worse this year but I have to say that in my 4 ½ years experience in this Parliament it has been the same every year with the Commission .
Every year we take the decisions in November , in the budget , as to which organisations should get funding , and every year the Commission delivers the money to them if they are lucky by October of the following year .
This is a totally unacceptable delay in terms of delivery of money .
The solution seems to be that we need more multiannual programmes - which I hope the new cultural framework programme will actually establish - so that major organisations like the European Youth Orchestra , the European Opera Centre and so on will actually be getting their money on a staged payment basis , with monitoring and evaluation by the Commission and proper auditing and all those things , but in a 