Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 26 June 1997 .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , all honest men and women in the Basque Country and throughout Spain were , barely 48 hours ago , devastated by the brutal assassination of Miguel Angel Blanco , an Ermua town councillor .
In recent days , millions of such men and women have taken to the streets in an impressive display of solidarity , shouting ' End all violence ' and declaring ' Yes to freedom , peace and tolerance ' .
Consistent with its evolution and the line it has always taken in the past , the European Parliament most emphatically condemns not only this odious attack on fellowship but also the attempt made to impose the will of a minority on the democratically elected majority .
Nor can we tolerate the mere fact of representing one 's fellow citizens being grounds for losing one 's life .
We in Europe have too often experienced the dark side of dictatorship and intransigence not to be able to recognize it once again in those who murdered one of our fellow citizens last Saturday .
We would like to offer our most sincere condolences to the family of Miguel Angel Blanco and our support at this difficult time .
We must offer our express support , also , to the democratic political forces which have unanimously called for ETA and Herri Batasuna to be ostracized both inside and outside Spain .
I would call upon all of you , as representatives of the citizens of Europe , to join with me in a minute 's silence in tribute to this cry of sorrow , but also of hope , which has poured forth spontaneously from the people .
We , ladies and gentlemen , are Miguel Angel , too .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the sitting of 26 June 1997 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , there is a mistake in the verbatim report of the sitting of 25 June .
In the evening , we discussed the allocation of funding under the PHARE programme , and I said that it would be better to increase the number of staff working on this at the Commission to ensure that the funding was allocated more effectively .
I used the term ' bestaffing ' , but this has unfortunately come out in the verbatim report as ' bestraffing ' , which is completely wrong .
It is also entirely wrong that PHARE funding should be used in Slovakia to buy history books containing xenophobic comments , and it is regrettable that the Council will not give me an answer to my questions .
Thank you , Mrs van Bladel , although I would point out that this does not relate to the Minutes of the sitting but to the verbatim report , which includes all speeches in their entirety .
However , we will take note of your point .
We shall now hear from Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz .
Mr President , could you please find out how it could possibly happen that the representative of the Dutch presidency-in-office of the Council in Zimbabwe , in reply to a question by the local NGO and government representatives , stated the European Parliament 's position on CITES .
Just eight days earlier , the European Parliament had adopted a resolution in the topical and urgent debate which runs to about three pages in length .
And yet the presidency 's representative said in as many words that the European Parliament had no position on this !
I find that scandalous .
We are not playing at parliaments here , we are a parliament .
It really is about time that the representatives of the Council took note of that fact !
The Council representative cannot say that Parliament has no opinion on something just a week after Parliament has adopted a three-page resolution in its topical and urgent debate .
Thank you , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , I can assure you that we will indeed verify precisely what happened and what the Dutch presidency said and , if necessary , I shall approach it to draw its attention to the matter .
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , on 12 May I asked you a question about a call for tenders for the supply of furniture to Parliament .
You told me to put the question in writing , which I did on 14 May .
Nine weeks have now passed and I have still not received an answer .
On 26 June , I asked you at the Brussels part-session when I could expect a reply , and you said it would be before the next Strasbourg part-session .
The first day of that has now arrived , and I have still not received a reply .
I do not understand how you can treat firms in the Union as you are doing , and this was what I wanted to ask you about .
What kind of an example of transparency is this on the part of Parliament ?
I should be grateful for an answer from your office by tomorrow at the latest .
Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , you are right that I said you would have your reply before the beginning of this week , but there are a great many questions to answer and the services prepare replies as and when they can .
What is more , these replies have to be submitted via the Bureau - I do not draft them personally .
In any case , as the Bureau will be meeting this afternoon and on Thursday of this week , I hope that you will receive your answer this week .
We shall now hear from Mr Gallagher .
Mr President , I wish to refer to a very serious incident which occurred over the week-end in my constituency in County Mayo .
In the villages of Glencullen , Glenamoy and Bangor Erris , many families were left homeless when flash floods swept through their homes , rivers burst their banks , floods caused landslides , left roads impassable and destroyed farm buildings and houses .
Sheep and cattle were lost , crops destroyed , and it was nothing short of a miracle that human lives were not lost .
This will have serious economic and social consequences for that entire region .
I would ask Parliament to support a call to the Commission to make funding available to assist these people who have suffered as a result of this natural disaster .
I realize that it is not the only region in Europe that has suffered - there have been disasters in other areas - and I hope that Parliament will support a call to the Commission to make the necessary funding available to this region of Mayo .
Thank you , Mr Gallagher , this is not , however , an item on the agenda .
The normal channel for such items is the topical and urgent debate .
Mr Titley would like to speak .
Mr President , one week ago today a bus carrying pupils from St James 's School , Bolton , which is part of my constituency , was involved in a serious accident in the French Alps .
As a result of that accident , three young people lost their lives .
I know this House will share my sense of sorrow and grief at such a tragic loss of life , and I would be grateful , Mr President , if you could pass on to the school the condolences of all in this Parliament .
This accident has once again highlighted the issue of seat-belts in buses , especially those carrying children .
It is particularly tragic that St James 's School has a policy of always using buses fitted with seat-belts .
Unfortunately their bus broke down and they were forced to hire a local French bus which did not have seat-belts .
This tragedy perfectly illustrates the need to have effective European-wide legislation to protect our citizens travelling between Member States .
I would request , therefore , Mr President , that you write to both the President of the Commission and the President-in-Office of the Council to highlight this tragic loss of life and to urge them to consider how EU legislation on seat-belts in buses can be further improved .
Finally , I wish to place on record my gratitude to the Commissioner for transport , Mr Kinnock , for the prompt and sympathetic way in which he has responded to me on this matter .
Mr President , I am sorry , but I cannot accept the answer you have just given me .
You have told me twice before that you would ensure that I received a reply as quickly as possible .
The fact is that the head of your tenders service is perfectly capable of answering my question .
If it is so difficult to find out whether firms in the various Member States have equal opportunities in calls for tenders , I really wonder just how transparent Parliament is .
Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , you have already reiterated your point on two occasions , but it is not an item on the agenda .
There are channels for asking questions and channels through which you will receive your answer .
I shall accept no more interventions on this point .
Membership of Parliament
Ladies and gentlemen , I have to inform you that Mrs Péry has written to advise me of her resignation as Vice-President with effect from Tuesday 15 July 1997 and as a Member of the European Parliament with effect from Wednesday 16 July 1997 .
Pursuant to Article 12 of the Act concerning the election of representatives to the European Parliament , by direct universal suffrage , Parliament establishes this vacancy and will inform the Member State concerned .
On a personal note , although I believe I would be expressing the feelings of the entire House , I think we should show our gratitude to Mrs Péry for her long years of service as Vice-President of this House . She has always been most conscientious and I am sure that her work has met with the approval of all Honourable Members .
The French authorities have informed me that Mr Eric Pinel has been appointed to replace Mr Philippe de Villiers with effect from 17 June 1997 .

I would like to welcome our new colleague and refer to the fact that , pursuant to Rule 7 , subparagraph 4 of the Rules of Procedure , every Member of the European Parliament occupies his or her seat in the House and on its various bodies with full enjoyment of rights , despite the fact that his or her credentials have not been verified or that there has been no decision regarding any possible opposition .
Order of business
We shall now move on to establish the order of business .
A final draft agenda has been distributed , pursuant to Rule 95 of the Rules of Procedure , by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting on Thursday 10 July 1997 , and the following changes have been proposed or incorporated :
Monday , Tuesday and Wednesday : ( no change ) .
Mrs Baldi would like to speak .
Mr President , I have a request concerning Wednesday and , more particularly , the Commission statement on the ' Planet Earth Summit ' , that is the New York Summit .
This important statement may end up being given too late , at midnight , because we have a very busy agenda , and so I would like to ask whether it could be brought forward to Tuesday or postponed to Thursday .
Otherwise , it may not be properly appreciated , and Europe clearly needs to leave plenty of time for that statement .
Mrs Baldi , I would remind you that proposals for changes may be submitted up to one hour prior to the sitting .
This proposal you have now made was not submitted an hour in advance and therefore , most regrettably , it cannot be taken into consideration .
Mr Blot , you may now speak .
Mr President , I have a question that I should like to put to you concerning the agenda .
Today , as you know , is the 14th of July , a national holiday and a day celebrated by all French citizens .
Does the Chair intend to pass on a simple courtesy message to parliamentarians , to officials working for the political groups , officials of Parliament and everyone else who works there and who is a French national - on behalf of everyone here of course .
I am sure our friends , as indeed we ourselves , would be deeply touched by such a gesture , especially as I believe courtesy is one of those essential parliamentary customs that help to ensure that an institution such as ours always runs smoothly .
Mr President , I shall be grateful for whatever you may be able to do or say in this respect .
Mr Blot , you know that any request calling for courtesy will always receive a favourable response from the President of the European Parliament .
You yourself have expressed what should be the content of the suggested message .
With your permission I will adopt your words and accordingly call on all the French delegates and Members to adopt it . Thank you .
Mr President , may I just ask you to confirm here in plenary that voting on the Rothley report will be on Wednesday .
It is printed in the agenda as such but there seems to be a deal of confusion and , given the sensitivity of this issue , it is important that everybody hears from your lips when the vote will be taken .
The vote will be taken on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Thursday :
The Confederal Group of the European United Left-Nordic Green Left is requesting the inclusion of a Commission statement on the issue of fraudulent exports of beef originating in the United Kingdom .
Mr Novo will now speak in support of the request .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you , know a few days ago Commissioner Emma Bonino , at a press conference , stated that there had been cases of fraudulent exports of beef from the United Kingdom .
I think that there are various reasons why we should discuss this matter in plenary session .
First of all , the information given by the Commissioner was imprecise and incomplete , which only added to media speculation and raised concerns among the public at large . The European Association for Consumer Protection reported on this .
Secondly , the Commission 's information came late in the day . Two months before this press conference the Standing Veterinary Committee informed the Commission of these facts .
Thirdly , as the Commissioner informed the press , albeit without enough detail and without giving all the necessary information , she should now at least inform this Chamber - if possible , with complete information this time .
Fourthly , it was situations of this type that turned the mad cows crisis into such a serious matter .
We must not repeat past mistakes and therefore should discuss this situation at once .
Fifthly , I think that this subject , brought to light by the Commissioner , Bonino , lies outside the competences of the BSE monitoring committee .
There is no link between the two .
For all these reasons I would ask you , ladies and gentlemen , to agree to our request for a Commission statement on Thursday on the fraudulent export of beef from the United Kingdom .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt will now speak to put the case against the request .
Mr President , I have listened carefully to what Mr Novo had to say .
Towards the end of his remarks he said that Mrs Bonino 's statement had nothing to do with BSE .
That surprised me , in view of his initial remarks .
My group and I are not in favour of adding a statement by Mrs Bonino 's to this week 's order of business , for the following reason : Parliament has appointed a temporary committee to monitor the activities of the Commission in connection with the Committee of Inquiry into BSE .
This temporary committee sits in public -its meetings this week take place today , tomorrow and on Thursday .
All Members of this House are free to attend the meetings and to hear the explanations given by the Commission .
Commissioner Fischler will be doing that today .
Mrs Bonino and Mr Novo have no need to wait until Thursday for a Commission statement - Mr Novo is very welcome to hear a statement today , by attending the meeting of the temporary committee .
When Mr Novo says that the information from the Commission came too late , his information differs from mine .
For example , it was not the scientific committee that advised the Commission - it was the Commission 's department for the combating of fraud .
If the Commission is to act responsibly , it will report when all concerned - public prosecutor 's office , police and customs authorities - have taken the appropriate steps .
At present , I have no reason to doubt that the Commission did that .
We shall hear Mr Fischler and Mrs Bonino this evening , and tomorrow we shall hear from Mr Cunningham , the British Agriculture Minister , followed on Thursday by Mr Boden , the Luxembourg Agriculture Minister and Council President .
So Parliament 's committee should have comprehensive information available .
There is therefore no need for the Commission to make a statement in this chamber .
( Parliament rejects the request )
Mr President , forgive me for requesting that we return to Wednesday 's agenda but you yourself have stated that the agenda for Wednesday remains unchanged .
Am I to understand that , as is customary , question time to the Council will still be held between 5.30 and 7 p.m. ?

That is correct .
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to clear this matter up .
The Conference of Presidents has cut question time to the Council by thirty minutes in order to incorporate an extra Council statement .
What has happened is that the Spanish version contained an erratum and mentions the period as being from 5.30 to 7 p.m. instead of 6 to 7 p.m. , which is , in fact , correct .



Mr President , with all due respect not only to yourself but to the Conference of Presidents , I would like to point out that the usual custom is for the Council to reply to questions from Members for an hour and a half every Wednesday .
In the case in point , according to my information , there are 37 questions tabled by Honourable Members , who are expecting to receive a reply from the Council .
In my view , reducing or postponing question time merely detracts from the importance of this dialogue between Members and Council representatives .
Therefore , with all due respect , I would like to place on record my disagreement with this timetable change and with this reduction in the question-time period .
Thank you , Mr Gutiérrez Díaz .
The agenda is an extremely heavy one this week and the Groups understood that three Council statements - statements which also constitute a form of parliamentary dialogue - had to be made and , therefore , it has been decided exceptionally to introduce this change to the agenda .
Mr Posselt would like to speak .
Mr President , I should like to support what Mr Gutiérrez Díaz has just said .
This has become a very frequent occurrence , simply because question time , which for years took place from 9 pm to 10.30 pm , has been moved to the afternoon .
At some stage , somebody discovered that the Council is too tired in the evenings and so moved question time to the afternoons .
Since then , it has been cut short or rescheduled on about every second or third occasion .
I believe it should be moved back to 9 pm , and then the problem would be solved .
Thank you , Mr Posselt .
I have already explained why the agenda has been changed .
You would have to bring the matter of your disagreement up with your parliamentary Group , given that the Groups have agreed to the change concerned .
Annual report of the European Ombudsman for 1996
The next item is the debate on the annual report from the European Ombudsman for 1996 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I begin by thanking you for finding time in the busy schedule of the July session for the Ombudsman to present his annual report . The practice that the Ombudsman presents his report in person signifies that the European Parliament follows the best parliamentary traditions of those Member States that have established an Ombudsman institution .
I am convinced that this will prove beneficial in terms of our common ideals for an open and democratic European Union .
The annual report for 1996 is the first to cover a full year of activity by the European Ombudsman .
The report concentrates on the work in dealing with cases , although considerable administrative effort was still necessary to complete the process of establishing the Ombudsman 's office and to set up an information campaign . In future it should be possible to devote a greater proportion of time to dealing with complaints and initiatives .
I am sure that the results from the complainants ' point of view will continue to improve steadily .
During 1996 the Ombudsman office handled 1 014 cases .
Of these , 842 were new complaints received in 1996 ; most of them were sent by private citizens , only 86 were from companies and associations ; 29 complaints were transmitted by Members of the European Parliament ; three own-initiatives were launched during the year .
In total 210 enquiries were begun in 1996 .


The institutions concerned were the European Commission in 187 cases , the European Parliament in 19 cases and the Council of the European Union in 4 cases .

These numbers reflect the fact that the Commission is the institution which most frequently has direct administrative dealings with European citizens .



The inquiries were completed in 102 cases .
The inquiries resulted in 82 findings of no maladministration .
Two complainants withdrew their complaints and in 12 cases the matter was settled by the institution in a satisfactory way for the complainant .
There were 34 findings of maladministration , 32 of them were closed with a critical remark to the institution or body concerned .
One complaint and one initiative resulted in two draft recommendations to these institutions or bodies .
The first draft recommendation was immediately accepted by the body in question , the other , resulting from the own-initiative on rules on public access to documents , seems to have been generally well received .
So far there has not been an occasion to present a special report on a case of maladministration to the European Parliament .
This is partly because most of the Community institutions and bodies have taken a cooperative attitude towards the Ombudsman , especially by looking for friendly settlements directly with the complainant .
Furthermore , the established procedures for dealing with cases necessarily take time to complete and many investigations may have not yet reached the stage at which a special report would be appropriate . The first occasion to present a special report will most likely arise later this year .
In the discussion last year I commented on the fact that many complaints were outside the Ombudsman 's mandate as laid down in the Treaty .
During the first year it appears that 35 % of the complaints are within the mandate .
Although many national ombudsmen have this same problem , the proportion of complaints outside the mandate still seems fairly high to me . It might also be argued that the high proportion of complaints deemed to be outside the mandate shows that the Ombudsman has interpreted the term maladministration too narrowly .
In our report for 1995 it was stated that ' there is maladministration if a Community institution or body fails to act in accordance with the Treaties and with the Community acts that are binding upon it , or it fails to observe the rules and principles of law established by the Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance ' .

Furthermore it was stated that ' the European Ombudsman must take into account the requirements of Article F of the Treaty of European Union that Community institutions and bodies are to respect fundamental rights ' .
A list of examples of maladministration was added to this definition .
At the same time it was stated that the experience of national ombudsmen shows that it is better not to attempt too rigid a definition of maladministration .
The report of the Committee on Petitions on the Ombudsman 's annual report for 1995 for which Mrs Ahern was the rapporteur noted that it was wise and right to avoid at that stage too rigid a definition of maladministration . Now there is more experience of applying the provisions concerning the European Ombudsman .


As the question or the definition of the term maladministration has now been raised , I undertake to provide a more precise definition in my annual report for 1997 .
This will give the European Parliament , and its responsible committees , the possibility to make observations on this issue and further clarify the situation .
Another important question was raised last in the deliberations on the annual report for 1995 .
It concerned the Ombudsman 's power to undertake own-initiative inquiries .
I argued that the Ombudsman 's primary duty is to deal with complaints and underlined that the power of own-initiative should not be used too lightly . It could be used when a series of complaints had focused attention on a specific body or on a particular type of administrative activity .
The Ahern report stressed that own-initiative inquiries should be an important tool for the Ombudsman . It stated that ' this form of inquiry may acquire a far greater importance in the years to come to the benefit of the democratic functioning of the Union and therefore of the Parliament and the citizens ' .

In the debate last year a more frequent use of own-initiatives than I had announced was urged .

There seemed to be an opinion that the Ombudsman 's activities should have a higher profile .
In 1996 a third of the complaints that led to an inquiry concerned the way that the European Commission exercised its responsibilities as the guardian of the Treaties .
This concerned supervision of the fulfilment by Member States of their obligations under Community law . As explained on pages 67 and 68 of the annual report , it appeared , on the basis of these complaints that the Commission 's procedures caused considerable dissatisfaction among European citizens .
I therefore began an own-initiative inquiry into the matter .
The result is that the Commission itself should consider enhancing the position of the individual complainants in the procedure as a matter of good administrative behaviour .
The initiative does not deal with the Commission 's discretionary power to decide whether to bring an infringement before the Court of Justice or not .
Lack of transparency was also a frequent subject of complaints leading to an enquiry . As explained on page 82 of the annual report , these complaints were an important consideration in the decision to begin the own-initiative enquiry into rules for public access to documents .
The enquiry was addressed to 15 Community institutions and bodies .
It concluded with a recommendation to have rules on public access to documents within three months . Although the institutions and bodies generally welcomed this recommendation , the time limit proved to be unrealistic .
It was subsequently prolonged to the end of July 1997 . Taking into account its importance this issue could constitute a proper case to be presented to the Parliament later this year as the first special report .
The same policy for the use of the own-initiative power underlies the Ombudsman 's next such inquiry . This concerns what appears to be the frequent and routine use of age limits as an admission requirement for the Community institutions and bodies .
This subject has given rise to a series of complaints to the Ombudsman .
Many of these complaints have come from the Member States which joined the Union in 1995 and allege that the use of age limits represents unjustified discrimination .
The use of own-initiatives in carefully considered issues provides a good opportunity for both the institution or body concerned and the Ombudsman to deal with the problem in a comprehensive and satisfactory way .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the Community institutions and bodies for a year of cooperation in a constructive atmosphere .
In particular I would like to thank you , Mr President , and your predecessor , Mr Hänsch , for your supportive and understanding attitude to the work of the Ombudsman as well as to the many Members and officials of the European Parliament who have assisted in that work .
I would also like to address the Commission and its responsible member , Mrs Gradin , and thank her for her firm commitment to an open and accountable administration .
A special tribute is due to the Secretary-General of the Commission , Mr David Williamson , for his role in setting up the basic principles for cooperation with the Ombudsman 's office .
As he will soon be leaving the service I would like to stress how significant his role has been in guaranteeing a good outcome of our common work for the European citizen .

I would also like to express my gratitude to the chairman of the Committee on Petitions , Mr Fontana , to his predecessor , Mr Newman , and to all the members of the committee for their clearly expressed interest and cooperative attitude in their contacts with the Ombudsman 's office .
Special thanks should go to Mr Papakyriazis , who has shown a serious and thorough attitude in producing the comprehensive and detailed report now before us , which contains many useful observations and proposals to develop cooperation between the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman while maintaining the independence of the two bodies .
The right to petition the European Parliament and the right to apply to the European Ombudsman together constitute a unique possibility to promote the rights of European citizens .
The observations and proposals in the Papakyriazis report provide a basis for looking for effective ways to serve that noble purpose .
For my part , I hope that there will be an occasion in the near future to turn these ideas into feasible and practical measures to establish a smoothly working relationship .
Thank you , Mr Söderman .
Annual report on the activities of the European Ombudsman in 1996
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0211 / 97 ) by Mr Papakyriazis , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the annual report on the activities of the European Ombudsman in 1996 .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Söderman , ladies and gentlemen , this evening I have the great honour to put before Parliament the report by the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions concerning the annual report on the activities of the European Ombudsman in 1996 .
This is in fact the first report covering the activities of the European Ombudsman for an entire calendar year , and I believe it therefore gives us a chance to take a more mature and detailed look at this new institution .
Because the European Ombudsman is indeed a new institution , but one with a long history in this chamber .
It was in this chamber that the European Ombudsman took its final shape , and in here of course that the first European Ombudsman was elected in 1995 .
A Europe close to its citizens would not be tangible , could not become a reality if its mechanisms were unknown , if it was itself hostile and inaccessible to European citizens , for whose benefit indeed the European Union was created .
The Ombudsman is one of those who are called upon to work patiently , persistently and vigorously , and if necessary to fight in order to neutralize circumstances which corrupt or violate the concept of fair administration by the European Bodies in the exercise of their function .
Today , speaking on behalf of the collectively responsible committee of the European Parliament , I am presenting a report which was fortunate enough to be approved unanimously , with no opposing vote and no abstentions .
On behalf of the committee , then , I would like to congratulate the European Ombudsman first on his detailed , extensive and informative report .
But we also congratulate him on its substance , on his work during 1996 and its results. the institution of Ombudsman is a historic European tradition , though the European Union 's Ombudsman is a recent body with new potential and new demands .
We also want to congratulate the Ombudsman for the specific results brought by his investigation and settlement of the complaints in a number of particular cases .
The cooperation so far between the European Union bodies involved allows us , I believe , to be optimistic about the future .
There were of course cases when the Ombudsman encountered some resistance , just as there are cases still to be resolved .
We believe the European Parliament is the institutional body that can and must show its solidarity and bring to bear the particular political weight that goes with the exercise of parliamentary control , when the Ombudsman confirms that the European Community 's institutional bodies have failed to respond .
That does not in any circumstances mean that the European Parliament is trying to influence or discuss the autonomy and independence of the body known as the European Ombudsman .
It is , however , necessary continually to deepen the cooperation between us , a concept which the European Parliament brings us by definition with its European Ombudsman , working in parallel every day towards a common goal .
The report contains specific proposals in twelve articles of the final resolution .
I will not dwell on these by mentioning specific practical indications for fuller cooperation and coordination of our activities .
I only want to say that there must be an increase in depth , a greater effort to inform citizens , because our citizens in all Europe 's countries have a somewhat confused picture of what are the respective responsibilities and powers of the European Parliament and of the European Ombudsman .
I will not revert to the issues mentioned earlier by Mr Söderman .
We agree completely that a pragmatic approach to bad management is the most helpful way .
However , the need to define more accurately the content of what fair administration means , is I believe common ground between us .
We completely agree about the need and perspective for own-initiative investigations .
In conclusion , I say that we are all dealing with a new institution , and this after Maastricht , where the Ombudsman was officially established . Today , after Amsterdam , the European Ombudsman has a new dimension and a new scope .
I believe we stand together in observing and reinforcing his role , always to the benefit of the citizens whom we , the European Parliament , represent .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists I want to congratulate the European Ombudsman , Mr Södermann , on his excellent annual report for 1996 .
I commend it to all the Members of Parliament .
I know it is available in all the languages this week .
Those of us who have had a chance to study the report before now know the very thorough way in which it is set out ; in it Mr Södermann explains his first full year of work and the cases of alleged maladministration that he has investigated .

It is important that Mr Södermann emphasized in his speech the own-initiative enquiries that he is undertaking , because those own-initiative enquiries emanate from important issues ; they do not come out of his head but arise from complaints he has considered and complaints which have drawn to his attention general problems that require his intervention .
As we have heard , complaints concerning environmental assessments on the Newbury Bypass and the M40 , both in my own country , the United Kingdom , led the Ombudsman to believe that the Commission was failing in certain ways and that it was more appropriate for a general examination of the procedural position of individual complainants in the Article 169 procedure to be looked at , and also , his owninitiative enquiry arising from complaints to promote public access to documents held by Community institutions .
These are all things we thoroughly welcome .
It is important that the rights of the citizen to complain to the Ombudsman about alleged maladministration should be more widely publicized , as should the right of the citizen and resident to submit petitions to the European Parliament on other matters that concern the sphere of responsibility of the European Communities and the respective responsibilities and duties of the Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions .

In conclusion , I would like to congratulate our rapporteur from the Committee on Petitions , Mr Papakyriazis , who has produced a balanced report that looks very closely at the work of the Ombudsman , Mr Södermann , rightly congratulates him on his work and puts forward support and positive proposals for the future .


Mr President , following after Mr Perry 's report on the activity of the Committee on Petitions , which we had at the June part-session , and Mr Papakyriazis ' report on the activity of the Ombudsman , I too wish to endorse Mr Newman 's invitation to all honourable Members to read Mr Söndermann 's excellent report .

Through those two reports , the European Parliament is seeking to tackle in a specific and not just an abstract way the crucial and fundamental issue of European citizenship : citizenship founded on the awareness of all European citizens that they belong to a community in which sovereignty resides not with the modern despots - that is the bureaucrats - but with the law , a legislative process in which citizens themselves participate with their own representatives in the national parliaments and the European Parliament .
Regrettably , the European Parliament does not have full powers to initiate legislation , it has only powers of codecision , though these were extended at the recent Amsterdam summit .
This , however , is a very serious gap , a structural gap for a parliament : the basic responsibility of Parliament should be to legislate , but that is not possible .
The absence of legislative power has a twofold consequence : firstly , since citizens do not feel involved in the legislative process , a serious democratic deficit exists in the relations between citizens and this House .
Secondly , European integration is not being based on a process of induction , moving from fact to law , from the particular to the universal , but on an abstract and deductive process : moving from the law to the directive and individual reality and from the general to the particular . And those who are familiar with the history of our continent know that it is special because of its varied history , culture and language .
That gives rises to crises of rejection , failure to act , the problems national communities experience in assimilating Community directives : in other words , the Union may fail because citizens do not perceive themselves as subjects but as the objects of decisions of the Community Institutions or even , in some respects , the victims of what is decided at a Community level .
On the other hand , the Commission has to monitor the application of the law , it has therefore to act as the guardian of European construction .
But the ancients said : Quis custodiet custodes ?
Who will keep an eye on the guardians ?
Where there is a failure to comply with the law , it is citizens themselves , Europe 's citizens , who have only two practical possibilities open to them under the Maastricht Treaty .
There are two main channels : one involves referring the matter to the European Parliament via the Committee on Petitions - the famous right of petition - and the other involves appealing to the European Ombudsman in the event of maladministration by the Community Institutions , and Mr Papakyriazis has described the work of the Ombudsman in his report .
The separate - the one is political and the other administrative - but complementary and collaborative activity of these two bodies is designed both to create a system for the protection of Europe 's citizens which does not rely on the courts but is simple , effective and free , and to identify and bridge all the many gaps which prevent general abstract and - frequently - remote legislation from actually being applied , so that we achieve the full European citizenship to which we aspire .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Söderman , I am a Northerner so I usually say what I mean .
I say that this is an excellent report from the Ombudsman and I hope it will set the precedent for future reports .
It concentrates on the main central issues and does not get lost in the details .
I think that this report will assist us in gaining a clear idea of what good administration is ; we have a right to longer , more reasonable time limits for dealing with issues , fuller explanations for decisions and greater equality which the Ombudsman himself also mentioned .
In future , we also hope to see greater openness as a result of his own-initiative enquiries .
I also think that this one and a half year period has demonstrated that the Ombudsman is needed as the guardian of the guardians , as he said about Article 169 .
We support the contents of the report but there are areas in the commentary from the petitions committee with which we cannot really agree , but which my colleagues in the Group will raise later .
Mr President , in point one of Mr Papakyriazis 's report , he congratulates the European Ombudsman on his comprehensive and well-structured annual report for 1996 .
Such congratulations are not a mere formality - they are well-merited but I think we should also express our congratulations retrospectively regarding the felicitous idea of creating such an institution within the scope of the European Parliament in the Maastricht agreements and also congratulate ourselves on the high standard of collaboration between the European Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions .
At this juncture , it would be appropriate to point out that such collaboration has been promoted by the personality of not only Mr Söderman but also those of the two chairmen who have headed our Committee on Petitions during this period , Mr Newman and Mr Fontana .

In his intervention , we were told that the way is now being opened for a concept of European citizenship which involves the knowledge that , in the face of maladministration , it is possible to have recourse to the Ombudsman , an Ombudsman who has demonstrated initiative and who should be congratulated on having taken the initiative to monitor this fundamental function of the Commission , by which I mean ensuring compliance with the Treaties .
He should also be congratulated on having responded - on his own initiative but with wide general support - to this concern about the transparency of our institutions .

I therefore feel Mr Söderman is to be commended on his report and on his work and that Mr Papakyriazis is to be commended for his interpretation of it which has enabled us to give the report our unanimous approval in the Committee on Petitions , and I believe that the report will also be unanimously approved in this part-session .
Mr President , Mr Ombudsman , colleagues , it is a pleasure for me , on behalf of the Green Group , to congratulate the Ombudsman on a very successful year 's work .
During the year he has also managed to adopt a high profile , as the European Parliament asked him to last year .
I should particularly like to congratulate the Ombudsman on his own initiatives , especially that concerning complaints about Community legislation .
It is extremely important to improve complainants ' position , so that they can follow exactly the consideration of their complaints .
They should have the right to receive information about the dialogue between the Member State and the Commission .
They may , after all , also have reason to supplement their complaints on the basis of the information they receive .
On another point , the initiative to increase openness at the institutions is far-reaching and a genuine foundation stone of democracy in the European Union .
We look forward with interest to the Ombudsman 's first special report on the subject .
The Amsterdam Treaty already places greater emphasis on openness , but I am sure the Ombudsman has spurred on efforts to increase openness by his very existence .
Mr President , last week the Bureau of the European Parliament approved Parliament 's rules on openness .
Unfortunately it did so behind closed doors .
It was not possible even for Members of this house to participate in the drawing up of the rules .
In many respects , regrettably , they are weaker than the Council 's rules on openness .
In my opinion this represents a serious failure , because the European Parliament wanted to present itself politically as the champion of openness .
But this time what is at issue is particularly access to administrative documents , and Parliament ought to act in an exemplary manner in this respect too .
Mr President , I too would like to compliment not only the rapporteur on his excellent report , but also - indeed especially - the Ombudsman on his excellent work and for this function - so essential to the European Union - which he has succeeded in vesting with a measure of importance .
Essential in the sense - and this is perhaps not always sufficiently strongly emphasized - that his job is to deprive those national governments that are forever seeking to pass every kind of worst evil off onto the Community institutions , thus transferring problems they were unable to resolve at national level to a European level , of a certain number of excuses .
We know , of course , that it will take more than an Ombudsman to resolve a far more fundamental problem , the problem of democracy in the European Union , a democracy so little respected that if the European Union were to seek accession on the basis of the same criteria as countries applying to join the European Union , it would certainly be turned down .
Obviously we are not expecting the Ombudsman to be involved with matters at that kind of level but , in any event , he can stamp out a number of evasions and make it less easy for the national governments to use the Community Institutions as a scapegoat .
A few words on matters on which my Group would like the Ombudsman to work more energetically : although he has already expanded the use of the Internet , he needs to find ways to encourage it to be used still more widely , to enable the citizens of Europe to send in their complaints via the Internet , to find ways of making people more aware of the existence of the Ombudsman , in particular by using more traditional communication media , such as national and regional newspapers , for example .
Perhaps one could also suggest to him that he should try to see whether , together with the Regional Committee , it might not be possible to find a way of spreading knowledge about the existence of the Internet , its role and its essential function , even in the most backward regions of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Ombudsman is completely independent in the performance of his duties .
That is laid down by Article 138e of the Treaty , which also stipulates that the Ombudsman must submit an annual report to the European Parliament on the outcome of his inquiries .
I should like to make four points about the report by Mr Papakyriazis , which I very much welcome and on which I congratulate him .
The Ombudsman said in his speech just now that there is no strict definition of maladministration , and I think it would be a very good idea if he looked into this more closely before the next annual report , so that a more accurate definition can be established .
Secondly , the concept of own initiative .
If repeated complaints are made , the Ombudsman must respond to them by carrying out own-initiative inquiries which will - and do , of course - involve contacts with the other institutions .
He has congratulated them all on this , but in my view we should not be too naive here .
The Commission will naturally provide whatever information is required , but that does not mean that the problem has been resolved .
Take BSE - mad cow disease - for example .
If that had been the subject of a complaint to the Ombudsman , I wonder what would have happened .
I think that where there is maladministration , there should be more thorough checks , and Parliament should have a role to play here .
Mr Ombudsman , you said in your report that some 65 % of the complaints submitted were outside your remit .
It would be very useful for us and for the general public to know what happened to those 65 % .
Did the people concerned simply receive a letter telling them that their complaint would not be dealt with ?
I think we should investigate how many of these kinds of complaints could be forwarded to the Committee on Petitions , so that people could be given suggested solutions , rather than just a negative reply .
So in addition to the 32 cases covered in the annual report , we would also be very interested to know what happened to the rest and why they were rejected .
Finally , a subject which various speakers have already mentioned : information for the citizens of Europe .
A new right has been established for the people of Europe , but they do not know anything about it , and through no fault of their own .
However , there are information centres .
The European Parliament has information centres in all the capital cities , as does the Commission .
What are they doing to let people know about their fundamental right to submit complaints ?
I think this is something we need to look into .
Mr President , we have now had our first annual report from the Ombudsman .
His activities have been rather modest , but I welcomed his recent attack on the lack of openness in the Council .
I think the role of the Ombudsman must gradually be developed , and Parliament must allow scope for this .
Our legal and regulatory relationship with him is a difficult one , in that he is independent , while at the same time being required to report to Parliament .
If this instrument of our people 's Europe is to be fully effective , we must not be too severe and we must not regard him as a rival .
This report by Mr Papakyriazis is full of unnecessary criticism of the Ombudsman , and seems to expect him to do many things that are not actually his job .
He is not responsible for maintaining the institutional balance , and it is also too much to expect him to detail every single complaint in his report .
The Liberal Group has therefore tabled a number of amendments , and will also try to have a number of paragraphs rejected in order to give the Ombudsman the scope he needs and deserves , not as some poor relation of the Committee on Petitions , but as someone who can investigate people 's complaints against the institutions independently .
Finally , I entirely agree with what my colleague Mr Chanterie said .
Following on from what Mr Bertens said , I think it is important for the European Parliament to send out the right political signal with this first report from the Ombudsman .
It is sending out entirely the wrong signal for us to warn him to be careful not to disturb the balance between the institutions , so paragraph 4 , which in my view is the worst thing in this entire report , simply has to be dropped .
The Ombudsman 's role must be allowed to develop and must be judged by his achievements , and this is why I also think it is madness to try to define what we mean by maladministration , mismanagement and the like .
These things will gradually emerge with experience , so let us not put the cart before the horse .
My first point , therefore , is that we should ensure that Parliament sends out a positive signal that it supports the Ombudsman , not that it is trying to undermine him .
And secondly , we must make it clear that the extension of the Union 's responsibilities , including those under the third pillar which concern people 's basic rights , should mean an extension of the powers of the Ombudsman as well .
We have tabled amendments to this effect , which I hope will secure a majority in the House .
Mr President , I should also like to congratulate the Ombudsman on his first annual report covering a whole year .
The fact that four members of the Liberal Group have asked to speak today demonstrates the importance we attach to the Ombudsman institution .
The Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions together constitute a very important , one might almost say - with all due respect for the European Parliament - the most important democratic instrument , in the entire Union .
It is a direct route whereby ordinary citizens can alter incorrect decisions .
A precondition for that of course is the ability to find out what is happening . That is why I am particularly glad that one of the initiatives the Ombudsman has taken is to investigate how easy it is for the public to gain access to documents .
The Ombudsman had to conclude - I was going to say unfortunately - that the situation is not satisfactory , but that outcome is in fact a fortunate one in the sense that the Ombudsman is now recommending that the institutions establish rules for document access . Without that , as I said , the public cannot find out what is going on .
I think that this first report shows that the Ombudsman institution is on the right track and that good results have been achieved in relation to the resources made available .
I therefore congratulate Jacob Söderman on this report .
Mr President , it was as a result of strong Danish advocacy in conjunction with the Maastricht Treaty and an initiative of the European Parliament that the European Ombudsman institution became a reality .
It is thus with great anticipation that we awaited the first whole-year annual report from the Ombudsman , which is covered by the Papakyriazis report .
As has been pointed out on several occasions , it is very important that the public in the EU become more aware of the European Ombudsman 's functions and powers .
So far not enough information has been provided on the possibilities open to both individuals and enterprises to complain to the Ombudsman .
It is thus important that the Ombudsman act as a guarantor of the openness of EU institutions to the public .
It is also important that the Ombudsman be given access to documents and information in the various EU institutions when he deals with complaints .
Many of the complaints the Ombudsman has received up to now are concerned with document access .
This is a sign that all is not well with the process of translating the Maastricht Treaty aims on openness into practice .
The European Ombudsman quite clearly represents an improvement of democracy in the EU , and he can contribute to making the EU system more transparent by giving European citizens a chance to complain when they feel badly treated .
It is therefore important to foster an awareness among the EU public of the existence of the Ombudsman and of ways in which they can complain .
It is the only way we can secure the development of an EU that does not work against its citizens , but acts for them and upholds their rights .
I think it is splendid report , and I would like to congratulate the Ombudsman on the good results achieved in his first period of activity .
Mr President , may I begin by congratulating both the Ombudsman , Jacob Söderman , for his annual report and Mr Papakyriazis for his report .
I read them both with great interest .
The function of European Ombudsman was introduced in 1995 , so 1996 was its first full year of operation .
This makes both the report and this debate of particular importance .
The job of the Ombudsman is to check that our European Institutions are managed correctly and , on behalf of the people of Europe , to put the spotlight on administrative errors .
More than 80 percent of all complaints involve the European Commission .
This is to be expected when you consider that it is the Commission above all which makes decisions which directly affect the people .
Let me emphasise that we set great store by the work carried out by the Ombudsman .
It is of help to us in the Commission in improving our own procedures and routines .
Every administrative function improves in the knowledge that it is under scrutiny .
Ultimately , it is the people 's right to know that their institutions manage themselves properly and that money raised through taxes is being used in a correct and sensible manner ; these are the core issues here .
I am the person within the Commission who is responsible for our relationship with the Ombudsman , Mr Söderman and I would like to thank him for his co-operation .
We in the Commission are continually striving for a good working relationship with the Ombudsman .
We do what we can to keep to our deadlines and make our answers to him as comprehensive as possible .
So we are , of course , pleased to see that the Ombudsman himself , in his report , has made note of the Commission 's positive attitude to his work .
During the last year our work involved finding appropriate ways of working closely together .
Naturally , there were a few initial teething problems during this first year and some considerable discussion took place on the interpretation of the role of the Ombudsman according to the Treaty and the Statutes .
But , generally , I think that we have managed to resolve any problems very well .
Mr President , Mr Papakyriazis ' report raises two issues , in the resolution and the motivation , which I would like to comment on : Point 4 in the resolution proposal and points 13-16 in the motivation section raise the issue of investigations into the discretionary powers of the institutes .
By this , I mean particularly the Commission 's power to open or conclude cases of infringement under Article 169 .
Here the resolution text underlines that , and I quote ' The role of the Ombudsman should be to support the institutional balance which is established in the Treaty and in particular the proper exercise / .... / of the European Commission 's / ... / discretionary powers ' .
The resolution goes on to say that it is necessary to identify clearly any anomalies in the operation .
This suggests that this balance would in some way be threatened .
During 1996 there were a number of cases which did involve Article 169 and there was a certain amount of confusion .
We had a thorough discussion about this in the Commission and reached a clear position on it .
I cannot now see any problems in our relationship with the Ombudsman in this respect .
It is my view that both the Commission and the Ombudsman have handled these matters in a balanced and responsible manner .
I also welcome the investigation which the Ombudsman is carrying out , on his own initiative concerning how these matters are handled , particularly with regard to information to and consultation with the complainant .
We intend to provide the Ombudsman with our opinions and proposals before the end of the month .
The Ombudsman has also taken the initiative for another investigation .
This concerns openness and access to documents .
I welcome this initiative as well .
It encourages the institutes to be as open as possible .
The Amsterdam Meeting which recently came to a close also demonstrates that this is an area where progress has been rapid and where we expect great things from all of the Institutes within the European Union .
Finally , Mr President , I also agree with the view in point 8 and 10 of the resolution , that people must be made aware of their right to submit petitions both to the European Parliament and to the European Ombudsman .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Fishing off the coast of Senegal and in the waters of Mauritius
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
( A4-0220 / 97 ) by Mrs Péry , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Decision on the conclusion of an Agreement in the form of an exchange of letters concerning the interim extension of the Protocol to the Agreement between the European Community and the Government of the Republic of Senegal on fishing off the coast of Senegal for the period from 2 October 1996 to 1 November 1996 ( COM ( 96 ) 0611 - C40032 / 97-96 / 0287 ( CNS ) ; - ( A4-0224 / 97 ) by Mrs Péry , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol establishing , for the period from 1 May 1997 to 30 April 2001 , the fishing rights and financial compensation provided for in the Agreement between the European Community and the Government of the Republic of Senegal on fishing off the coast of Senegal ( COM ( 97 ) 0324 - C4-0322 / 97-97 / 0179 ( CNS ) ) ; - ( A4-0229 / 97 ) by Mr Gallagher , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation relating to the conclusion of the Protocol defining , for the period 1 December 1996 to 30 November 1999 , the fishing opportunities and the financial contribution provided for by the Agreement between the European Community and the Government of Mauritius on fishing in the waters of Mauritius ( COM ( 97 ) 0043 - C4-0136 / 97-97 / 0035 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , it gives me great pleasure to be able to present a fisheries agreement that is imbued with a new spirit , in that it takes account of the interests not only of the European Union but also of the indigenous Senegalese fishermen and of fish stocks .
Let me briefly give you the facts .
The previous protocol , concluded for a two-year period , expired on 1 October 1996 , even though negotiations on an extension had not been completed .
This protocol was renewed for a period of two months to avoid a break in fishing activities .
Subsequently , negotiations were broken off and our boats were obliged to stop fishing .
I would remind you that a debate was held here during the November 1996 plenary and that our Assembly passed a resolution taking note of the breakdown of these negotiations and setting out the terms for a resumption of the dialogue .
We felt that greater account needed to be taken of the depletion of fish stocks in Senegalese waters , the relational difficulties between industrial and non-industrial fishing , and the growth in indigenous fishing activities .
In December 1996 , I myself went to Dakar on behalf of the European Parliament , not to resume negotiations , because we did not have the necessary authority for that , but to resume the political dialogue .
The message must have got through because , in the meantime , a new agreement , which I see as a positive one , has been concluded .
It is for a period of four years instead of two and extends from 1 May 1997 until 30 April 2001 , and therefore offers increased stability to both parties .
It is a mixed-type protocol covering three types of fisheries : trawling , pelagic fishing and tuna fishing , which you will recall feeds the local fish processing industries .
Fishing zones have been changed to take account of the local concerns of non-industrial fishermen .
Because of this , EU vessels of more than 150 GRT - accounting for most of our vessels fishing off Senegal - now have to fish beyond the twelve , rather than six , nautical mile zone .
This protocol offers more flexibility for European shipowners , as licences may have a duration of three or six months , though dates have to be strictly adhered to .
However , the fees paid to Senegal by the shipowners increased by 10 % per annum for four years .
Technical inspections of European fishing vessels will be subject to more stringent conditions .
A biological rest period is , for the first time , required by the Senegalese authorities .
It is of a two-month duration and applies , without discrimination , to demersal inshore and deep-water trawling , and applies to all vessels : Senegalese , European and other .
This requirement has been accepted by the European Union .
Mesh sizes have been increased , especially for cephalopods , from 65 mm to 70 mm .
The cost of the agreement is 18 million ECU a year , 48 million for the agreement as a whole .
So it is the overall picture that I see as positive .
I wish to highlight a declaration by the Government of the Republic of Senegal , which is annexed to the protocol and stipulates that : ' a significant percentage of the overall financing compensation will be used in the fisheries sector , in accordance with the aims of sustainable development of fishing , including non-industrial fishing ' .
This commitment by the Senegalese authorities was set out in concrete form in a letter from the Minister for Fisheries to Commissioner Bonino confirming a decision by the Senegalese authorities to allocate 50 % of the total compensation to the Treasury and use the remaining 50 % in the fisheries sector on the basis of the aims of sustainable development referred to under the headings of the protocol .
It is precisely in that area that we can talk of a new spirit and of progress in achieving a balance of interests between both parties .
Let me conclude by saying that some of my colleagues , from the Committee on Budgets in particular , would like to see a mid-term review of this agreement .
I consider that such a request is not only acceptable but would also encourage both parties to observe the spirit of this new agreement .
Mr President , a fisheries agreement between the Community and Mauritius was concluded in 1989 .
The first protocol to this agreement was in force from 1990 to 1993 and the second protocol between 1993 and 30 November 1996 .
Therefore a new protocol for the period December 1996 to November 1999 has been initialled and Parliament has been consulted on it .
Pending Parliament 's decision this week , the delivery of its opinion , and the Council 's as well as Mauritius ' signature , the agreement is applied on a provisional basis , pursuant to an agreement on this in the form of an exchange of letters .
The first payment of financial compensation to Mauritius was made at the end of May 1997 .
It is a quite typical access to resources / financial compensation protocol .
The protocol provides opportunities for 43 vessels .
The figure has been more than doubled and , of course , this is to make it possible for Spanish shipowners to benefit from the agreement .
The limit of the capacity is 100 gross registered tonnes .
The financial contribution is , in total , ECU 1 , 746 , 750 , which is an average of ECU 582 , 250 per annum .
That is an increase over the previous protocol , which was ECU 1 , 455 , 000 , equalling ECU 485 , 000 per annum .
This considerable increase in the fishing opportunities obtained explains the rise in price .
Included in this , fractions of the financial contribution are earmarked for scientific and technical programmes and for promoting skills and knowhow of Mauritian nationals engaged in sea-fishing .
In spring 1996 , the Commission reported the following rates of utilization of the fishing opportunities obtained from Mauritius : tuna seiners : 85 % , and vessels fishing by line : 10 % .
The Committee on Fisheries drafted a set of guidelines to be applied to fisheries agreements and protocols .
These guidelines make possible a check-list as a test of each agreement 's and each protocol 's conformity with the aims of the common fisheries policy , its coherence with relevant aims of the Community 's regional policy and development cooperation policy and its conformity with the Community 's obligations and undertakings under Treaties , codes of conduct and declarations adopted at international level .
No proper framework for the fisheries agreements exists yet and their evaluation is rendered more difficult by the lack of fixed routines for the collection and communication to Parliament of all relevant information involved .
Recent improvements in the Commission 's reporting on utilization of fishing opportunities and on the execution of the budget lines concerned , as well as the speeded-up transmission of new protocols , deserve credit , but these improvements are far from sufficient .
They cannot make up for the continued absence of a comprehensive evaluation system which is needed to improve the basis for the Commission 's actions , Parliament 's opinions and the Council 's decisions .
Local fishing communities do not appear to be adversely affected by the activities of the Community fleet .
These communities are reported not to engage in tuna fisheries .
The Community vessels may not fish within the Mauritian 12-mile zone .
The effects of the protocol on the Mauritian economy can be expected to be positive .
In this context it is notable that Mauritius ' GDP per head is in fact higher than that of Portugal and just slightly lower than that of Spain .
The new protocol with Mauritius should be approved .
The Commission must , however , endeavour to improve its collection of relevant information and make this information available to Parliament .
To that end , it should adopt a uniform procedure of the type outlined in the Committee of Fisheries ' own-initiative report on the fisheries agreement 1997 .
In conclusion , Parliament should not be asked retrospectively to approve any protocol .
If the information was available on time , then the Committee on Fisheries and Parliament would expedite the report and make this available , together with approval , if necessary , prior to any payment being made .
I wish to refer to one amendment which suggests that , because of the importance of tuna-fishing in this area and the fact that a number of states border the Indian Ocean , it should be looked at on a regional basis .
Mr President , the EU buys up fishing rights in third countries because fish stocks are declining in its own waters and there is overcapacity in its fishing fleets .
One is tempted to ask whether the EU is in reality merely exporting overfishing by its boats to the waters of poor countries , at whatever cost .
It is necessary to ensure sustainable fisheries in the EU , but the same applies with even greater urgency to the developing countries , fish being one of the few resources available to the poorest of them .
In Senegal the fishing industry employs some 250 000 people , and it is the non-industrialized inshore fisheries that are most vulnerable .
Senegalese fishermen are worried by EU fishing operations in their waters .
It is their fish , survival and livelihood that are at stake , as was explained by representatives of the Senegalese fishermen during the deliberations on this matter in the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
It is a concern that is impossible to ignore ; the Senegalese fishermen actually asked the committee to vote against the agreement .
It is therefore difficult to share the unbounded enthusiasm shown by Mrs Pery for the new agreement with Senegal .
I have to concede that improvements have been made to the fishing agreement with Senegal , but not enough , and I can only regret that the opinion of the Committee on Development and Cooperation was not taken more into account .
The reason why we chose not to reject the agreement with Senegal but instead to demand a mid-term review is that , amongst other things , the agreement has already come into force .
What is particularly disturbing is that , although the fishing zone has been extended in principle from six to twelve nautical miles , a smaller number of vessels still have access to coastal waters to the detriment of the Senegalese fishermen .
Even though EU access to species living close to the shore has been reduced , it is still significant and represents a problem for local fishermen .
The local oceanographic research centre has reported a drop in both stocks and in the average size of species that are fished commercially .
It is therefore unacceptable in terms of both the development of the non-industrialized fishery and the fight against poverty that EU vessels should be allowed at all to catch demersal species close to the shore .
In addition , the protocol for the first time provides access to coastal pelagic species .
Pelagic species , notably sardines , are an important source of cheap protein , for the poor population in particular .
The fishing operations by EU vessels thus give grounds for concern .
The fishing agreement will certainly not help the poor local fishermen in Senegal .
On the contrary .
Although a large part of the financial compensation from the EU will be deployed in the development of local fisheries , this is not much of a consolation if there are no more fish to catch .
I strongly urge you to vote for Amendments Nos 6 and 7 and , especially , 5 , which calls for a mid-term review .
That is a condition of my voting for the resolution .
Mr President , I should like to focus on three vital points of the Pery report on the fishery agreement with Senegal .
First of all , to emphasize that for the first time this agreement covers a four-year period , which gives boat owners some stability , as well as fishermen and businessmen linked to the sector , since it allows them all to plan in the medium term .
Secondly , I should like to say that this agreement has a considerable dimension , enabling some 150 trawlers , pelagic fishing boats and tuna boats to fish , involving 48 million ECU of compensation .
Despite the fact that this is a medium-sized agreement , it is of some importance for the European Union fleet .
Thirdly , I should like to mention what I think is the most important point - although fishery agreements are essentially commercial texts , this one is proof that , when well negotiated , they can also be an important instrument for supporting the development of these countries and their fisheries sector in particular .
In this particular case , around half of the Community payments will go into developing the sector , from research to taxation , into non-industrial fisheries , into restructuring the sector as a whole , into the biological protection of resources .
I think that this is interestingly innovative and might be an idea for negotiating future fisheries agreements with a similar dimension and equilibrium .
I should finally like to congratulate Mrs Pery on her excellent work .
It is a shame that the European Parliament is losing a colleague of such calibre but I wish her all the best for the future !
Mr President , I always seem to follow Mr Cunha in these debates .
Our opinions are the same on many things but when it comes to international fisheries agreements we often differ just a little .
The Liberal Group has put down two amendments to the Senegal agreement and one on Mauritius .
The Mauritius amendment is similar to ones we have tabled before on international agreements and it is to accuse them of not being commercial agreements at all .
In fact they are highly subsidized agreements which we feel it is very difficult to justify , except by saying that if we do not pay money as taxpayers towards these agreements , we will be undercut by major fishing nations , whether it be Korea , Japan or previously the Russian Federation .
But that is a false argument and a difficult one .
These fishing agreements should be primarily negotiated by the industry itself .
There is no real reason for the state to be involved .
More than that , by subsidizing them we are encouraging a worldwide problem of overproduction and overcapacity in international fisheries which , of its own right and economically necessarily so , causes excess depletion of stocks on a global basis .
How are we to tackle that ?
One of ways put forward in FAO and WWF discussions has been that this matter should be taken up by the World Trade Organization .
It has the powers and over the next year should try to exclude state subsidies in this fishing area as much as it is trying in other areas of economic activity .
It is no different from that .
That is why we have tabled these amendments .
In addition , my colleague Mr Eisma who is very involved in environmental issues has tabled an amendment asking for a mid-term review of the Senegal agreement to check whether or not it is working correctly in terms of impact on local fisheries and the state of stocks .
We as a group would strongly support that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs pery , our Group has insisted on the need and the advantages for both sides in setting clear rules and principles to enable European Union fishing fleets continuous access to non-Community waters .
As a basic guideline , we have supported the notion that a twelve mile zone has to be reserved exclusively for local coastal and non-industrial fisheries , as they are the economic and social base of many regions in all nearby countries and in the case of Senegal the essential base for people 's food requirements and their very survival .
Let us not forget - indeed let us highlight - some of the positive aspects of this agreement , such as accessory fishing or increased financial compensation for developing the local fishing sector .
While emphasizing and recalling the effects of certain aspects of multilateral controls on fishing fleets , we have to say that we have some doubts about the proposal , albeit with limits on quantity , on access by trawlers to Senegalese fishing stocks located within the twelve mile zone .
We hope that this will be duly corrected so that we are in keeping with the whole spirit of the agreement .
I now wish to congratulate Mrs Perry who is sadly leaving us . That means she will not be producing any more European Parliament reports and we are losing a colleague who is known for bringing high quality texts before the European Parliament .
Personally and on behalf of my Group , I wish her all the best for the future .
Mr President , I am sure everyone here is aware that the Greens have fundamental problems with the European Union 's approach to fisheries agreements .
We are not opposed to fisheries agreement in principle .
But we strongly object to the way they are negotiated and the basis on which they are negotiated .
When I was doing the Madagascar report , we did a detailed study on the Madagascar fishing agreement and we found it severely wanting .
Since then we have voted against agreements .
The Mauritius agreement is very similar to the one with Madagascar , Mauritius being a neighbouring island .
Senegal presents another problem .
It is a renewal for four years and for the first time it gives access to EU vessels to the pelagic stocks .
These stocks are a major target of the large important artisanal fisheries sector and the fishermen are very worried about the impact this will have on their livelihood and the food supplies of the coastal villages .
That is why we , in conjunction with the EDN Group and Mr Macartney , have proposed an amendment calling for a mid-term review of the agreement .
We would like this mid-term review to consider the impact of EU fishing on both the fish stocks and the artisanal fishing community .
This is a proposal which is strongly supported by the artisanal fishermen in Senegal .
The review should be by an independent body and not by those who have vested interests in the continuation of fishing by the EU .
If the impact is found to be negative , we want a renegotiation of the agreement to eliminate those fishing activities which cause the problems .
I have a very simple question for the Commission and I should like to have a reply tonight .
I should like to know : if Parliament approves our amendment for an independent mid-term review , would the Commission accept such a review ?
Mr President , I should like to start by congratulating Mrs Pery on her report .
She and I had the good fortune of going to Senegal and talking to the fishermen .
Perhaps that is one reason why the agreement with Senegal is an improvement on some of the previous agreements .
One of the defects in the system is not only that we often get presented with a fait accompli but that we do not get a chance to go to the country concerned .
It is certainly not provided for by the committee 's budget .
This puts the rapporteurs at a great disadvantage .
Also , in the case of Senegal , we had people appear before the committee .
That has helped to redress the balance somewhat .
We still have problems about the timing of agreements in general , but again , I see some progress in the Senegal case as opposed to some of the others .
There are still debates about costs and benefits .
I will come back to that in a minute and would perhaps want a comment from the Commissioner .
Other grounds for satisfaction are that we have moved to a longer distance from the shore before the EU fleets can come into operation .
The big worry in all these countries is that their indigenous , traditional , in-shore fleet will never have the chance to develop or will find their catches have been scooped up by the big , powerful European fleets .
On the question of the cost of these agreements , I take issue with my colleague Mr Teverson from the Committee on Fisheries .
I would see this agreement as being an opportunity for European fishing fleets to benefit .
The criticism that comes from many parts of the Union is : why is it that only certain countries take advantage of these agreements ?
Why is it Spain , France , Portugal and Greece in particular ?
The question I would like to ask the Commissioner is : is there any problem about fishermen from other countries getting involved ?
What is the procedure ?
This is a question that is now being asked .
I would be glad to get a reply to that question .
Generally speaking , international fisheries agreements need to satisfy a twofold objective .
On the one hand , as far as the European Union is concerned , they need to allow its fleets to pursue their fishing activities on the high seas and thereby safeguard jobs in fishing and related industries . On the other hand , as far as the partner States are concerned , international fisheries agreements need to contribute to the sustainable development of their economies .
These two objectives are by no means mutually exclusive and should be pursued at one and the same time .
Overall , this has been the case with the agreement that is being proposed to us .
As regards Senegal , it is worth recalling that this country has 700 km of coastline and that 500 000 people are engaged either directly or indirectly in the fisheries sector , which alone accounts for 11 % of the country 's primary GDP and 2.5 % of its total GDP .
Senegal was the first country to sign a fisheries agreement with the European Union .
We are now about to enter what might be called a third generation agreement .
Our Group notes with satisfaction that this agreement places greater emphasis on traditional fishing which , in line with commitments made by the Senegalese government , should benefit until 2001 from a significant share of the financial compensation paid by the European Union .
The substantial outlay proposed in the area of training , and more specifically in training for fishermen 's wives , who handle the commercial management of fishing-related businesses , seems to us to be entirely appropriate .
Non-industrial fishing is to be developed from top to bottom , in its entirety , everywhere .
With this in mind , our Group deplores the compartmentalization which separates structural fisheries policy from development policy .
What I am trying to say is : would it not be better , rather than regularly breaking up large parts of our European fishing fleet - a spectacle that those of us who have witnessed it find it difficult to justify - to sell these boats to the non-industrial fishermen of the European Union 's partner States , at special prices naturally ?
Such a course of action would enable the non-industrial fishing fleets of our partner States to modernize , especially from the point of view of safety at sea and certain fishing techniques .
This proposal seems to us fully to meet the needs of many ACP countries , including of course Senegal .
This is something we would be in favour of , as indeed we would be in favour of the demand for a mid-term review of the agreement , one of the merits of which is that it extends over a longer period than its forerunners .
Mr President , we have to make up our minds ; or , more precisely , we are being asked to give an opinion on two agreements : the agreement with Senegal and the agreement with Mauritius .
I hope you will forgive me if I concentrate my attention on the island of Mauritius , once called the Île-de-France - indeed it was French from 1715 to 1810 .
And while on the subject , let me say on this important date in the French calendar , the 14th of July , that the fact that these agreements are being concluded at all is because both Senegal and Mauritius are independent States .
We have witnessed in these agreements the part played by the principle of self-determination , the right of people to be masters of their own destiny , the principle of nationhood .
These principles have , as I say , played their part , and it is France that gave them birth on 14 July 1789 .
In other words , today is not simply a national holiday but a day of celebration whose dimension is universal .
I am truly sorry that Mr Fauré is not with us today , champion of human rights that he is . It is not just the Bill of Rights of 1689 or the 10 amendments of 1787 to Jefferson 's Constitution , but no less so the 1989 Declaration that has given them a universal dimension .
We working people , we have to work even on a universal holiday !
This agreement , then , is but one in a whole series of agreements : there has been the unfortunate agreement with Morocco , which in order to help Spanish fishermen from Andalusia and elsewhere and some Portuguese fishermen had us paying out very large sums just at a time - as my colleague Mr Souchet was telling us earlier - when our fishermen , European fishermen that is , were being forced into smashing up their own boats !
There was in any case a need for these rules to be harmonized , as the Committee on Fisheries made a point of telling us in April in an own-initiative report , because the same old problems are coming back to haunt us and the same solutions are needed !
Coming back to the specific case of Mauritius , the agreement here constitutes a kind of toll allowing entry into an economic zone over which Mauritius has exercised exclusive rights since the Montego Bay Convention on the Law of the Sea , in which , incidentally , neither Mauritius nor Senegal figured very much , as it concerned principally the countries of Latin America and East Africa .
So , we have in effect a toll of the order of 20 ECU per tonne , which I believe can rise to 50 ECU if the quantities are exceeded , plus of course a financial compensation package of 1.7 million ECU .

That actually poses a problem as regards the cost / benefit analysis , the problem of a fair balance between the two contracting parties : given that the per-capita GNP in Mauritius is higher than that of the Portuguese and almost equal to that of the Spaniards , just how far should one go in continuing to give presents to people who are at least as rich as those giving the presents ?
The most interesting aspect , however , is that of cooperation with developing countries , which Michel Rocard deals with in his report .
I do of course see that that is one way of preventing immigration by recruiting crews locally , by landing fish locally , or by setting up joint-venture businesses .
I am particularly glad that in this agreement with Mauritius 110 000 ECU are being set aside for promoting skills and know-how among local fishermen .
That being the case , we cannot but subscribe to this kind of agreement which , over 3 or 4 years , the period covered by the agreements with both Senegal and Mauritius , should open up interesting new prospects .
On this point I go along with Mr Souchet .
These agreements belong to the third generation , or the third wave , of such agreements and they have our wholehearted support .
Mr President , this is the first fisheries debate since Amsterdam .
Parliament hoped that Amsterdam would bring progress in the joint fisheries policy towards the debureaucratization of legislative processes and another attempt at democratization , by increasing the responsibility of Parliament .
This is a perfectly normal political right of a democratic assembly in a democratic society .
However , our contributions to Amsterdam were ignored .
We are now approaching the year 2002 , and it is incomprehensible that Parliament is not to make any more extensive contributions to the codecision process .
The entire internal market is involved in the codecision process .
And that makes it all the more puzzling that fisheries are to be excluded , now that the period of temporary exemptions has come to an end .
We must compensate for the lack of attention paid to us by the European Council by ensuring that our work in this House is even more tightly organized and strictly supervised , and by practising greater openness .
The challenge begins here .
Parliament must grant the necessary powers to the Committee on Fisheries .
We should therefore also make the fullest possible use of the powers granted to us in the codecision process .
We must not allow the issues of veterinary law to be removed from the jurisdiction of the Committee on Fisheries , together with similar issues such as the establishment of specific laboratories for fisheries products , and so on .
Because I venture to assert that this specialized committee can rightly claim that it has the greater knowledge !
We are also dealing today with the international fisheries agreements with Senegal and Mauritius , as we have heard .
I congratulate the rapporteurs on the quality of their informative reports .
Here again , though , I must say this : in the future we are going to demand , and take action to get , greater punctuality from the Commission and the Council , greater transparency and , especially , greater powers .
The Committee welcomes dialogue and accepts constructive contributions .
But I can say with complete confidence that it will not allow itself to be used as a tool and will not get involved in any differences of opinion , including differences with other parliamentary committees , which may be harmful to those who depend on fishing for their living .
And , in conclusion , I too would like to wish Mrs Pery every success in her future position .
Mr President , I wish to endorse all the praiseworthy remarks that have been made about Nicole Pery and to add one more : her experience was very valuable for the Committee on Fisheries because she is also on the Committee on Development and Cooperation , and the two aspects are linked in a report , of which I was the rapporteur , adopted in this Parliament in May .
We have to look very carefully at the links between development and international fisheries agreements .
I am very pleased to know that the Commission really seems to be starting to do this , probably under the influence of Mrs Pery , with the Senegal agreement .
This is clearly a better agreement than agreements we have had in the past .
The three principles enunciated in that report on international fisheries agreements last May seem to have been partially heeded , but not completely .
Sustainability : yes , we have taken notice of it , but we are allowing trawlers in .
I hope it works and that we have a mid-term review .
Cooperation : clearly there was much more cooperation and , clearly , the artisanal fishermen were consulted in this case - a process which ought to continue and perhaps be made stronger in the future .
Coherence : I like the idea that a large proportion of the money in the Senegal agreement will be spent on development .
I hope the monitoring of the spending of that money will be very stringent and that we will see results over the four years .
In conclusion , I welcome the improvements in the agreements .
I endorse Mrs Langenhagen 's remarks about Parliament in relation to these agreements .
That was in the report I referred to before .
We ought to stress that this Parliament wants more say in what happens in these agreements .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , naturally I would like to express my thanks for the important work done by the two rapporteurs - both Mrs Péry and Mr Gallagher - however , I would like to thank Mrs Péry in particular for her work - not only for this report , but also for her past work on our Committee on Fisheries .
We will greatly miss her reliable and dependable work , her knowledge and her dedication to the fishing sector since her appointment to our committee .
I wish you the very best of luck , Mrs Péry , in your new post .
She will be greatly missed by all of us , but we will always have at our disposal her magnificent work , her magnificent reports , which have sometimes addressed complex issues , as you will be aware .
However , I would also now like to thank the Commission and draw attention to the new phase of collaboration we have initiated between the Commission and this House , which is marked by the agreement with Senegal .
The text of the agreement with Senegal was sent to our committee the day after it had been signed , which enabled Parliament to give its opinion in this part-session before the first financial compensation payment was made .
The agreement with Mauritius has also benefited from this arrangement between the Commission and Parliament .
I also have to draw attention to the fact that , obviously , in recent months , the forwarding of information has been speeded up in such a manner that I clearly have to praise the efforts of the Commissioner .
These are two good agreements and we should congratulate ourselves on having obtained greater fishing opportunities for the Community fleet - I refer to the agreement with Mauritius - and for having been able to extend the agreement with Senegal from two to four years , which will allow greater stability .
Therefore I do not understand why there has been a request for revisions mid-way through , when even Senegal has not requested this .
I say again , the extension from two to four years will bring greater stability for the fleet fishing there .
However , allow me to continue - the most significant aspect of this debate , to my mind , is the increase in collaboration between institutions and , Madam Commissioner , I , as Chair of the Committee on Fisheries , wish publicly to acknowledge that this is the mode of action which will enable us to continue with such work . My hope is that the situation will even improve in the future .
Forgive me , but I have heard certain things here about which I would like to ask a number of specific questions , so that the Commissioner might reply to them .
I am referring to questions as to whether the agreements are to be used only by Spain and Portugal .
Given that we are speaking about Senegal , I would like the Commissioner firstly to tell me which Member-State fleets are going to make use of this agreement .
Secondly , I would also like her to clarify the issue regarding pelagic species , as this is a matter which has greatly increased the cost of this agreement . I would also like clarification regarding which Member States requested access to pelagic species .
Mr President , in my opinion the new agreements and renewed agreements with ACP countries require new attitudes .
Not least , there must be maximum cohesion between trade and development policy .
Also , in my opinion , there must be overwhelming concern and action to preserve fishing stocks so that we have a sustainable fishing policy .
Article 130u of Title XVII obliges the EU to ensure coherence between development policies pursued and the fishing agreements .
However , the agreement arrived at with Senegal obviously undermines to some extent the development objective of poverty alleviation , because the agreement gives the EU fleet and others , I presume , access to demersal species and to pelagic species , which are the principal source of protein not only for Senegalese people but also for those peoples of Africa who live in landlocked countries .
Furthermore , there is , it seems to me , within the agreement some considerable disregard for the expanding needs of the artisanal fishing fleet and warnings about the decline in fishing stocks .
Senegal provides us with an example of the dangers , of what can happen when we take a narrow view of fishing agreements .
The EU , in my opinion , as part of EU agreements must assist ACP countries in terms of scientific monitoring , facilities for training and providing inspectors , and with the boats themselves to allow them to inspect the catches taken by ACP and EU countries , and , of course , the objective must be a sustainable fishing policy .
I wish to commend to you and to the House the Pery report and to call upon the House to give it its wholehearted support and consent .
And , as the co-chairperson of the ACP working party , I extend to Mrs Pery my hopes for every success in the future not only on behalf of this House , but also on behalf of a whole host of members from the ACP countries .
We will miss you .
Mr President , I too would like to thank Mrs Pery for her report and indeed for many important contributions that she has made in this House over the years , particularly in the area of fisheries , but also in general .
Mr Gallagher as well , I might say , is also a great expert in the area of fisheries , but we do not want to praise him too much yet , because he is showing no indications that he is going to leave here and we do not want to be taking it back at a later stage .
I have nothing in principle against the whole question of these fisheries agreements .
I support this as a normal commercial activity between the European Union and the competent Member State authorities , who have a right to sit down and make this sort of agreement with us .
I do not agree with the people who think that this ought to be a mixture of development cooperation and a commercial deal .
It is a bit futile for us to go to an independent state , make a deal with them , offer them a price and then tell them what they must do with the money .
It is fairly futile because unless we go in and manage their economies for them , we do not have the capacity to be absolutely sure that what we want them to do with that money is best for them , or indeed that they will actually do it .
My concern is the whole question of a cost-benefit analysis in this area .
I believe that all the money we spend on this ought to go to the regions in need , those areas who have spare capacity , who want to utilize that capacity through these deals .
On the other hand , if we were to take all the money we could organize some sort of a PESCA programme and devote it to these particular regions - I do not mind if it 's Spain , or Portugal , or parts of France - and ask ourselves whether , through the development of aquaculture and the creation of more efficient structures within their industry and processing and marketing , the amount of money we spend on this might in fact do much more to advance the economic welfare of these regions .
That is the question I would like to raise in this debate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to look at another aspect of these agreements .
Both of them , for the first time , are agreements on which we are consulted under the code of conduct .
The code of conduct was approved in December , together with the budget .
In that joint declaration , signed by the Council , Parliament and the Commission , the Commission undertakes to provide this House with better , and above all prompter , information on the international fisheries agreements .
Furthermore , all three institutions undertake to expedite the legislative process as far as possible so as to prevent the Commission making - yet again - payments to third states without Parliament , as the budgetary authority , having been able to give its opinion .
The unfortunate facts , however , are as follows : although this agreement exists , we were not consulted on the agreement with Senegal until three and a half months after it had been initialled , while in the case of Mauritius we were not consulted until four and a half months later .
In other words , the first payment date for Mauritius has already been overrun by six weeks , while theoretically we have just a fortnight in which to give our opinion on the agreement with Senegal before the first instalment falls due in July .
This was certainly not what we pictured when the code of conduct was signed !
And I would say this to the Council : if we are able to discuss Senegal today , we owe that entirely to the fact that the Commission has at least passed us the text of the agreement and , eventually , the finance sheet as well , though not until a month ago .
I really do think that , here again , the Commission should work faster .
But my main criticism is directed at the Council .
Incidentally , the Commission 's advance information on the renegotiation of the agreement with Senegal was totally inadequate , especially as far as the financial aspects were concerned .
The Committee on Budgets has now accepted three amendments to the agreement , which I would ask you to support .
As always , they relate to classification .
The funds for international fisheries agreements are , of course , non-compulsory expenditure .
As far as information is concerned , two amendments are designed to ensure that the failings that have been mentioned do not recur in future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall not reiterate the main points of the fisheries agreement , which your rapporteur , Mrs Pery , has in any case explained to you quite admirably .
I shall confine myself instead to making one or two observations of a more general nature on the various questions that have been raised .
Firstly , to remove any risk of ambiguity , unless I did not quite understand the translation , the agreement does in fact involve a total of 48 million ECU , or in other words 12 million ECU per annum .
Having said that , I should like to seize this opportunity to lay to rest , once and for all , some of the prejudices and commonplaces I have heard here today concerning the fisheries agreements and which , quite frankly , are beginning to drive me to despair , because I do not know what more I can do to separate fact from myth .
First of all , Mr Gallagher , I am sorry , but this agreement has nothing whatever to do with the Spanish fleet .
It is an agreement that concerns mainly the French .
It has to do with a request for access on the part of the northern States , in particular Germany and Holland .
So , before people say anything they should check their facts .
Secondly , I wish to raise the subject of poverty .
I am indeed sorry not to see Mr Morris here , because I keep being asked the same questions over and over again . I try to answer them , but then we are back where we started from .
Mr Crampton , we had a debate here on non-industrial fishing back in May , which stirred the same feelings of frustration , what with Members asking me questions and then departing before I have had a chance to reply to them .
I know everyone is terribly busy , but that is the reason for my having to repeat myself .
Non-industrial fishing in Senegal is all about a fish called the djaboï and the agreement in question allows for catches totalling 25 000 tonnes .
Let me remind you that Senegalese non-industrial fishermen , without any control or resource-management measures , are landing 400 000 tonnes of this fish .
Let us stop pretending therefore that the additional 25 000 tonnes of djaboï are going to destroy this particular resource or reduce to starvation the Senegalese non-industrial fishermen who themselves , without any controls or management , are catching 400 000 tonnes of them .
Personally , I wish the local fishermen would observe the principles of control and good management that are being imposed on European vessels .
Moving on to another matter , I do deplore , and I have myself written a letter on the subject , the very long and heavily slanted RTBF report , which I found insulting if for no other reason than that it ignored the truth .
In my experience it is normal , when doing a report in which an institution stands accused , for the institution in question to have the right of reply .
The representative of the non-industrial fishermen does of course have every right to go to Brussels to state his case , but I do feel that the other negotiating partner - in this instance the Commission - should have been allowed to give its own version .
I come back again to the question of poverty .
In view of my track record so far , I find it disgusting that I should be accused of exploiting the developing countries .
Let us remind ourselves of what is in the agreement .
It provides for 33 % of crews to be Senegalese .
The agreement states that at least 10 000 tonnes of tuna must be landed to supply local fish processing industries , which otherwise would have no work to do as , apparently , the non-industrial fishing boats do not fish for tuna .
Instead they fish for djaboï , which does not need processing .
The agreement also provides for a scientific observer to be on board .
This agreement provides for 50 % of the total compensation to be used in the fisheries sector by the Senegalese government .
But , Mrs Jöns , we are negotiating agreements with sovereign States .
Well , we can negotiate and discuss with them what is best for their country 's development , but obviously we are not going to tell them what to do , about aquaculture or anything else .
Talks are in progress and , as I say , these negotiations are with sovereign States .
My second point is that it is up to every State to carry out its own evaluation of fish stocks in its own waters .
We can do that together if the State wants it , but ultimately it is for them to decide .
We cannot go demanding that they leave the evaluation of stocks to us .
If they do not want that because the waters in question are theirs , they are within their rights to deny us access to them .
Thirdly , if the fleets , the Member State or the Partner State want it , it is possible with FIFG to sell boats from our fleet to non-industrial fishermen at absolutely special prices .
All these things are possible ; all it needs is for the fleets and shipbuilders to want it too .
Mrs McKenna , as regards the mid-term review , an annual assessment of the agreement , of the kind we have already undertaken to perform is one thing , a mid-term review is quite another .
This was never part of our negotiating mandate and it is not in the agreement that we have made with the Senegalese authorities who , moreover , never even required it .
So when you ask me to review the agreement in two years time in order , if necessary , to renegotiate it , my answer is no , precisely because the agreement has already been negotiated and because it is an important guarantee of stability for the two partners .
Frankly I find it quite astonishing that anyone should insist on a mid-term review , which does not form part of the agreement , when no-one else , not even the Senegalese , has asked for it .
And another thing . I have heard it said here that the Senegalese authorities were opposed to this agreement .
I am absolutely amazed , because in all my contacts with the Senegalese authorities , from Prime Minister to Fisheries Minister and on downwards through all the other ministries - and Mrs Pery knows this very well - I found the exact opposite to be the case .
As for those who have expressed concerns , they all seemed to have non-industrial fishing on their minds .
Let me repeat : our catch will be 25 000 tonnes of djaboï , while non-industrial fishing accounts for 400 000 tonnes .
If this sector were to apply certain measures aimed at the proper management of non-industrial fishing , that would help .
We shall only be landing 25 000 tonnes of djaboï as a by-catch , so as not to discard it .
It is djaboï that feeds the Senegalese - the only fish they eat - and it is fished by fishermen in their dugout canoes , at the rate of 400 000 tonnes , with no management of stocks .
I am telling you this to make things very clear .
I believe I have been able to give some kind of an answer to everyone , having to explain myself once more .
I am not proposing to go over the Mauritius agreement again , because everything that there was to say has been said .
I am pleased to see the beginnings of improved cooperation with Parliament .
There are always bound to be difficult moments in relations with other institutions , and even sometimes between different committees of Parliament , but I believe that the positive progress we have made together until now hopefully means that we can move on and look back on the positive , rather than the negative , side of what we have done .
The fact that this is a new agreement , which has been concluded in accordance with Article 130 of the Treaty , is proof that even between Commission departments , between DG XIV and DG VIII , close collaboration and close cooperation has been established in our pursuit of an objective that is common to us all , namely to conclude , jointly , evenly-balanced agreements , rather than agreements that are to the detriment of either of the parties .
Mrs Bonino misunderstood something I said .
The Committee on Development and Cooperation received a visit from a delegation representing the fishermen themselves , and it was they who asked us to vote against the trade agreement , because they are concerned at the fact that access has been given to their fishery within the twelve-mile zone .
That is also why we are asking for a mid-term review , if it should turn out that their concern has a basis in reality .
Mr President , it is very important that the Commissioner should confirm to this House the implication that the information in my report , which I spent many weeks preparing , was not factual .
I challenge the Commissioner in her criticism of me when she said that it had nothing to do with Spain and when she suggested that I should not have referred to it .
I would suggest to her that she should acquaint herself with the reports on both Mauritius and Senegal .
I want to put the record straight in this House .
I was not being contentious .
I was merely stating a fact .
I was not giving my own personal views but those of the Committee on Fisheries .
The report states that the increase in the number of tuna seiners has made it possible for Spanish vessels to benefit .
So I challenge the Commissioner to put the record straight here and now and not to besmirch my integrity in this House .
Mr President , that ties in with Mr Gallagher 's point .
I asked the Commissioner a direct question .
I thank her for her reply but she omitted to mention this rather critical point about how people get access to these agreements .
Is there a procedure that she could outline ?
I did not want to create a discussion about integrity .
There has been a misunderstanding .
I was just referring to the Senegal agreement .
I know very well that the Mauritius agreement is about tuna etc .
I did not want to call into question the integrity of anyone .
When I took the floor I said that the particular sentence referred to the Senegal agreement and underlines that the Senegal agreement is mostly for the French and the opening to the pelagic was at the request of Germany , the Netherlands and the French .
Regarding your request , Mr Macartney , these are open agreements .
New Member States can come in .
The procedure is as follows : normally Member States are informed of the new possibilities and then they inform their own sector .
So it is the Member States , or the COREPER , or the ambassadors , who inform their own governments which are supposed to inform their own sector .
This is the normal procedure .
Of course we could also provide information through the European Parliamentarians .
But the procedure operates in this way .
Thank you very much , Mrs Bonino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Green Paper on commercial communications
The next item is the report ( A4-0219 / 97 ) by Mrs Larive , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission Green Paper on commercial communications in the internal market ( COM ( 96 ) 0192 - C4-0365 / 96 ) Draftsmen ( ) Mr Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection Mr Arroni , on behalf of the Committee on Culture ; Youth , Education and the Media Mr Añoveros Trias de Bes , on behalf of the Committee eon Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights ( ' Hughes ' procedure )
The removal of unnecessary barriers to cross-border advertising , direct marketing , sponsorship and much commercial communication is a national issue , and as such is subject only to national legislation .
Europe 's wealth lies in its cultural diversity , and this is why we are right not to concern ourselves with discrepancies between national rules and regulations - provided , Mr Blokland , that they are proportionate and that cross-border commercial communication is not obstructed or discriminated against .
Under the Hughes procedure , our resolution has taken account of the opinions from the Legal Affairs Committee , the Committee on Culture and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Together we have sought to rectify a serious shortcoming in the Green Paper in that greater protection is needed for consumers , and a quarter of the text of the resolution by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is now devoted to this .
A vital element here is our proposal regarding the constitution of the complaints committee , which should not just be a group of officials arranging things behind closed doors , as the Commission proposes , but instead a tripartite committee in which representatives of government , industry and consumer organizations deal with complaints together on an equal footing .
The resolution forms a triptych .
First , the indents give details of all the European legislation on consumer protection and the protection of minors with which commercial communication must comply , including the Internet , because what is illegal off-line is just as illegal on-line .
Secondly , the recitals set out the basic principles of the internal market .
Finally , the main body of the text contains specific proposals to reinforce and supplement the Green Paper , a document which we nevertheless regard as a sound basis for action .
In addition to the tripartite committee , we also want the proposed mechanism for assessing proportionality to be safeguarded .
We want there to be a data bank , a European contact point and a SLIM analysis of the sector , and as the guardian of the Treaties , the Commission should apply Article 169 much more firmly and consistently .
Our resolution is systematic and well-balanced , trying to secure the internal market on the one hand , while making allowance for cultural differences on the other .
Industry too should be made to accept its own responsibilities and ensure that there are effective national self-regulatory codes in all the Member States , leading eventually to a single European code if possible .
It must also do more to improve cross-border complaints procedures for consumers .
You can therefore imagine my astonishment when a whole pile of amendments appeared last Thursday which to my mind completely undermine the internal market .
I was also very surprised to see that the Greens , the Europe of Nations Group and the Socialists all submitted amendments with precisely the same wording , and I wonder whether it is just a coincidence that it is also the exact wording proposed by the BEUC , the European Consumers Organization , in its letter of 8 July .
We reject any such attempt by the multinationals to influence us , particularly remembering how this has angered the House before .
I reject any such attempt to influence us by any interest groups whatsoever .
Finally , there is the controversy over country of origin and country of destination , which comes up several times in the amendments .
Article 59 of the Treaty says that restrictions on freedom to provide services within the Community are to be progressively abolished .
If a service complies with the rules of the country of origin and is still subject to other rules in the country of destination , then that constitutes a restriction to freedom of movement .
Article 59 aims to remove barriers so that controls by the country of origin become the norm .
Does this mean that controls by the country of destination are always contrary to the Treaty ?
No , because a restriction can be consistent with the Treaty if it is proportionate , which means that the particular measure must be proportionate with the intended objective and the objective cannot be achieved using less restrictive measures .
Under these circumstances , controls by the country of destination are permitted , and harmonization is the only way to achieve freedom of movement .
If people refuse to accept this , then there is no internal market for that particular service .
However , if the measure is found to be disproportionate , because it is designed to protect only the local industry , say , then it is incompatible with the Treaty and the country-of-origin controls must apply .
If necessary , Article 169 must be invoked .
The Court of Justice confirmed the country-of-origin principle just last week in the Agostino case .
The European Parliament did the same with the ' Television without frontiers ' directive .
It is the axis around which the internal market revolves .
And let us not forget that the country-of-origin principle gives consumers greater access to efficient complaints procedures , because it is only then that the legal system of the country of establishment of media and advertisers accused of infringements can be directly applied .
In conclusion , we hope to achieve a balanced approach which takes account both of the completion of the internal market and also of cultural differences .
Mr President , deputizing for my colleague , Mr Añoveros , and on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , I would firstly like to point out the timeliness of this Green Paper and the necessity , indeed , urgency , for the Commission to address the matter of the intervention of Community law in this particular area .
Generally speaking , the Committee on Legal Affairs supports the criteria on which the Green Paper is based and , also in general terms , subscribes to the line taken by the report by the Committee on Economic Affairs .
There is one aspect which Mrs Larive emphasized but which I would also like to stress , albeit a repetition .
Mrs Larive rightly states that the control measures - i.e. restrictive measures - adopted by the host country are , in principle , contrary to free movement .
They are therefore contrary to the principle of mutual trust established by the very nature of the internal market and are consequently contrary to the Treaty .
These measures , therefore , are only exceptionally in accordance with the Treaty .
Since the landmark 1986 Legia ruling , case law has actually been consistent on this subject and establishes two requirements : firstly , proportionality , as already stated , and , secondly , that it should not be possible to achieve this same end via other measures which restrict free movement to a lesser extent - i.e. which are more in keeping with the internal market .
We have to stress both aspects .
Again , as Mrs Larive has quite rightly stated , we should not be told that such measures are justified on grounds of consumer protection , since , let us be clear on this , Mr President , if we truly believe in consumer protection , if we truly wish to build a genuinely integrated Europe , if a specific measure in a Member State is justified on the grounds of consumer protection , what is logical ?
Leaving it to the discretion of a Member State ?
No !
The national regulations of the other fourteen Member States should be harmonized so that such consumer protection extends right across the internal market . We cannot have exemptions relating to individual Member States .
We should therefore understand that such control measures - established by the host country - are exceptional measures and are temporary until such time as harmonization is achieved .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me start with an aspect that struck me from the outset , the first time I set eyes on this Commission Green Paper .
The title ' Commercial communications ' seems to me misleading , because in fact no one reading or hearing that phrase would correctly guess what it actually means - and certainly not the consumer .
I would propose , then , that for comparable Green Papers in future the terminology chosen might be more to the point .
Because what the term ' commercial communication ' really refers to , in principle , is that the European Commission has tackled the issue of advertising law in the European single market .
Quite specifically , it deals with this question : in what circumstances , where , in what country and for what product am I allowed to indulge in advertising - sales promotion , in other words .
This is actually an area which is dealt with very differently by different Member States .
In Germany , for example , and admittedly in many other States too - very thoroughly listed by the Commission in the Green Paper - there are a whole range of highly exotic regulations .
In German law , for example , we have the Discount Act and the Bonus Regulations , and it is certainly fair to say that nothing of the kind exists anywhere else .
One effect of this is that there are constant obstacles to the free movement of services where advertising is concerned .
So the consumer , if he receives different advertising messages , cannot always judge accurately how those messages are to be interpreted , because there are widely differing legal regulations , some of which are allowed and some of which are not .
I therefore especially support the efforts the Commission is making , at last , to bring a holistic approach to this subject , and perhaps to use the Green Paper as a basis for developing additional proposals on the harmonization of advertising law .
The patchwork mechanism adopted in the past , picking out individual aspects such as comparative advertising , is an unsatisfactory one .
I think it is far better , as this Green Paper considers , to adopt a holistic approach to the subject , to approach the issue of advertising law as a whole .
I wish the Commission every success in the further course of its work .
It can rely upon the support of Parliament in this matter - that much is apparent from the opinions of the Committee on Economic Affairs and the other committees .
Mr President , opinions can of course differ regarding the degree of balance achieved by Mrs Larive 's motion for a resolution .
It all depends how you look at it .
However , I would not go so far as to imply that , if we undertake something here from the standpoint of consumer protection , it can be the subject of negative lobbying somewhere or other .
You approach things from a particular point of awareness , just as I do - I , too , was once a representative of consumer protection .
There are of course various things that could be said about terminology . The term ' commercial communication ' encompasses all forms of advertising , direct marketing , sponsorship , public relations and sales promotion , and it embraces the use of commercial communication services by the consumer goods industry and service sectors of all kinds .
That is exactly why commercial communication has become such an exceptionally important social factor today .
In principle , I am receptive to all liberalization movements that allow new forms of economic activity but - the crucial point - consumer protection cannot be disregarded at this particular time .
Indeed , the author of the report herself refers to the need to involve the consumer at every stage of the process .
That is a demand that I naturally support in principle , particularly because consumer protection , in the liberalistic system of the defence of interests based on individual responsibility , is not just a question of fair competition and equality of opportunity in the single market , as industry demands every time something is done to boost liberalization .
In reality , of course , consumer protection is something more .
The amendments tabled by my group relate to a question of principle . They relate to the involvement of and respect for the consumer , and especially to the right of our children not to be subjected to total brainwashing by advertisers .
That is the issue of consumer protection !
Even within our system of values , this is a question of democratic minimum standards , despite , and indeed because of , the great economic potential involved .
The citizen of the European Union must not have the feeling that , within the liberalized European Union , he has been delivered up helplessly into the hands of various lobbies and their interests , because otherwise he might eventually transfer that very feeling onto the European Union , which is something we do not want .
Consumer protection is a question of confidence and the creation of confidence .
It is clear to me , on the one hand , that every enterprise and every industry wants to see its own house rules transferred to the marketplace .
But we must not lose sight of the fact that the consumer , the purchaser , the user has a right to have the standards or provisions of the law applied in his home country .
The amendments tabled by the Socialist Group are designed to ensure better communication , better access to the law and a closer watch on commercial communication for the consumer , and to build his confidence .
The issue is the protection of the weak , not some new form of protectionism .
So it is important , when we come to vote , that due account is also taken of this entitlement .
Mr President , I would point out to Mr Ettl that that is what protectionists through the ages have always said .
In today 's society , commercial communication is practically what makes or breaks a product , and the considerable differences which exist in national legislation need to be eliminated if we wish to make the largest market with the greatest spending power in the world - our own European internal market - accessible to firms .
That is why this Green Paper , which finally spells things out clearly , has been welcomed with such enthusiasm .
The plethora of existing national rules and regulations urgently need reviewing in the light of European legislation and the broader aims of the Treaty .
Besides cultural differences , differences in national legislation are the greatest obstacles to the smooth operation of the internal market .
Cultural differences may well also represent a major obstacle , but if so , it is one which we hope will always remain .
If consumers cannot identify with a product because the way in which it is marketed does not take account of their specific cultural background , the product is bound to fail on that market .
In my view , it is the consumer who determines whether a manufacturer has taken sufficient account of his cultural background , and we do not need special legislation for that .
As Christian Democrats , we feel that the new spirit shown in the Amsterdam Treaty concerning the European Union 's respect for religious beliefs and the principle of non-discrimination should also be fully reflected in future directives in this field , and we will support any amendments to that effect .
My group feels that regulations in this area simply have to be based on the country-of-origin principle , as this is the only way to eliminate or prevent the barriers to trade created by discrepancies in national legislation .
As soon as you combine the country of origin and the country of destination , the situation becomes unworkable , in that businesses have to seek authorization from all 15 Member States .
Having said that , I would point out that although the internal market is important , the interests of consumers and particularly children also need to be protected against excessively aggressive advertising .
We are therefore 100 % in favour of the rapporteur 's proposal for a tripartite committee to deal with complaints to the Commission .
Parliament cannot be involved in this committee : we shall be calling the Commission to account , but our job is purely to monitor .
To sum up , my group supports all the basic principles set out by the rapporteur in her excellent report : the countryof-origin principle , the proportionality principle , and the tripartite committee without the EP but with representatives of industry , and chaired by the Commission .
We shall therefore be voting against any amendments which undermine these principles .
Mr President , if by definition ' commercial communication ' includes every form used to promote products , services and company , group or organization images , among distributors and / or consumers , it could be said that it covers everything , from serious and scientific information to the deceptive advertising and brain washing mentioned by Mr Ettl .
The Larive report does deal with the defence of consumer rights and that is welcome .
But we should like to use the very short time we have been given to emphasize a more relevant point : we must regulate commercial communications so that they cannot be used perversely so that , by using means only available to large groups , they distort or eliminate competition , by smashing opponents unable to resort to the same means .
The question is to know whether , when we hear so much about competitiveness , fair competition and protecting the weakest , there are or can be real objectives that can be put into practice , in the face of the polarization of means , even or especially those of commercial communications .
Mr President , cross-border commercial communication is a difficult phenomenon , and the rapporteur has mentioned the obstacles which service providers in this sector face in trying to cover the whole of the internal market .
Every Member State has its own rules and regulations on admissibility for commercial communication .
Are these national laws the culprits ?
Research would indicate otherwise : it is actually the differences in culture and market structure that lie behind the legislative diversity which are to blame , but this is something which Mrs Larive 's report does not take up adequately .
Moreover , the rigorous application of the country-of-origin principle tends to mean a particularly low level of protection for consumers and children .
The right to freedom of expression is something else to be considered .
This freedom involves duties and responsibilities , as specified in Article 10 ( 2 ) of the European Convention on Human Rights : it has to be protected , but it must also not cause harm to others .
In my Amendments Nos 19 and 26 , I have given a far from exhaustive list of the limits which commercial communication service providers should observe .
I sincerely hope that the rapporteur will support these proposals .
Mr President , the report which we are discussing forms a constructive and well balanced contribution to the evaluation of the Green Paper .
Mrs Larive has raised the important role played by advertisements , marketing , sponsorship , sales support and public relations in the internal market in a manner which deserves our praise . This applies both to the internal market and to activities in markets outside Europe .
The rapid development of electronic trading makes commercial communication all the more important .
Effective commercial communication enables the private purchaser to make purchases abroad more easily but , of course , this should only be on condition that illegal marketing is actively discouraged .
This is also underlined in the report .
T he report comes with a number of addenda to the Commission 's proposal .
This reflects the valuable work carried out by the rapporteur and the four committees involved .
We welcome the proposals put forward by Parliament and will , of course , take heed of them in the communication that the Commission has planned for the Autumn .
The regulations governing this area differ in the various Member States .
At this stage , complete harmonisation is scarcely an appropriate method of resolving all the different problems which can arise .
This is made clear in the Green Paper as well .
Instead , we prefer a gradual approach , where solutions are sought case by case .
This will take place as part of a structured dialogue with the interested parties and with the Member Countries .
This is dependent , in its turn , on close contact between all the parties involved and a common view of the methods to be used in tackling individual problems .
I am pleased that Mrs Larive 's report agrees with this approach .
The report supports and reinforces the key proposal in the Green Paper concerning how to assess proportionality in national actions which appear to be obstacles to the internal market .
This also applies to the proposal on targeted community harmonisation which we will be studying more closely .
The Commission also welcomes Parliament 's support and their proposals for the proposed committee on commercial communication , which will consist of a member from each Member Country with the Commission taking the presidency .
We will be studying closely those proposals relating not only to giving interested parties access to this forum but also allowing them to participate in it .
Parliament 's proposal that the committee should operate using open procedures and with clear deadlines is both logical and constructive .
Let me conclude by assuring the House that the Commission will study carefully what has been approved by the four committees involved .
We will not hesitate to table a proposal on targeted harmonisation where this proves to be necessary .
Thank you very much , Mrs Gradin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.05 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
Yesterday 's Minutes have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I just wish to mention that my name does not appear in the attendance register in yesterday 's Minutes .
This is probably my fault because I cannot remember whether I signed or not , but I was indeed present .
Mr President , this is just to inform the House that I was here yesterday but was not recorded in the Minutes .
I would be grateful if that could be changed .
Very well . The necessary corrections will be made .
Mr President , may I draw attention to the fact that yesterday one of our National Front colleagues was encouraging us to celebrate the 14th of July and to dance the carmagnole , while at the same time the mayor of Toulon was banning the festival arranged by the anti-racist organization SOS Racisme , on this French day of freedom ?
This is clear evidence of double standards at Toulon and at Strasbourg .
Mr President , yesterday we placed on Wednesday 's agenda the vote without debate on an interinstitutional agreement on the financing of the common foreign and security policy .
Our aim in doing this was to apply Rule 143 of the Rules of Procedure , which requires the Committee on Budgets to have first adopted the report that it is putting before this House .
Well , the Committee on Budgets met yesterday evening and was unable , for lack of time , to examine the text in question .
And even had it been able to do so , if Rule 104 of the Rules of Procedure is applied this can only lead to it being put down for the next part-session .
I should like to add that what we are dealing with here is an interinstitutional agreement , one that is going to apply to all the institutions , that has not been the subject of any debate in any national parliament , that has not been discussed at all by the Foreign Affairs Committee , and which we are being asked to adopt here without debate !
Moreover , at a time when people are quite rightly accusing the European Union of being insufficiently democratic , this procedure shows a flagrant disregard for the citizens of the European Union as a whole .
I am therefore asking you not to approve the part of the Minutes that deals with adopting this item and including it in the agenda ; otherwise we shall be forced to resort to one of the other options available to us under Rule 143 to ensure that the opportunity to hold this debate is not spirited away from us .
And in any case , we need to wait for the Amsterdam Treaty to be adopted by the various Member States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr FabreAubrespry 's intervention comes as no surprise , since he informed the Committee on Budgets yesterday evening that he would be making it .
The text in question is an interinstitutional agreement concluded with the Council and the Commission in connection with the second pillar of the Maastricht Treaty and concerning the funding of foreign-policy measures .
The document in its present wording has been on the table since the conclusion of the negotiations in Amsterdam .
The fact that 4 July is the date given on the cover page is simply due to the document having become a report .
The document , however , has been on the table since Amsterdam ; in other words , the countdown to the amendment deadline has been running since 30 June .
We in the Committee on Budgets have arranged another extraordinary meeting of our own for this afternoon to discuss the details of this report , because a motion has been tabled for a decision to be taken without debate tomorrow on the basis of Rule 143 .
I assume , Mr President , that this fulfils the formal requirements and would therefore ask you to reject Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's request .
Thank you very much , Mr Samland .
Since the Committee on Budgets is meeting this afternoon or tonight , I think that this debate can be kept on tomorrow 's agenda , as scheduled .
Are there any other comments ?
Mr President , the Minutes do not record my presence yesterday .
I would like that corrected .
Thank you very much , Mrs Ahern . That has been noted .
( The Minutes were approved )
Decision on urgency
I call on Mr Colino Salamanca , the representative of the Committee on Agriculture , to speak on the basis of the item .
Mr President , yesterday the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development decided to approve the urgent nature of the Commission 's proposal and to submit it to the part-session for consideration as part of Friday 's agenda , without a report .
I would , however , request that Mr Funck , whom our committee has appointed to present a report , be allowed to give the House an informal oral report , under paragraph 5 of Rule 97 of the Rules of Procedure .
( The request was approved )
Legal protection of biotechnological inventions
The next item is the report ( A4-0222 / 97 ) by Mr Rothley , on behalf of the Committee on legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions ( COM ( 95 ) 0661 - C4-0063 / 96-95 / 0350 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , a journalist from the Wall Street Journal recently asked me if I was a patent attorney .
I told her I was not and that I had no particular interest in patents .
But people with genetic diseases becoming curable does interest me , and people finding work interests me too !
And that Europe should not fall any further behind in biotechnology and genetic engineering , that interests me !
( Applause ) By adopting this Directive we are not opening any floodgates .
We are meeting our obligations under the international convention , in which all Member States of the European Union and the Union itself have pledged themselves to grant patent protection for products and processes in all areas of technology .
This patent legislation has been created in the United States and it has been created in Japan .
It is only a matter of the European Union upgrading its patent law to this international standard .
That is all .
The European Patent Office does issue patents in this area .
These patents , however , can be challenged by national courts , and there is therefore a real danger of legal fragmentation in Europe , a fragmentation that would be poison for investment in Europe .
That is why we need this Directive .
By the way , I said that this patent protection already exists in the United States and in Japan .
I do not believe that the Americans or Japanese are morally corrupt .
How absurdly presumptuous of us to think we are morally superior to the others !
It will no doubt be asserted in the course of this debate that this Directive will obstruct research .
That , of course , is untrue .
Patent protection is a prerequisite of research .
How can any research be conducted at all if inventions are not made public ?
We know from experience that effective patent protection and research go hand in hand .
Or has research in the United States perhaps hit rock-bottom , or has research in Japan hit rock-bottom ?
Nothing could be further from the truth !
If we do not create this patent protection , research will , of course , continue .
But it will continue behind close doors .
We shall not have the opportunity to follow and discuss the development of biotechnology and genetic engineering .
We shall also , incidentally , destroy the small university research establishments and the small and medium-sized businesses that live from selling their patents to pharmaceutical companies .
Those who want to do that should vote against the Directive !
But they should not subscribe to any more resolutions against unemployment .
( Applause ) It is asserted that discoveries would be patented under the Directive .
That , of course , is untrue .
Nobody in the world who knows anything of patent law would make that claim , with the exception of Greenpeace 's legal experts .
It is asserted that treatments will be patented in the future .
That , of course , is untrue .
Diagnostic and therapeutic processes will be no more eligible for patenting than they have been in the past .
That is expressly stated in the recitals of this Directive .
It is asserted that parts of the human body would be patented .
That , of course , is untrue .
We have made that crystal-clear in the text of this Directive .
Parts of the human body will not be patented .
What will be patented are products made by human hand and nothing else !
We have made that crystal-clear in Article 3 .
Paragraph 1 describes what discoveries are , and paragraph 2 describes what inventions are .
There are some forms of dyslexia for which I cannot be held responsible !
( Laughter ) The European Parliament has been under considerable pressure over the last few days , not only here in the House .
The Protestant Church in Germany , my own church , allowed Greenpeace to stage a children 's crusade against this Directive at its General Assembly .
( Heckling ) I assume that , for the youngsters who took part in it , this was the first time they had heard the word ' patent ' .
Enough of this nonsense !
( Applause ) Let us have done with this nonsense and come back to the subject of patent law .
This law will not be able to solve the ethical questions that arise in connection with biotechnology and genetic engineering .
That is beyond the power of patent law ; it is a constant task of society and its legislatures .
It cannot be done by patent law alone .
Patent law seeks only to prohibit the unauthorized use of someone else 's invention for commercial purposes .
That is all .
It is , if you like , part of the law governing competition .
And for that reason we need this Directive to strengthen competition within the European Union .
We need it urgently .
That is why I ask for your support .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is a serious matter .
This is the first time in the history of humanity that patents are to be issued in respect of living material .
And when Mr Rothley says it is a matter of protecting products made by human hand , we cannot fail to observe that what is to be made patentable today has indeed been produced by human hand .
Generations of human hands , Mr Rothley , have contributed to a colossal cultivation effort to create what we live on today , the basis of our subsistence .
And along come interested parties now and look at this creation , at the way in which the farming community has been able , as a matter of course , to develop and sow seed , to breed and rear animals and to feed us with the fruits of its labour , and these interested parties decide they would like a slice of the cake .
They certainly do provide a genetic boost to the process of livestock development and land cultivation , but the purpose of this genetic boost , which they subsequently patent , is to give them rights over the entire stock of seed and animals .
It is a question , Mr Rothley , of coining in on something that has always been a matter of course .
That is what the Agriculture Committee wanted to prevent at all costs .
We have emphasized the so-called farmer 's privilege .
This is nothing more than the right of farmers to raise their livestock and to sow their seed .
We were unable to have this view adopted in its entirety , but we did manage to enshrine something of this right .
And , Mr Rothley , the Committee on Agriculture also called for removal from the draft Directive of the clause on reversal of the burden of proof .
I ask the House to accept the proposal of the Agriculture Committee on this point too , so that those who wish to claim rights under a patent must prove that they are indeed the legitimate holders of the patent .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy voted by a large majority in favour of the proposal for a directive that we are today debating , asking the Legal Affairs Committee to refine it further .
I cannot but be in complete agreement with what Mr Rothley has said and want only to highlight a couple of points .
There is substantial demand for the products of biotechnology : demand from citizens , particularly those whose circumstances are rather special - and this mainly involves the pharmaceuticals sector ; and demand from sectors , such as agriculture , in which products of this kind could bring substantial benefits from many points of view .
What we therefore need to determine is whether Europe , whether the European Union , wants merely to be a consumer and , therefore , importer of the results of research into biotechnology , via the products in which biotechnology has been used , or whether it wants also to be a producer and , consequently , a potential exporter .
The protection of biotechnological inventions , which we also need to enable the single market to function better , is vital in order to provide a favourable framework for the development of European industry in the sector , with obvious advantages : for employment , as Mr Rothley has already said and I can only emphasize further ; for the development of research in a rapid growth sector ; to generate value added , income , well-being ; to - and I venture to stress this - make it possible to retain greater control of the sector , particularly given the ethical and other concerns that many people have .
But we shall be in no position whatsoever to express those concerns if we continue to be dependent on , and therefore marginal to , the industrial research and development work being done elsewhere in the world and primarily - as we have already been reminded - in the United States and Japan by European industries also .
Mr President , about 40 % of today 's world economy is based on genetic resources from developing countries .
These so-called developing countries also contain 86 % of the world 's plants .
Every fourth medicinal drug is manufactured from the genetic resources of tropical plants .
Eighty-three per cent of known genetic diversity and in situ knowledge is held in Africa , Asia and Latin America .
The German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation writes that , according to estimates by the International Ethnobotanical Society , the indigenous peoples in those three parts of the world possess 99 % of the entire body of knowledge on useful biological diversity .
In other words , this means that the bulk of the resources we are now discussing , resources for biotechnological inventions and for patents awarded or potentially awardable in respect of such inventions , come from the Third World .
These biological resources are too often used without the consent , or indeed against the wishes , of the indigenous peoples or local communities in whose country they are found ; we might even say they are being stolen .
The use of these resources for biotechnological inventions depends on traditional wisdom , such as knowledge of their medicinal properties or cultivation methods .
This means that the multinationals make huge profits from the biodiversity of developing countries and from the traditional knowledge of their inhabitants without a decision-making process , without consent , without legal protection and participatory rights for the populations concerned and that they even patent human or biological material .
The best-known examples are perhaps the Guayami Indians in Panama and the Hagahai in Papua-New Guinea or on the Solomon Islands .
That is why it is especially important to strengthen intellectual and cultural property rights in the countries of the Third World and particularly among indigenous peoples .
When Mr Rothley says jobs are at stake , that is nothing but polemics .
Multinational corporations are acquiring the property rights of the world 's population .
So what we actually need is a convention on traditional rights .
That is why our committee has rejected this report .
We have agreed with Mr Rothley on the inclusion of the principles enshrined in Article 8j of the Convention on Biological Diversity .
The committee will have a free vote .
If the recital based on this Article is accepted , the position will have changed .
As someone involved in Third World policy , I can say from personal experience that no jobs are created by these activities ; they only serve to swell the coffers of the multinationals .
The current system under the European Patent Convention is better .
The harmonization envisaged in the new Directive will bring us no nearer to a common convention for the people of this world .
Mr President , the opinion of the Environment Committee seeks to restrain Mr Rothley 's report .
When ordinary people hear that we are debating patents on genes , the immediate reaction is everywhere the same : you cannot take out a patent on that kind of thing , regardless of the fact that a substance can be patented if it is possible to characterize it by its structure .
This instinctive repugnance is something we should take seriously . We should at least make the patentability of genes as restrictive as possible , so that the patent only covers the industrial application for which it has been sought .
We should also do that for the sake of the patients .
Patients suffering from rare diseases or cancer , for which knowledge on a great variety of genes is needed , are gravely concerned that it may not otherwise be possible to pay for the research .
However , it should not be possible to patent methods of diagnosis .
Official circles in Denmark have been particularly concerned to ensure that it is not possible to patent procedures for the modification of the genetic identity of human body cells .
This would , for example , make it impossible to take out patents on cosmetic interventions in human beings .
I therefore urge you to vote for my amendment to paragraph 2a of Article 9 - not paragraph 2b , as has been incorrectly indicated .
The amendment excludes the possibility of such a patent .
Finally measures should be taken to ensure that , in accordance with the Convention on Biological Diversity , agreement has been reached on the equitable sharing of economic benefits before a patent is issued in those cases in which biological material is obtained from a developing country .
In my Amendment No 65 I am asking , for reasons I do not have time to explain here because unfortunately so very little speaking time has been allowed , that the sentence on publication be dropped .
Mr President , after eight years we can at last be hopeful of a successful outcome for this important text - Mr Rothley has reminded us of all the issues involved - and for this we have to thank the combined efforts of our rapporteur , to whose work I pay sincere tribute , and the successive chairmen of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , currently Mr De Clercq , and Mr Casini before him .


I have just three observations , since I have three minutes .
The first thing I want to say is that the draft directive that has been put before us answers the main objections that had led to the first draft being rejected , as you will recall , in March 1995 : the ban on germ-line therapy , the protection of animal rights , the setting up of an ethics committee and , most importantly , the clear commitment to a ban on patenting the human body ; and on this point I believe that the wording our committee has come up with , which eliminates the ambiguities in the Commission 's initial draft , could not be clearer .
My second observation concerns the slogan ' No patents on life ' , a slogan with which we have been bombarded at enormous expenditure of resources , which I cannot help wondering about , in a flood of letters , cards and press releases , of which we have all been a target .
As if the directive 's opponents had a monopoly on protecting life and its supporters were messengers of death !
Let me say quite emphatically that , for me , protecting life means not standing in the way of progress in medical research .
Protecting life means giving hope to children suffering from cystic fibrosis .
Protecting life means opening up new prospects in the fight against malaria .
Protecting life , when all is said and done , means stamping out hunger in the world by increasing the available food resources .
Protecting life means finding new types of crops that are more economical with our soils and require fewer fertilizers and pesticides .
The so-called cautious approach that some people advocate is a luxury that only well-off westerners can afford !
My third and final observation . I should like to say a word on exceptions to patentability , which has to do with methods of intervention on embryos .
Let us be clear on this point : there was never any question of patenting the embryo , any more than the human body or its parts .
Certainly not .
However , this measure does cause problems , let it be said , between the PPE and ourselves .
It is a measure that springs from an initiative of one of our PPE colleagues and which , because it involves public order and moral standards , does affect , let 's face it , not just patentability , but also research .
As we know , research on embryos is banned in Germany , and I respect this decision , I respect the conviction behind it , but this very same research is authorized , and strictly controlled by legislative provisions and codes of practice , in the United Kingdom , Spain , Belgium and France .
It is necessary not only to make progress - it has been done in fields such as in vitro fertilization - but also to open up new prospects in the fight against nervous disorders , or against Alzheimer 's disease .
Ladies and gentlemen , you will understand that my group cannot accept the ban imposed by this paragraph .
We respect your convictions , which derive from your history , your culture and your religion . I am asking you to respect ours too .
I have to tell you that we shall be voting against this paragraph .
But we shall of course be voting in favour of the Rothley report .
Mr President , I believe that the anguish that has surrounded this directive is justified . It is justified because what this directive is doing is statutorily regulating the activity of man who having first observed and laid hands on innermost matter , the atom , is now observing and laying hands on the most intimate aspects of living matter .
There are problems , and they are by no means trivial .
The task is made all the more difficult because this is a field that is difficult to understand , in both legal and biological terms .
Patent law is a difficult area , this is a new field and biology is hard to explain to those unfamiliar with the subject .
Finally , there is a great deal of pressure from European pharmaceutical industries that want to be able to compete with the United States and Japan : they hold out the prospect of more jobs , but they need to make huge investments because , these days , inventions are not the product of a stroke of genius but the result of an effort over a long period by many people .
Moreover , cultural circles and environmentalists are bring pressure of another kind to bear : they fear that the environment will be polluted and that huge resources will be seized by the few to the detriment of the many .
How are we to take a view on this ?
I happen to have today read an interview with New York 's former mayor , Mario Cuomo , which , I think , provides the right steer and which I should like you to hear . Former mayor Cuomo said that , in the field of biotechnology , the sole focus should be life which is the most precious thing that man has to protect .
If we place life , which is the most sacred thing we have , at the centre of our political , philosophical and scientific considerations , then progress will be painless .
I am therefore in favour of establishing the directive in full because I am thinking of life , of the life of the many sick people who are waiting for it and have written to us .
Some may perhaps have had some relationship with the industry 's lobby which wants the directive at any cost ; but it is a fact that there are sick people ; it is a fact that pharmaceuticals have already been discovered using the new techniques of genetic manipulation and that other , more important ones may be found .
But for the very same reason that I am favour of the basic fabric of the directive , I also believe that guidelines and categorical limits have to be established .
Those limits are the ones established by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights in the amendment to Article 9 .
However much I wish to defend the directive , I believe that its long passage , that it not over today , would be prejudiced if all of the limits provided for in Article 9 were to be changed and abolished .
I have to say that Mr Rothley is right here when he says that what we want to protect through patenting are the inventions and not genes or genetic sequences .
But in that case we need to take to follow through principle that it is the invention that is to be protected and not the gene , so that the invention is linked to a specific statement of industrial authorization .
We have already said this in the Legal Affairs Committee and are repeating it here , and we hope that this is the direction the final text will take .
Moving in that same direction , I ask you to consider , specifically because of the importance of the directive , the need to retain as it stands the committee 's amendment to Article 9 .
Mr Rothley , it is not an old ideology that is at issue ; there is no reference to abortion or generally experimenting with embryos .
It says only that human embryos should not be used for economic gain and that in an article which , rightly , provides that no suffering should be caused to animals .
That is all it says !
It seems to me that the European Parliament , which sees the value of human beings as the basis for seeking investment for the benefit of man , should have the courage to engage in a simple process of reconciliation by accepting this limit along with the others .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the text of Mr Rothley 's report has been long and difficult in the making .
In 1995 , as you will all recall , the House rejected the text produced by the Conciliation Committee , taking the view that it did not make plain enough the parameters and limits required in an area as sensitive as the patentability of biotechnological inventions .
Thanks to the detailed and new work done by Mr Rothley - whom I congratulate on behalf of my group - we now have a substantially clearer text that is able to meet the demands both of those who wish to guarantee European firms a favourable legal framework that does not perpetuate the disadvantage they suffer compared with their US and Japanese competitors and of those who are rightly determined not to abandon the protection of human beings and other living beings .
The new proposal for a directive , based on Article 100a of the Treaty , contains a number of important points of reference .
In particular , it makes a distinction between a discovery and an invention ; it refers to the principles of existing legislation regarding the conditions of patentability ; it rules out patentability for germinal genetic therapies applied to human beings ; it establishes that the human body and parts thereof in their natural state cannot be deemed to be patentable inventions ; it is designed - and this is a requirement that was stipulated and needs to be borne in mind - to protect the interests of farmers in the livestock sector .
The amendments adopted by the Legal Affairs Committee are designed to rule out patentability of , among other things , plant varieties and animal species , biological procedures for the production of plants and animals , parts of the human body at its various stages of development ; the simple discovery of the sequences contained in genes ; the procedures for human cloning or measures to modify the germinal line of human beings ; methods which make use of human embryos ; and inventions the use and publication of which are incompatible with ordre public and morality .
The latter , in particular , is an element that will certainly be the source of a great deal of work for the courts and lawyers because we know just how different the concept of ordre public and morality can be , depending on the time and the place .
Nonetheless , this is part of a general solution arrived at within the Legal Affairs Committee and one which , we believe , should be endorsed in all its aspects because , if it is not , it could again undermine the credibility of this House .
We believe that at a time when all eyes in Europe - and not just in Europe - are focusing on the work this House is doing , the worst thing would be were we to prove yet again to be incapable of taking a decision .
Mr President , as others have said before me , this directive is particularly important because it harmonizes patent law in the Member States in the area of biotechnological inventions , in order to clear up the legal uncertainties and to avoid the risk of it all falling apart .
I should remind you , as does the excellent rapporteur Mr Rothley , whom I do congratulate , the purpose of patents .
It is to reward inventors for their creative activity , to provide an incentive to invention and to promote technological innovation as an essential factor of economic growth .
It is through the protection granted to patents that the heavy , even massive , investments - not to mention the return on them - in research and the industrial exploitation of the results can be secured .
The market in biotechnological products is a fast expanding one .
It is estimated that this market will be worth 80 billion ecus in the year 2000 , a quarter of which will be spent on new drugs .
At present , unfortunately , Europe is nowhere : in biotechnology , in immunology , we are being beaten on our own continent by American firms .
The first question then is this : is the European pharmaceuticals industry going to be allowed to catch up and make us less dependent on the United States for new drugs as well as agrochemicals ?
Are we somehow going to develop the means to take charge of our own health ?
That is the aim of the directive .
But , of course , since it involves research and patents on living tissues , the ethical aspects naturally absorbed our attention for many long hours .
As has already been said , the directive states plainly that the human body is not patentable , that human cloning is banned and as is altering the human gene line .
All possible precautions to prevent possible abuses have been taken and , consequently , the objections concerning the risks of gene manipulation are unfounded , especially as the directive provides for the setting up of a European ethics committee .
I would say in conclusion , therefore , that for us the directive as it stands , with the amendments voted through in committee , constitutes the middle ground between the need to pursue scientific progress in biotechnology and the desire to protect human dignity and integrity .
To those who once again seek to impede - as they tried to do some time ago by calling for a moratorium on research - all advancement of human knowledge , ban all research and inventions to do with biological material , to them I would simply say that they would be bearing a very heavy responsibility if they were to crush all hope of a cure in those for whom gene technology offers the only chance of escaping a life of disability , even of escaping death itself .
In all human progress it is always possible to discern a dark side , where inventions are put to a perverted use .
It is for us , for our democratic countries and institutions , to avoid this risk , not through a Luddite approach to scientific discovery , but by ensuring , by means of proper controls , that the ever deeper understanding of the human body is devoted exclusively to combatting physical and mental afflictions .
That is what the directive , as amended , sets out to do , which is why the ELDR Group will of course be voting for Mr Rothley 's report .
Mr President , presumably , the aim of such a directive and , consequently , of the Rothley report is to attempt to protect the public interest by extending patentability to biological material .
However , such a claim must be considered cautiously since patents on genes and cells will give private concerns virtually unlimited control over the basic elements of life . Not only is no in-depth thought given to this risk but also the report avoids the issue , maintaining instead that ethical matters are unconnected with patent law .
Moral issues are , in fact , not discussed - a debatable point if one takes account of the fact that all law , including patent law , is concerned with responsibility , duty and obligation .
Everything relating to the basic elements of life gives rise to moral considerations .
Yet , however questionable this exclusion of moral issues may be , it appears more questionable still to claim that - from the standpoint of consistency - the public interest is being defended when , in reality , legal instruments are being created which enable the industry to claim that it has invented natural processes and the circumstances are such that industry might gain a total monopoly of control .
What guarantees do we have that such control will be exercised to the benefit of the public interest ?
None , except the good will of whoever is exercising that control .
It is financial considerations - not public ones - which will shape the decision as to how and when an invention is to be exploited and who is to benefit from it , given that control over whether a patented invention is exploited or not is granted to the proprietor of the patent who will naturally make decisions regarding it on the basis of his or her own interests .
This is a worrying scenario and , moreover , in Mr Rothley 's report , emphasis is given to the need to eliminate legal uncertainties and to ensure that the law on patents is interpreted uniformly in the Member States of the Union .
However , in practice , this uncertainty continues , given that this directive is in conflict with the principles of the Convention on the granting of European patents , expanding the scope of patents beyond currently established limits .
I believe that reflection is in order .
The granting of patents should not depend on exclusively technical considerations - applications should be closely examined in terms of their wider social implications .
The Commission 's new proposal has not attempted to examine such wider social implications or explore alternative forms of intellectual property rights which reward genuine innovation without guaranteeing the monopolistic powers of control conferred by patents .
All this should mean that we consider the issues calmly and arrive at a political decision which goes beyond the desire to satisfy the demand for biotechnological products .
Such a political decision should also pay heed to the ethical question .
My Group calls upon this House to base its deliberations on moral principles .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , whatever is possible is permissible here . Is it right , Mr Rothley , to allow things just because they are possible ?
We are debating principles today in a debate which transcends boundaries but for which quite new boundaries need to be set .
At the heart of this debate is nothing less than responsibility .
It is about morals and ethics .
It is about the value of life .
It is about the inviolability of nature .
It is about human rights .
Do this call for growth and progress and the illusory promise of more jobs not represent a threat to social welfare and the rule of law ? Do they not undermine the principle of respect for nature ?
The patenting of living organisms and rejection of the inviolability of the individual are the result of an overweening arrogance that no longer knows any bounds .
Who do we think we are , regarding evolution as private property and claiming ownership rights in respect of a life that has evolved over millions of years into millions of living organisms , our common heritage with its indescribable wealth of biological diversity ?
Who do we think we are , believing we are entitled to set ourselves above the flora and fauna of this world in order finally to enslave humankind and turn people into exploitable commodities , into mere biological material ?
Responsibility towards ourselves and our children 's children can only mean strict and consistent rejection .
No patents for genes , plants , animals , people or their constituent parts !
We are committed to freedom of research and development .
But we are opposed to any situation in which this freedom is liable to be restricted by excessive patenting , by the inaccessibility of scientific knowledge , due to its having become the preserve of individual groups of companies and hence of economic interests , and in which the right to acquire and share knowledge is a question of money .
And we are committed to morality in politics .
Above all else , morality means independence .
We are not the caretakers of an unbridled competitive ideology in which policies are subordinated and attuned to these interests .
I appeal to our social responsibility , which is something other than subjugation to the policies of BASF , Boehringer or whatever they are all called .
I should have liked to see some of this independence from the rapporteur , because the separation of politics and morality can only result in immoral policies .
Mr President , colleagues , two years ago the European Parliament rejected at the third reading the initial draft directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions .
A unique event in the annals of the codecision procedure , this negative vote let it be known that our Assembly was not prepared to adopt illdefined legislation that has such a bearing on what human beings are most sensitive , namely their genetic heritage - gene pool - the opening of the book of life .
One year ago , at the time of the public hearing organized by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , we witnessed some fascinating and contrasting debates between the experts invited here to express their views on the legitimacy of patenting scientific research and development . That , I hear you say , was yesterday .
Yes , but unfortunately between yesterday and today the debate has progressed very little and the blurred areas are still with us .
Commercial interests have been increasingly insistent , the same pressure groups have been vocally advancing the same arguments , and throughout these two years the Commission , confusing speed with haste , has drafted a new fresh text which , while noticeably different , has still not altered the original concept , not one iota .
What the Commission is actually doing is laying down a basic premise according to which patent law is relegated to a piece of technical legislation which , therefore , would more or less be confined to dealing with ethical questions , even when this law applies to living human material .
In other words , it is setting the limits on patentability solely on the distinction between invention and discovery , thereby cleverly stifling all philosophical and political debate on the future of mankind .
One or two questions come to mind .
How is it that the Commission has never wondered about the pertinence of applying the principles of patent law to living tissue and , in particular , to human living tissue , nor about the pertinence of adapting these principles ?
It is really quite a fundamental point .
What are we to make of the report passed by the Legal Affairs Committee ?
It is in fact an imperfect clone of the Commission 's draft .
A clone , in the sense that the Legal Affairs Committee manifestly takes the same strict legal view as to the manner in which patent law should apply to living human tissue .
Imperfect , because it is necessary nevertheless to emphasize the considerable improvements introduced by Members to Articles 3 and 9 of the text , which spell out the relevant ethical principles .
The fact remains that the affirmation of ethical principles is always unsatisfactory .
No higher principles , such as the preservation of the human body from exploitation or respect for human dignity underpin measures of a legal nature .
Amendment No 81 , tabled by the ARE Group , seeks to re-establish the supremacy of Man and the idea that science should be a tool at the service of the individual , and not the other way round .
Even when these ethical principles are explicitly written down - I am referring here to Amendment No 11 of the Legal Affairs Committee which establishes the principle of excluding patentability of the human body , its parts and its products - the principle of excluding products of the human body , such as blood , tears , sweat , sperm , is not to be found in Article 3 , Amendment No 49 , which deals with the non-patentability of the human body .
This lack of rigour on the part of jurists who are so insistent on the strict application of patent law , I find surprising .
Another inconsistency is the affirmation , in Article 4 , of the principle of excluding from patentability plant species and the animal species , when what is meant by the animal species is not even defined .
I also find it regrettable that ethical principles are diluted in a heterogeneous whole .
What is the point of including , in Article 9 , a reference to the basic legal principles of high moral standards and public order , in drawing up an exhaustive list of the types of genetic manipulations that are to be strictly prohibited , and therefore non-patentable , and in including a reference to the quantification of pain in laboratory animals ?
Does not legal rigour justify having a statute dealing specifically with the human body ?
It is inept and misleading to try to present an ethical principle as being common to animals , plants and human beings .
The Commission and the Legal Affairs Committee have not done that .
They are therefore going to be condemned by our Group if our proposals continue to be ignored .
Mr President , the subject tackled by the Rothley report is a difficult one which , as others have said on occasions , is of direct concern to every delegate in this Parliament and touches upon the deeply-held convictions of each one of us .
I also cast my mind back to the questions that arose on that difficult day , 1 March 1995 , when the time came for us to cast our votes .
It strikes me that this is a subject on which it is not possible to have a Group vote , as I have heard suggested now and again .
It is up to each one of us to search his or her own soul and conscience , and in what I have to say I shall be speaking for myself .
To begin with , let me say that I have some sympathy with the argument that the European Union needs a directive in this area . It is true that we do have patent law at international level ; this fact is mentioned in the draft that we have before us .
There are also the various national laws : in France , for example , there is the Law of 29 July 1994 . But there is probably a need for something more , something to introduce at least a measure of harmonization and will make for greater efficiency at European level .
Clearly , whatever we fail to do ourselves will be done elsewhere .
I must admit that I also have some sympathy with the argument that we do need to have treatments for a whole host of diseases .
Serious diseases , often of genetic origin , affect millions of people .
But I , like many of my colleagues , am wondering about our very real ethical concerns .
Have they been taken sufficiently into account ?
There is of course a need for a directive that will allow biotechnological inventions to be patented when - and only when - such inventions are of real use to society ; a directive that offers a meaningful response to suffering .
The human body is not patentable ; only products created by Man can be patentable .
The work of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has been useful .
Have we gone far enough ?
I am wondering in particular about the patentability of animals .
The results of the votes on the amendments will give us the answers to these and other questions .
Even though , a priori , I am for the time being inclined to vote in favour , I shall wait to see the results of the voting before finally making up my mind .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is absolutely no good reason why the European Parliament should cut off its own nose .
And that is the danger today .
On 1 March 1995 , after difficult and intensive negotiations , we rejected by a clear majority a directive on the patenting of biotechnological inventions .
Today we are dealing with this matter again .
The wording is new , the content old .
I could take the easy option and suggest that we vote ' no ' as we did last time .
That would be wrong .
Biotechnological inventions help people , not only in medicine but in other areas too .
So these inventions must be protected , not for the sake of interested companies ' bank balances but for the benefit of the women and men of our countries .
The discovered parts of the human body must not be redefined as inventions , which would make them patentable .
It is unacceptable that individual organizations should have a sole right of disposal over these .
Genes and gene sequences must remain the common property of humanity and be freely accessible to researchers for the benefit of all people .
That is the political decision before us .
The existing law on patents has nothing to do with this .
It is capital-centred and does not focus on people .
Our duty as Members of the European Parliament is to serve 370 million children , women and men .
This obligation underlies amendments 71 to 76 .
That is why we tabled them .
Let me repeat that I am not against the patenting of biotechnological inventions .
I am against any attempt to patent human parts , animals and plants , to declare such discoveries to be inventions , thereby making them patentable .
Mr President , this is now the tenth year of discussion and consultation concerning the Directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions .
Part of the reason for this interminable process is the fact that the legal categorization of this Directive as a singlemarket directive designed to harmonize patents law in Europe has repeatedly been lost from view .
Time and again there have been attempts to limit or even to reduce the scope of patent rights by overloading the Directive with rules which have no basis in patent law .
Three aspects of the Directive are under discussion : the legal , the economic and the ethical aspects .
Harmonization of the Member States ' legal provisions in this domain has become necessary as a means of countering the divergence between the development of legislation and that of jurisprudence in the Member States .
The danger of further legal fragmentation must be confronted .
We need legal consistency .
In the economic domain , it is a matter of encouraging inventions and innovations , not of promoting imitation .
The competitiveness of European industry must be fostered , and European researchers must be motivated to remain in Europe , to conduct research in Europe and not to emigrate overseas .
To that extent the Directive is also a key instrument of European employment policy .
How and to what extent ethical aspects are to be integrated into the Directive has always been the real powder keg of this Directive .
This has been demonstrated again by a number of today 's speeches .
Patent law governs the legal relationship between the inventor and third parties .
It does not govern the actual right of utilization .
Although patent law lays down that inventions cannot be patented if their publication or exploitation would be contrary to public policy , the fact remains that both research and the use of research findings are governed by other laws , such as the Genetic Engineering Act or the Embryo Protection Act .
Public policy , or ordre public , is defined by the central provisions of the various national constitutions and the statutes derived from them .
In other words , patent offices are not responsible for controlling technological development .
In the form in which it was adopted by the Legal Affairs Committee , the Directive merits our full support .
The vital thing now is that those who are aware of the importance , and hence also of the limitations , of patent law should prevail and that this Directive can soon be adopted .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when in March 1995 we voted on the first directive on the patentability of biotechnologies , I voted in favour .
Today , there are at least two reason why I am pleased that that directive has been revived : firstly , because I am convinced that the present directive is better , because the definitions it contains are more precise , as has been stressed by others who have spoken before me . Secondly , because we have had the remarkable scientific achievement of the cloned sheep and , more recently , the announcement that it is possible to manufacture blood plasma using biotechnology .
These innovations have made it possible to extend the public debate and actually to compare the imaginary with the possible and perceptions with knowledge .
We may wonder whether during this 18 month delay , research into biotechnology and the biotechnology industry in Europe have suffered a competitive setback compared with their American and Japanese counterparts and whether capital and jobs have been lost .
I fear the industry will confirm that this has indeed happened .
The importance of this issue and the new area of life we are penetrating , public suspicion of the progress of science and technology , which is sometimes confused with certain doubtful exploits in the area of human procreation , mean that we have to exercise great caution and be considerate of sensitivities .
It therefore seems to me to be very important that , moving beyond the directive we are approving , all of those involved in this frontier sector should undertake to enhance the information available in such a way as make it easier to understand and dispel the fear that comes with ignorance .
I have great confidence in the ethics committee that has been set up and in the debate that we in the Committee on Research and Technology shall be pursuing further in the context of the Fifth Framework Programme .
Mr President , the European institutions have been discussing the subject of patent protection for biotechnological inventions for over ten years now , and since I have had the honour of being the chairman of the Legal Affairs Committee , we have had no less than 15 meetings on the new Commission proposal between January and June this year , resulting in 250 amendments and 47 compromise amendments .
So you can see that the institutions in general and Parliament in particular have been treading extremely carefully in dealing with this delicate subject , on which it goes without saying that all views should be heard .
Have we now reached the limits of what is humanly possible in biotechnological research ?
Some people would say yes , while scientists think that we have only just begun , so it is up to us as politicians to provide a clear and correct legal framework .
Looking objectively at the text which is now before us , I think it tries to strike a fair balance between those who wish to go further and those who oppose any research whatsoever , between the technical and the ethical .
I would call on everyone here to have the courage to face up to this new challenge , and to ensure that we introduce appropriate , clear and fair legislation to control our own inventiveness and our constant urge to push back the limits of our ability .
Mr President , as everyone here is aware , biotechnology has developed rapidly in many areas .
The economic and commercial interests involved are enormous and serve to stimulate financial appetites .
It is undeniably true that in this area Europe has definitely failed to keep up with international competition .
One of the ways of meeting this scientific , industrial and commercial challenge is to make up the lost ground and to harmonize national legislations .
This would make it possible to open up research activities and to put an end to market segmentation .
At the conclusion of the codecision procedure , this directive was rejected by the European Parliament in March 1995 because the ethical dimension had not been taken sufficient account of .
Since then , the Commission has submitted a new draft directive on the protection of biotechnological inventions by patents , at the same time setting out the conditions and the exceptions to patentability .
It is true that some of Parliament 's proposals have been taken on board , but once again the ethical requirements that the patenting of human tissue makes indispensable have not been adequately taken into account .
I would draw attention to the fact that my country prohibits the patenting not only of the human body , its parts and its products , but also of the knowledge of the total or partial structure of the human gene .
These ethical principles should , in my view , be embodied in the draft directive .
This is vital if serious violations are to be prevented and human dignity is to be safeguarded .
The argument advanced here is that such restrictions would hinder research .
I really cannot go along with that , as researchers would be the first to alert us .
I therefore believe that the directive as it stands would leave the door open to every possible abuse and is still geared to satisfy strictly commercial interests .
Mr President , genetic resources , patents and their economic control are the key questions of the coming millennium .
With unlimited patentability , life itself and all living plants and animals would become an industrial product .
Even human life would be exploited by this directive .
The genetic resources of our planet must not be monopolized in the private hands of a few companies .
At the moment the European Patent Convention draws a clear line between inventions and living material .
First of all , discoveries such as genes are not patentable ; plant and animal varieties and procedures for the breeding of plants and animals are excluded from patents .
To photocopy the genes and then declare that an invention is a travesty of science .
The pressure that industry has exerted on politicians in order to ensure that the patent system includes living material is intense .
The way this directive is being pushed through is contrary to acceptable political decision-making .
This requires open discussion and informed decision by those given a mandate by their citizens .
If the Commission has sought to prohibit Commission employees from freely disseminating information to the public , this would be an attack going to the heart of our European democracy , and I want an answer from the Commissioner on this point .
Commissioner Cresson gave this House an assurance on the banning of human cloning , but the directive does not ban patents on the product of human cloning .
That a proto-human being could be cannibalized for spare parts cannot be contemplated .
Patients suffering from inherited diseases have been told that patenting is necessary for the development of therapies .
The reverse is true : the patenting of human genes will create problems for the development of therapies .
Free and immediate access to information , i.e. in the human genome project , is the prerequisite for the beneficial use of this information .
Patents on the gene would mean that a single biomedical company could completely control all future research and medical development leading from the isolation of a specific gene .
This would not foster research but kill it .
It would also make the possibility of genetic testing for a disorder such as breast cancer so prohibitively expensive that it would be beyond the scope of the public health services .
While new techniques will soon allow rapid and inexpensive analysis of genes , if a patent has to be paid on each gene analysed , testing for breast cancer predisposition could become prohibitively expensive .
One of the key issues is the question of whether doctors and medical personnel will be free to diagnose and treat people without a royalty payment to the patent-holder .
Current law prohibits patents on methods for the treatment of the human body by surgery or therapy and diagnostic methods practised on the human body .
This is removed by the draft directive .
I urge colleagues to vote for Amendment No 91 by the Green Group which proposes such a doctor 's exemption .
An example of the problems raised is the case of the breast cancer gene already referred to .
The US patent-holders , Myriad , have applied for a Euro-patent and are seeking to charge over 2 , 000 dollars for its use in screening .
If the directive is passed , there are serious implications for our access to food and medicine .
Our gene cells and body parts and our resistance to hereditary disorders would become the monopoly property of the companies that hold the patents on them .
This would legitimize trade in such items as blood plasma and transplant organs which are now prohibited from sale in many Member States and are the subject of a complex donor network organized by the national health departments for the public good .
For example , the granting of a patent on umbilical-cord blood could deny access to these blood cells to anyone unable to pay for them .
Colleagues , the Clinton administration in the US has sought to move US health care towards a European model .
If we now move our European health service towards an American model , leaving aside the public good , the citizens of these Member States will not forgive us .
Mr President , colleagues , a debate that presents itself in a purely legal guise may conceal more important questions , and we are seeing today , first of all , just how much is at stake economically , as Mr Monfils recalled a short time ago , and as the barrage of lobbying to which we have all been subjected rather crudely reveals .
We are also seeing what can only be described as an ideological clash between humanism and liberalism , and on top of that we have some interesting cross-currents muddying the more usual political divisions which have been revealed for example by the speech of our colleague Mr Casini , or the thoughtful speech of Mr FabreAubrespy .

So , is what we are debating here today really a legal problem ?
If it is , then we have our various national legislations , we have a European convention , some intimations from the European Observatory , and we have a worldwide agreement reached within the framework of the World Trade Organization .
Well , I do not believe that this is a purely legal problem but rather - and we need to be on our guard here - it is an extension of the scope of patentability to include living tissue .
If it is technical or economic problem , the draft directive and the report are based on a prior assumption : it is patents that open the way to technological progress .
Is that actually true ?
For my part I believe quite the opposite , that patents , as Mr Telkämper said a moment ago , often simply allow the weak to be robbed by the strong .
One could be cynical and choose , for economic reasons , to side with the strong , but that would not be my personal choice in this matter .
An another thing : who says that the system of patents necessarily helps progress ?
I know of a thousand examples which show that patents , because of the possibility of their being bought out , can actually stifle scientific and technical progress .
I myself believe that we do most certainly have an ethical problem .
Everyone in their own way , the Commission and the rapporteur , are saying to us : ' listen , let us not talk about morality , let us not talk about ethics , let us not talk about humanism , that is not where the question lies ; it is all to do with law , with trade , with business ' .
Personally I do not go along with that at all and I do not believe that one can accuse of obscurantism people like Mr Monfils and other speakers who feel a kind of medieval terror in the face of technological progress .
I have listened to the remarks by Mrs Roth , Mrs Ainardi and Mr Scarbonchi : many of us believe that this text should have had a moral and ethical preamble explaining the technical choices we would have to make in retrospect .
We know that man has acquired the means of total self-destruction and the means of infinite self-replication .
This progress cannot therefore be limited to its technical and commercial aspects .
It was not I who said : ' Science without conscience ruins the soul ' .
Now it is true that the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has improved this text .
We have been listening attentively to this morning 's debate and we shall hear what the Commission has to say in response , any overtures they might make , and we shall see what happens to the tabled amendments before we come to any final decision , but as the directive stands at present our Group is not in favour of its adoption .
Mr President , the debate on this directive has focused over the last year on technical legal aspects , rather than ethical considerations .
I have nothing against this as such , since the legal content of the text has been much improved .
However , I do still have considerable misgivings .
The Commission and the rapporteur , Mr Rothley , have both chosen to give a broad interpretation to the TRIPS Agreement , to the effect that human genes , once identified and isolated , can be patented .
They claim that this interpretation is the only proper technical solution , and that all other suggestions are based not on technical considerations , but on sentiment .
I have two reactions to this .
The first is ethical , based not on cheap sentiment , but on the conviction that man is God 's unique creation and thus cannot , either in whole or in part , be called a human invention .
Isolating a gene is , in itself , a technical tour de force , but calling genetic material taken from the body an invention is somewhat presumptuous .
Furthermore , such a patent would inevitably have a very broad scope when it comes to new applications using the gene in question .
Secondly , I think that adopting a technical legal approach to a problem does not imply that there can only be one correct solution , as Mr Rothley claims .
There still remains a freedom of choice which politicians have to exercise responsibly .
In my opinion , the Commission document and the Rothley report both do their best to twist the terms invention , innovation and technical application so that the human gene can be made to fit into the strait-jacket of patent law .
The interpretation given in the Gebhardt amendment seems much more natural to me .
I therefore feel that there is a much more valid case for patenting products or production methods based on the discovery of a gene .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the thrust of the Rothley report on the proposal for a directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions has , in my view , been brought well into focus by those who have spoken , including Mr Casini .
The passage of the report in its final form has been a difficult one , but it seems to me that we have achieved our goal with the confirmation that : life has to be protected , the embryo must not be exploited for financial gain and the industry has to be protected from US and Japanese competition .
I shall not discuss the merits of the amendments which we shall be debating tomorrow at the vote .
We in the Alleanza Nazionale shall be voting in favour of the report as a whole and those amendments that are designed to protect life , the embryo and morality - and on this occasion morality and politics will have to work together - but not those which will have the effect , from a legal and biological point of view , of distorting the physiological in the strict sense of the word .
I should like now to say a few words about patents .
I agree with the Committee on Development and Cooperation that patentability of living entities has a negative impact , at both an ethical and a practical level , for the human race , the animal kingdom and the environment .
To conclude , therefore , we need to avoid patents on the following : the human body , parts of the human body , human tissue and all genetic material derived from human sources ; animals , parts of animals , animal tissue , genetic modification processes , plants , seeds , vegetable tissue and other reproductive material .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have to safeguard life , protect morality and avoid distorting what the Eternal Father has given us .
Only in that way will we be able to meet the challenge of the times while at the same time making progress in research .
Est modus in rebus , as Horace put it !
Mr President , I do not feel that the importance of these discussions has to be emphasized any further .
It suffices to take note of the amount of information - sometimes disinformation - which we Members have received concerning this directive .
In principle I would like to point out that we should resist all attempts to manipulate this directive - ' manipulation ' means saying things that the directive does not say or asserting things which are allegedly necessary and which are already contained in the directive .
I have been listening to much talk of morals and rights , morals and politics , and I totally support these views , but this has nothing to do with the directive .
The directive itself upholds moral principles , confirms the need to observe good practices and to maintain public order and a number of assertions are made concerning matters which are intolerable .
Moreover , the directive is being asked to give more than it is able to .
In Spain , there is a song which goes ' I went to sea for oranges , something the sea does not have ' , quite obviously , and here , too , we are sometimes asking for the impossible .
What we are dealing with here is a law on patents .
There are other ethical standards .
The Commission has a Working Group on ethics , and at these very Council of Europe headquarters , approval has been given to a convention on the protection of human rights vis-à-vis manipulation of a medical nature .
All this already exists and already forms part of the background against which this directive is being formulated .
Nor do we have to succumb to slogans .
I believe that the previous directive collapsed mainly because of the existence of a slogan which ran ' No patents on life ' . Fortunately , in these discussions , there has been a different slogan - ' Patents to promote life ' .
There are also those who desire patents in order that life should continue .
In conclusion , I feel that I must recommend that everyone should read the directive before voting .
On a closing note , I would like to congratulate Mr Rothley because not only has he largely captured the feeling behind the amendments but has altered practically the entire directive , has made it more systematic from the outset , and it is my belief that the majority of those of us who are members of the Committee on Legal Affairs feels that we are properly represented by the work he has done .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should also like to begin by thanking the rapporteur .
The draft directive before us is undoubtedly of huge economic importance to Europe .
Nine million jobs depend directly or indirectly on the type of basic conditions we create for biotechnology .
Patent law , however , is but one of these conditions , and I believe that many other things are also important ; for example , we also have to remove all bureaucratic obstructions .
As a doctor , I most strongly warn against making patients into pawns in this primarily economic debate .
That applies to both sides , so the applause was perhaps premature .
If some here are suggesting that the adoption of the directive cannot fail to bring about enormous advances in the treatment of genetic diseases , the least I can say is that there are divergent views among medical scientists .
Those who see potential problems in the absolute protection of DNA material also have sound arguments on their side .
Let me say this quite clearly to both sides : we do not know !
Politicians always want straightforward answers , but science cannot provide straightforward answers to this question at the present time .
And I must also reiterate that the development of diagnostic resources , better diagnosis , will not necessarily benefit patients if treatments are still twenty or thirty years away .
To put it simply , caution and prudence are of the essence here .
It is of decisive importance to our group that certain ethical boundaries are drawn in this directive .
One of these concerns intervention in the human germ line , while others relate to the patenting of methods that involve the use of human embryos and to animal welfare .
And it is also especially crucial that the cloning of human embryos is totally banned .
Cloning violates human dignity .
All of the political forces in this House agreed with that view when the appearance of Dolly the sheep brought human cloning into the realms of possibility .
The time has come for us to stop talking and to start taking action .
In this directive we must therefore unequivocally prohibit the cloning of human embryos .
It is not enough only to exclude implantation in the womb , in other words reproductive cloning , which is what the Commission 's group of advisers would like .
Firstly , even experimentation with embryos is despicable and offends against public policy and morality .
But secondly , and I would ask you to listen carefully just before I finish , what exactly is a new invention ?
Implantation in the womb is already known .
Birth , fortunately , is still a natural process .
So surely nobody can seek to patent these things .
The only step on the way to a cloned human being on which we have any power left to impose limits is the cloning of embryos .
And the road to Dolly was paved with numerous sheep embryos .
We do not want a host of human embryos to pave the way to a cloned human being .
That is why I ask you to support Amendment 55 and especially the last two subparagraphs .
Mr President , we had a great battle with Mr Langer in 1995 to defeat this directive .
At the time , Mr Langer was staunch in his defence of plants and animals while I was for the embryo and therefore human beings .
Combining those two elements , human beings and plants and animals caused a great deal of confusion in people 's minds and caused much time to be lost .
Had they been kept separate , we should long since have entered into competition with the United States and Japan , and we need that for development in Europe and to create jobs .
The Rothley report is today being submitted to us once again .
I think that the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has done a great job .
I personally approve of what they have done .
I call for Article 9 in particular to be kept as it is and invite the House to adopt it as it stands , without changing anything .
Mr President , not surprisingly this debate has generated huge public interest and I think that it poses a challenge to this Parliament as a legislature to face maturely our responsibilities .
The Rothley report , in my opinion , as the product of a prolonged debate , is an effective , balanced and reasonable proposal and I congratulate the rapporteur .
Mrs Roth , speaking earlier for the Greens , spoke of her belief in the need for morality in politics .
I share that belief strongly which is why on this occasion I feel at ease in supporting this report and do so in good conscience .
A clear distinction is drawn between discovery and invention .
Patents on human bodies , on human cloning , on embryos and on altering the human germ line are all banned in the draft from the Legal Affairs Committee .
Farmers ' privilege is explicitly protected for reseeding and breeding animals on their own land , as is the case today .
Emphasis is placed by Parliament on the need to respect the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity and to protect against fears of bio-piracy in respect of the underdeveloped world and the environment , and these two are important obligations which cannot be set aside .
Again today my mailbox is full of letters , not least from groups in my own country representing those who suffer from genetic and other medical disorders currently without a cure , requesting support for this measure because it offers them some hope .
In conscience I will not vote against offering that hope .
We have also suggested an ethics committee . For all of these reasons I believe that this is effective but also balanced , and this time round , unlike before , I am happy to give it my support .
Mr President , may I begin by thanking Sierra Gonzalez for her contribution , which I fully support . I also think that current legislation must be made to satisfy society 's new demands , particularly with regard to the ethical and social impact .
There ought to be , as indeed there are , big differences between technological industrial inventions and those issues under discussion here today .
Here , the patent holder is being given even greater licence to exercise power and control as a result of the monopoly position in which he may find himself , and I see this as a potential obstacle to development , particularly of small and medium sized companies .
I think that the discovery of the function of a gene , for example , should be just that , a fantastic discovery which should be available for the service of the global community and not primarily for the interests of private , economic profit .
I very much regret that politically we have not progressed towards real , practical proposals which promote global co-operation instead of commercial competition , especially as there is such a serious issue at stake here , the health and biological diversity of mankind , not just in the European Union but in the whole world .
Mr President , Commissioner Monti , the European Parliament would forfeit its credibility if it adopted the Rothley report , which is totally unacceptable in terms of ethics and morality .
Parliament will be a laughing-stock if it adopts a report to which it was still opposed on 1 March 1995 , on the basis that the Commission keeps making it vote until it comes up with the desired result , until Parliament has bowed before the genetic engineering industry .
The new proposal still provides for the patenting of living organisms .
Even human genes can be patented ; the only proviso is that they must be isolated from the human body .
If Parliament adopts this report , it will have set its seal on one of the greatest and most scandalous property redistributions in history .
Life would become a commodity , a product .
As Klondyke fever sets in , humankind will be reduced to a source of raw materials which can be exploited at will .
That will violate human dignity .
The human race will be degraded to mere biological material and the human body to a marketable commodity .
If Parliament approves this report , the ethical floodgates will come under intense pressure .
Human dignity and selfdetermination will be bartered away in the marketplace .
For the first time since the abolition of slavery , it will be possible to claim property rights over human beings .
Is our life an invention ?
Life is not an invention of genetic engineers .
Not even the cloning of body cells , as was done in the case of Dolly the sheep , or the patenting of biological weapons are excluded in the Legal Committee 's report .
For the first time , treatments and diagnoses of patients will become patentable .
That will restrict treatment options in a life-threatening manner .
The patenting of living matter will lead to an huge upsurge in the commercialization of medicine .
Doctors will no longer be free to choose the most effective treatment .
A two-tier system of health care will be firmly established .
The directive does not set out a fundamental position on genetic engineering .
The patenting of a medicinal drug produced by means of genetic engineering will be entirely unimpeachable , despite the fact that the gene in question , which has existed for centuries , could never be called an invention .
The patenting of genetic material will stifle applied research and impede innovation .
That emerges clearly from the patenting of umbilical-cord blood cells , which has erected a barrier to applied leukaemia research .
Patents will establish a monopoly on all uses of genes , including potential future uses .
We are using this directive to privatize nature .
I therefore appeal to you to reject the report as it now stands and to adopt the amendments tabled by the Green Group .
That is the only way to ensure that the moral floodgates are not forced open here in the European Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after eight years of indecision it does seem high time now to change the European legislation on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions .
The text put forward by the Commission this time does largely take account of the vitally important ethical standards of natural law on the matter , in particular excluding the human body from that which can be patented .
Even though in this area we should have liked the text to have been a little more precise and , to that extent we would have been in favour of adding to the text as it presently stands Mrs Sandbaek 's Amendment No 84 , which would impose a total ban on all manipulations involving not just the human body , but embryos as well .
We do of course need to take into account those patients who are hoping for advances that would enable them to be treated more effectively thanks to these new technologies .
Lastly , it is worth reminding ourselves of what the purpose of patents is : it is to reward inventors for their creative activities by giving them the exclusive right to do as they wish with their invention for a period of twenty years .
They are an encouragement to innovation , investment and job creation .
Well , we know that our legislation as it stands today leaves us powerless in the face of American and Japanese competition .
According to the rapporteur himself , as he says in his explanatory memorandum , only 24 % of patents accepted by the European Patent Office are of European origin .
Well , it is my belief that behind the outpourings of moral indignation that we have heard and which , in some cases , I am sure are genuine , I think that quite often there are powerful transatlantic economic interests are behind these attitudes .
And it would not be for the first time either .
For these reasons , therefore , I shall be voting for the text , which represents a good compromise between the various constraints under which our legislators have to work , but I would once again stress the need for Mrs Sandbaek 's Amendment No 84 to be added to the rapporteur 's text .
Madam President , in recent weeks Members of this Parliament have been subjected to a barrage of misinformation on this subject , which has been orchestrated by the Green movement .
On BBC Prime Time , at 7 a.m. this morning , the item on this debate was largely inaccurate in relation to the content of the draft directive .
The key phrase of the Green propaganda machine has been : ' no patents on life ' .
As Mr Verde i Aldea mentioned a few moments ago , it was the same two years ago .
One of the very sad things about the current discussion is that the campaign against the directive has ignored fact and ignored the very substantial changes that have been negotiated to allay legitimate concerns and fears that genetic research will involve the reproductive system .
It is a great pity that the changes that have taken place have not been recognized by the opponents of the directive .
We have to recognize - it is a very unpalatable thought - that most of the medicine we take does not actually effect a cure : it only relieves the symptoms .
Vaccination and antibiotics have dealt with many of the life-threatening illnesses of the past .
As we live longer we are subjected to a different type of disease : cancer , heart disease , Parkinson 's , Alzheimer 's .
These are all diseases which have a genetic element in them and the developments in biotechnology and genetic engineering bring some hope that there might be a cure .
I am supporting the directive not just on medical grounds but also because biotechnology brings a cleaner world ; , it brings a world which is more energy-efficient ; and , I believe , it offers us the hope not only of a longer life but of a healthier life in the future .
The opponents of the directive should ponder what they are trying to prevent .
Madam President , if we were able to distil the maximum benefit from the DNA technologies and at the same time control the associated dangers , we would have found the best way to support investment in that sector .
Today , an important tool for the encouragement of biotechnological investment is the patents system , which by rewarding inventors for the time , money and experience they devote , acts as an incentive for investments of that kind .
In practice , however , legal protection is complicated by social , ethical , scientific and legal factors .
Since this Parliament 's failure to establish an appropriate legislative framework two and a half years ago , the legal protection of biotechnological applications remains an exceptionally sensitive , public and open issue .
In part , this reflects the fact that by definition biotechnology includes the application of technology to living organisms , including man .
As is natural , patents related to matters involving life itself generate strong feelings .
The purpose of today 's debate is to clarify some of the doubtful aspects so that legislation can go ahead .
In the case of DNA technology the debate creates conflicts because it is difficult to define when and which of the elements of a specific technological application constitute inventions and which discoveries - given that patents should in my opinion only be granted for inventions and innovations and not for discoveries - and ones which must also result in a biotechnological application .
In the case of DNA technology , precisely because the gene or the cell or the human body and its respective parts pre-exist when they are discovered , there is no ' invention ' and there can consequently be no protection by patent .
However , if inventors succeed in perfecting a method for isolating a gene which can be used ex vivo to produce the human protein which it codifies , then that method can be patented .
It is precisely in this respect that we ask the Commission and the rapporteur to clarify Article 3 ( 2 ) , which does not make it clear whether patents can be granted for genes , which in my opinion are the subject of discovery and not invention .
Here , it should be stressed that regardless of what can be done with a gene , its structure and the information it contains existed already before its use and consequently the gene , as such , cannot constitute an invention .
In contrast , its use , which could lead via new techniques to the production of a new substance with biomechanical applications , certainly is an object for legal protection .
Even a possible modification of the gene , leading to a new structure , is eligible for protection by patent provided that it is associated with a specific biological application .
We therefore express our serious reservations because , with the present version of the text , patents will also be sought for natural genes that already exist and whose description , I repeat , constitutes a discovery .
If we accept that patents should be granted for natural genes , this would result in what I would call an oligopolistic exploitation both of the genes themselves and the proteins that they codify .
Overall , and subject to the reservations expressed by what I have said , which I hope will be taken into account because there are amendments related to it , I am in favour of the motion for a directive , because the legal protection conferred by this directive will contribute to protection for biotechnology , which will encourage its continual expansion into areas with an important impact on health and disease , nutrition , environmental protection , agriculture and other important areas of human life and activity .
Madam President , it is not my wish today to go back over the technical aspects of patentability , but rather to focus on those aspects that have to do with the patentability of living beings .
Thanks to the excellent work of the rapporteur and the European Parliament , the new directive now takes account of ethical and social aspects in being based on a coherent approach .
There is a difference between discovery and invention : a gene is not life - one has to make a distinction between the whole and its parts .
Genetic engineering is not about the manipulation of embryos : it is important to distinguish between the cellular machinery and the passing on of hereditary traits .
The compromise amendments ensure respect for the living being from its conception until its ultimate death , the non-commercialization of the human body and of its parts , the banning of any manipulations involving embryos or germ-line cells , the outlawing of cloning for purposes of reproducing the human species .
For my part , it seems to me ethical to ensure recognition of the added value associated with the intelligence and creativity of human beings , without which there can be no lasting progress .
The new directive is not only based on the harmonization of patent law , but also takes account of the characteristics that are peculiar to human beings and to the living world ; it protects inventors , it safeguards preferential treatment for farmers , allows the development of products resulting from biotechnology to satisfy the need of sick people and their families for treatments for leukaemia and cancer thanks to cell growth factors , treatments for haemophilia , for diabetes , thanks to purified , non-contaminating products - I stress the fact that they are non-contaminating - all of these more effective than the products used at present .
It makes it possible to treat not only those major genetic diseases such as cystic fibrosis and myopathy , but also certain rare diseases , the so-called orphan diseases .
Finally , let us not forget that a patent is not an exploitation licence .
Let us not confuse the protection of inventions with the marketing of products derived from biotechnologies , which really owe more to subsidiarity .
In the preparation of such a directive our Parliament has exercised its responsibility of democratic control with a view to securing recognition for research and researchers and for the economic competitiveness of the European Union in the respect for life , respect for human beings and respect for the rights of the individual .
Madam President , all that can be said on this issue has really already been said .
Unfortunately , it has become something of a dialogue of the deaf and there are also a number of inaccuracies involved , which Mr Adam also pointed out earlier .
The deciding factor for me , when my group and I adopted our position on this , was something which Mr Pompidou has already mentioned , and that is the fact that it is patent legislation which is under consideration .
Everything which can be patented does not automatically gain a licence for use , at national level for example .
All too frequently during the debate we have forgotten that we are in Europe .
We have a European patent tradition which has meant that traditionally we have set strict standards for patents and required a high level of detail in all applications .
We have a European Convention to protect human dignity in the application of medicine and biology ; this also applies to patents .
I hope that biotechnological research will help us to make progress in all those medical challenges which the experts have spoken about here in this Assembly .
The real inequality affects those who would survive only if they were able to afford 200 000 marks for a drug , but do not have the means to do so .
Ladies and gentlemen , looking at the other side of the coin , we should also be sufficiently humble to say that this is a new form of patent and that , today , we do not know what the consequences of research in this area will be .
So , if the unacceptable occurs , we must be prepared to review the legislation .
This is why it is important that the Commission and the ethical committee report back to this Parliament .
Madam President , speaker after speaker has brilliantly succeeded in showing us what is unacceptable in the report by Mr Rothley .
For my part I shall concentrate my attention on just one aspect of this report .
Artcle 52 ( 4 ) of the European Convention on patents , which serves as the basis for all national legislations , excludes methods of treating human or animal bodies involving surgery or therapy , as well as diagnostic methods .
This provision does not figure either in the Commission 's draft directive or in the report by Mr Rothley and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , although it had been included in the previous draft .
Two amendments tabled by the Greens seek to reintroduce this provision .
Why ?
Because we for our part believe that there are dangers in patenting such methods - dangers to the rights of patients , dangers to medical progress and dangers to advances in knowledge in general .
Let me give an example to illustrate this : the American company ' Biocyte ' has been granted a patent in respect of the blood cells from the umbilical cord .
This patent covers not only the cells in question , but also any therapeutic use to which they may be put .
Numerous clinicians and researchers working in the field of bone marrow transplants are against , both on the ethical grounds that I just mentioned , and also because they say that what we are talking about here is not an invention so much as a technical development - simply isolate the cells and freeze them - which really adds nothing new to the sum total of human knowledge .
I believe that the current debate about this patent , which is being challenged by numerous researchers and doctors , risks tipping the balance in favour of ' Biocyte ' .
The Rothley report undoubtedly gives pre-eminence to the economic and technical aspects of the debate . It confuses the interests of sick people suffering from genetic diseases with those of the pharmaceutical industry which holds them hostage .
To that extent we find the report quite unacceptable .
Ladies and gentlemen , in view of the present importance of this draft directive , as well as its far greater future importance , I do not intend to deal with the opportunities it offers .
These have in any case been sufficiently discussed already .
My purpose is rather to draw attention to the dangers that might lie ahead if we approve this draft , dangers which we should bear in mind when we come to cast our vote .
What I mean is that the prospect of short-term gains should not induce us to put our future in hock to this extent .
On the contrary , the reservations expressed by numerous experts should be taken seriously and examined carefully .
Let me give you an example to illustrate the importance of our decisions . The draft before us lays down that the human genome and the gene sequences it contains are to be patentable .
That must be firmly rejected , for the human genome in any form is common property to which anyone should have unhindered access .
Reserving that right for individuals would enable them to monopolize knowledge of the uses and applications of the genome .
Another argument against the patentability of human DNA sequences is that it would prevent the use of specific sequence variations by anyone other than the patent-holder and would thereby hinder research .
For these reasons we shall reject the directive , and we know that our position has the support of the 1.2 million fellow Austrians who signed the national petition on this subject .
Madam President , in the short contribution I am about to make I do not want to enter into the details of many of the passages of this very important directive , nor into the technical and scientific details which this is not the place to describe or explain .
We in the Italian delegation of the Socialist Group consider that the result achieved by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , particularly through the efforts of the rapporteur , Mr Rothley , is balanced overall and the product of careful and keen study .
We consider that it should be supported , even though there may , clearly , be amendments designed to improve or clarify it .
We should remember that we are basically deal here with a very precise element , namely patent law and the fact that this directive makes a clear distinction between discovery and invention .
A discovery is not and cannot be the subject-matter of a patent .
Only an invention can be patented : the product then of an intellectual process of research which needs this guarantee if it is to provide a fundamental point of reference for industrial development also .
We think that the ethics committee that is to be set up has an important role to perform , even though it should not have direct legal function .
This is not an ideological or teleological debate on life but a lay instrument designed to guarantee , regulate and harmonize a European area for biotechnology - an area that is now more than ever necessary if we think about what is happening at an international level .
If Europe follows the example of the American system and we work together , by 2005 - according to expert forecasts - biotechnology will really take off and become competitive , providing work for between 1.5 and 3 million people in Europe , while at the same time guaranteeing the right to health and the development of research and industry .
If this is not done , if the industry , politics , research and the mass media do not work together , then Europe 's budding biotechnology industry will never flourish , and , as has already happened with information technology , Europe will become a biotechnological dependency .
Madam President , any speech made at this stage of the debate enables one to state , quite simply , ' I reject this ' and ' I support this ' .
Well , then , I reject the empty rhetoric we have had to listen to today in this House , I reject the value judgements and totally gratuitous attempts which have been made simply to bring discredit - I would almost describe this as personal discredit - and I support the significant contributions we have also heard .
The first of the latter came from you , Mr Rothley .
You have both my recognition and my admiration .
I also support the important statements we have heard from my illustrious and admired colleague , Mr Casini , and Mr Cot 's clear observations , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's sharp commentary and the well-informed contribution from Mr Pompidou .
I could , quite simply , end here , yet I will go one step further .
I will be voting for the Rothley report and I will be voting in favour despite the fact that , in my opinion , it contains a number of significant technical shortcomings , such as amendments 42 and 43 to recitals 39 and 40 , which are incorrect as I see it , or amendment 45 to paragraph 2 of Article 1 .
I shall also be voting in favour , irrespective of the result , of subparagraph 2d ) of Article 9 , i.e. the issue of the use or the patentability of inventions in which embryos are used .
Why am I doing this ?
I am doing so because the darkest , deepest and most atavistic convictions come together in this Aleph which is current biotechnological research , an industry which , in 2000 , will have a turnover estimated at ecu 83 , 000 million .
In addition , this situation affects every single one of us , but still Europe looks to the past . The law , once again , is not only three paces behind social reality - as the German classicist used to say - but way behind social reality .
Because , let 's not forget - by way of illustration - between 1981 and 1995 , 1175 DNA patents were granted worldwide .
We are not legislating for the future , we have to keep in step with a reality which is pressing in on us from all sides , a reality we have to guide towards legal standards .
I shall also be voting in favour because of the economic reasons which have been set forth , but , above all , Madam President , I shall be voting in favour for a fundamental reason which , in my opinion , constitutes the very basis of the discussions we are currently involved in .
This directive is not , in effect , a draft measure to regulate biotechnology - its objective is much more restricted and , as stated , an attempt is being made to protect biotechnological inventions , nothing more , nothing less .
This directive does not aspire , nor can it , to be the law on biotechnology : it only wishes to be - and only should be - a law on patents and , naturally , this obliges us to remember , Mr Casini - I will be at your side in this struggle - that we do not have a general , systematic legal framework of substantive law in which to frame the directive and that the palliatives it offers are few and insufficient .
We should also remember that we have to face up to the criticism that the edifice did not actually begin at the level of the foundations .
In spite of all this - I shall soon be finished - I shall be voting in favour of this directive , in the conviction that it is a step that has to be taken and that we still have a great deal of time left in which to improve it .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there are two industrial sectors that will be providing a great many jobs throughout the world over the next few years : information technology and biotechnology .
In both fields , the European Parliament has the power to determine where those jobs will be created , in Europe or elsewhere in the world .
So far , Parliament has failed to recognize the growth in the biotechnology industry by providing it with the proper patent legislation it needs for economic support , and after nine years we have still not achieved harmonization at European level .
This House suffers from a peculiar syndrome known as the patent-for-life syndrome .
More than 95 % of all Europe 's biotechnology firms are SMEs , the very sector where Europe 's potential for innovation and job-creation lies .
However , their innovation is being stymied by the fact that protection for biotechnological inventions is fragmented and , in comparison with the United States and Japan , very expensive .
It costs on average ECU 19 000 to submit to the European Patent Office a patent application covering eight countries , a market volume similar to that of the United States .
In the United States , it costs ECU 1500 .
Europe is at the forefront scientifically , but we do not capitalize on our knowledge , and this is costing us jobs .
Biotechnology has many very promising applications , such as in the prevention and cure of hereditary diseases in particular .
Ladies and gentlemen , we do not have the right to choose whether other people should go through life healthy or handicapped .
That is why my group intends to vote for this excellent report by Mr Rothley and the patents directive .
Madam President , one of the principles of the Christian faith is that all living beings should be regarded as God 's creatures .
If that is to be more than just a pious saying , it must mean that the physical , genetic and creative integrity of our fellow creatures is a legal right that has to be protected , and protected in every area of the law , including patent law , Mr Rothley .
The directive in front of us only does that to a limited and unsatisfactory extent , and at certain points it even abolishes such protection , as in Amendment 74 .
It does that because , as the rapporteur himself says on page 32 of his report , the directive concurs with those who demand the industrial exploitation of life .
That is what we reject !
Not freedom of research , not the development of therapies , not the progress of the biotechnological industry , but the fact that the whole thing is being subordinated to very specific economic interests , as has just been very clearly reemphasized .
Whoever does that must not be surprised if he has to rescind the new cloning ban within a short time for the very same reasons that have been advanced in support of the directive .
Life does not exist so that it can be industrially exploited ; on the contrary , industrial exploitation exists to support life .
That is why the law is there and for no other reason !
Madam President , sometimes in politics , as in life in general , you have to hold your hands up and say : I got it wrong .
I have to say that the European Parliament got it wrong in 1995 when we rejected the original biotechnology directive and I got it wrong by voting along with the majority in Parliament at that time .
The test , though , is not whether , from time to time you get things wrong but whether or not you learn from your mistakes .
I am pleased to say that the European Parliament has learned from its mistake and that Mr Rothley has expertly guided this new proposal through the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
I join with the many other Members who have paid tribute to his work over the last year or so .
We now have a proposal which , on the one hand , balances the genuine need to protect inventions and the scientists and researchers who work towards creating those inventions and , yes , the companies who put resources into financing the research .
They deserve a return on their investments .
The present proposal is also fair to the patients groups .
The most effective of the hundreds if not thousands of letters I have received on this subject have come from the patients groups .
It is fair to the patients groups .
It gives them hope that this relatively new branch of science will help in the treatment of genetic disorders and in cures for diseases such as cancer and AIDS .
On the other hand and just as importantly , the new proposal provides safeguards for the environment ; it provides safeguards for animal welfare ; it respects existing international agreements ; it ensures that human cloning is outlawed .
Two years ago we were seduced and panicked by the horror stories of those opposed to biotechnological research .
I bear in mind the point Mr Liese made earlier that there is only hope but this time we should consider the aspirations of the thousands of Europeans who suffer from currently incurable diseases and illnesses and give them some hope by promoting this directive and bringing some order to the field of biotechnology .
Madam President , in many respects what Mr Martin has just said echoes my own thoughts on the matter , though , unlike him , I am happy to confess that I actually supported the proposal when we last voted on it two years ago and I do not intend to change my intention this time .
As Mr Adam pointed out earlier , most Members of the European Parliament have been subjected to a barrage of misinformation on this topic .
I have here a file of misinformation .
As many colleagues know , I yield to no-one in regarding the activities of lobbyists as important in helping us to do our job properly ; but in the end it is up to us as parliamentarians to make judgments as between one side of the argument and the other .
I am quite clear on which side of the argument I would come down : the interests of the patients and the interests of the single market .
Very few speakers today have made the point that this is a single market measure .
It was first brought to this House by the Commission in 1988 .
It will not be long before we reach 1998 .
In a fast-moving industry the European Community has been lagging behind the very rapid progress made in the United States .
Indeed , reference has been made to the fact that the chief beneficiaries of biotechnological patents will be large multinationals .
That is absolute nonsense .
In my own country we have 165 important small and medium-sized companies which are involved in biotechnology .
The United States has 1 , 300 .
Surely we in Europe ought to be able at least to equal , if not to surpass , what the Americans are doing .
Another part of the mythology is that currently there is no legislation about the protection of biotechnological patents here in Europe .
There is !
There are 15 different sets of biotechnological patent law which cause confusion and chaos and add enormously to the expense of registering a patent .
The intention of this proposal is to replace fifteen sets of national regulations with one set of European regulations .
As for ethics - although I consider that the ethical consideration is not really appropriate in this directive - the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and its rapporteur have included in Amendment No 56 a new Article 9a setting up an ethics committee .
As has been pointed out , we have also taken care of the interests of animals and , indeed , the interests of humans , though there seem to be some Members of this Parliament who think that animal rights are more important than human rights .
In conclusion , I shall be supporting this directive and I hope that the Commission will be able to accept most , if not all , of the amendments of the Legal Affairs Committee .
Madam President , it seems to me that the only clear argument from the rapporteur is that Europe should approve a provision on patenting in the field of biotechnology because the US and Japan already have similar legislation .
That , Mr Rothley , is absurd because it means that we are subordinate to decisions already made in other countries .
There is , however , nothing absurd about questioning the consequences of a decision of this nature , but the rapporteur was careful not to go into this .
What does it mean to patent a living , albeit genetically modified , organism ?
It means retaining an organism that is the product of human invention , but , scientifically and logically , this is wrong , in fact it looks suspiciously like the crazed desire for omnipotence of a sorcerer 's apprentice .
In reality , the sole objective is financially to exploit discoveries in the field of biotechnology : and these are discoveries because genes can only be discovered or modified , they cannot be invented .
No-one benefits from the kind of sophistry proposed by some of the amendments : it is nothing but hypocrisy to exclude the human body or parts of it from being patented because , in biological terms , man is an animal species .
We ought therefore to conclude that what is not acceptable for human beings should not be acceptable for other animal organisms either .
In fact , in the name of the economic interests of a few multinationals , we are attempting to establish a criterion that involves new experiments and fresh suffering for animals .
We are then told that it is necessary to patent genes and gene therapies to meet the needs of the sick .
I wish to point out that treatments of that kind are also available without being patented ; in fact , agreeing that they should be patented means encouraging research only into treatment that makes money for the multinationals . Consequently , those treatments will be available only to rich citizens and nations , but not to the world 's poor and , particularly , not to those who have very unusual illnesses which will not provide the multinationals with an adequate return .
This is not about defending the sick !
I should also add that , as has already happened in the US , these genes are stolen from their genuine owners , for although they have them in their bodies , once they are patented they are no longer able to dispose freely of them .
These are grave implications for the future of humanity , and they cannot be shrugged aside , as our rapporteur seeks to do .
And so we are opposed to this .
Madam President , I should like to use my speaking time to refer to some of the misunderstandings that have cropped up time and again in this debate , as on previous occasions .
Contrary to the perceptions of many Members , the Rothley report certainly does provide for the patentability of human genes and of flora and fauna .
I ask anyone who believes otherwise to read Articles 3 ( 2 ) and 1b carefully .
Article 3 ( 2 ) refers to a gene isolated from the human body , but it must be said that even an isolated human gene is still a gene .
Amendments 71 to 75 , which Mrs Gebhardt and I have tabled , do not seek to prohibit patents ; their purpose is only to exclude those patents that go too far , because medical patients and the treatment of serious diseases , as well as the job situation in Europe , are equally pressing concerns of ours .
Based on the principle of responsible research , our amendments certainly permit the patenting of processes and applications as well as of proteins , medicinal drugs , vaccines and many other products .
That should provide the European biotechnological industry with enough incentive and reward , and many of its representatives echo that assessment .
What we want to exclude is the applicability of product protection to primary genetic matter , both for ethical reasons and for research-policy considerations .
Knowledge of the ways in which the human body works should remain freely accessible to society .
It should not be the subject of exclusive property and exploitation rights .
Product protection of primary genetic matter will provide a few European companies , but chiefly American and Japanese corporations - simply because they will be quicker to react - with a European monopoly for many years to come .
They will then be able to prevent other enterprises from using the patented genetic material or charge them high licence fees .
My third point is that the proposed rules will also prove very costly for European farmers , for animal-breeders and plant-growers and consequently for consumers too .
Costly by European standards , but prohibitively expensive by Third World standards .
If animals and plants become patentable , and if such patents apply not only to the first generation but to all subsequent generations resulting from natural reproduction , even the envisaged farmer 's privilege will be of little help .
I shall close by asking all Members of the House who are seeking to reconcile the various legitimate interests involved here to support our Amendments 71 to 75 .
Madam President , during this debate on the Patent Directive I have been particularly upset by the fact that certain organisations representing patients , including the Danish Cystic Fibrosis Association , maintain that there is a ' Green Lobby ' which does not care a jot for the needs of seriously ill people .
This is , of course , wrong !
The most sensational claim is that , without the Patent Directive , large companies would keep their research results secret .
But it goes without saying that , in a democratic society where there is freedom of research , the results of that research should be freely available to all researchers without the need to pay a licence fee .
What the Patent Directive means , as the Scandinavian Association against Painful Animal Tests has pointed out , is that a company can gain a monopoly over important genes which could create difficulties for the discovery of new drugs .
The Rothley report also opens the way for the patenting of methods of treatment , as the term known as the doctor 's exemption is missing in the report .
According to Sweden 's Christian Council this would mean that research would be blocked and that groups with few resources would be excluded from receiving the best possible treatment .
Mr Adam said previously that there is a ' Green Propaganda Machine ' which has mounted a pressure campaign before this debate .
This is absolutely ridiculous when you consider the enormous propaganda campaign carried out by the biotechnological industry to try to get a few Members of this Parliament to change their position from that which we adopted two years ago .
So I must say that if this directive is adopted it will not only be a defeat for democracy but also a disgrace for the European Parliament .
Madam President , I have no doubt at all that biotechnology is going to represent the very future of science .
Having said that , I think it presents ultimate ethical dilemmas , and the ethical dilemma which I face can be summarized as : What do I say to the parents and family of a child suffering from cystic fibrosis if no hope is held out for serious scientific research in that area .
On the other hand , what happens when we hear talk - and it can be serious talk - of people who want to design their offspring ?
Who want to say ' My child shall have yellow hair and a smaller nose ' ?
How do we face that dilemma ? It is an ethical dilemma , Mr Cassidy , and ethics do come into this .
When in March 1995 I was one of those who proudly voted against the last directive , it was because I did not feel that it contained sufficient ethical safeguards .
That was the clear reasoning behind it .
And I must say I was surprised , when we received the draft directive in the Environment Committee , to see that there was no reference to the ethical dimension ; it was an Environment Committee amendment which Mr Rothley as rapporteur took on board in the Legal Affairs Committee and which has subsequently been added to by Mr Cot and myself .
When it comes to the ethical committee , we have not said in that second amendment what it shall comprise , merely that the Commission shall come forward with a proposal .
When it comes forward with that proposal we can consider what the ethical committee 's terms of reference shall be and who shall be on it .
Let us make it a precondition for this directive coming into effect that an ethical committee shall be established and shall be a central part of our decision-making process .
Madam President , whenever biotechnology is debated , industry repeats the mantra of competitiveness in a manner reminiscent of the medieval church .
In my view , we political decision-makers ought to be far more critical of the promises which are made regarding the millions of jobs which will be created in this field .
The plain fact is that there is no clear evidence that improving the parameters within which enterprises operate by means of this Directive would increase the number of jobs .
In today 's newspaper an Austrian agronomist says that small plant-breeding businesses could actually shed jobs because larger enterprises will compete them out of existence .
A patent entails a kind of monopoly .
The Commission could also have adopted different approaches to the issue of legal protection .
It could have considered separately , for example , microbiological processes and transgenic animals , but now provisions concerning all these very disparate life forms have been incorporated into the same proposal for a Directive although they really deserve far more differentiated treatment .
For example , a plant-breeder 's right is a traditional form of legal protection for plants which have been improved , and it would have been possible to introduce legal protection for animals on the same basis .
Madam President , after this long debate , I should like to dot some ' i 's ' and cross some ' t 's ' , and in particular two of them .
The first relates to the concept of patents .
Patents , in case it needs saying again , are a vital element which offer both legal and economic security , without which there would not be any inventions .
Every time we raise these problems here we always make a point of emphasizing Europe 's weakness in the area of innovation .
Now , the process of innovation is directly linked with the process of invention and , therefore , with protection .
Six months ago now , we voted through a report of which I was the author and in which we drew attention to this European paradox of a Europe putting itself forward as a champion of discovery but a Europe poor in inventions .
This report was passed unanimously .
Well , I have to say that while some people here may be suffering , as Mr Rothley was saying earlier , from ' Legasthenia ' , they are also , curiously , suffering from amnesia ; and I am very much afraid that genetic engineering is not going to be of much help to them .
The second thing I should like to highlight is the fact that a great deal has been said about humanism and morality .
Humanism is clearly that which ensures that Man is the measure of everything , and especially those men and women who suffer in their bodies and in their minds those diseases for which no-one has yet come up with a cure and for whom genetic engineering offers considerable hope .
This form of humanism has nothing whatever to do with the naturalism that we hear people talk about today , which regards idolized nature as a yardstick of I know not what judgement .
I would say to Mrs Roth that if , indeed , morality invigorates politics , then just as surely moralism kills it .
I fear that had we been called upon today to discuss Pasteur and his inventions , a part of this House would have condemned him , just as others condemned Galileo a few centuries ago !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur and I reached a fair compromise on Amendments 16 and 49 after lengthy discussions .
They concern recitals 16a and 16e and Article 3 .
One of their chief aims is to prevent abuses .
Such abuses , which have in fact been tried already , could consist in patenting gene sequences without having any specific scientifically demonstrable application in mind .
The formulation ' an industrial application must be disclosed ' draws a clear line . DNA sequences are not patentable just because they have been discovered .
They can become patentable on the basis of explicitly described applications , such as the production of active substances .
Anyone who has ever looked into the enormous expenditure that the development of such active substances entails will surely understand and recognize the moral justification , and indeed the necessity , of stimulating research and development by holding out the prospect of a patent .
These are not , as the demagogues have claimed , patents on life but rather patents for life .
Genetically engineered human hormones , for example , will be a monumental step forward for haemophiliacs , for anaemia sufferers and for patients with genetic metabolic disorders .
In 1995 , when this Parliament rejected the proposal for a so-called biopatent directive , many Members saw it as a moment of glory for the European Parliament .
But it caused consternation among Europe 's biotechnologists , because outright rejection naturally deprived them of the upsurge in motivation which the draft directive was meant to provide .
That , ladies and gentlemen , is why we are contributing now to a genuine red-letter day in the life of this Parliament .
After nine long years , let us finally adopt this legislation .
Madam President , Mr Rothley , you have argued very , very eloquently today in favour of employment , and you have undoubtedly imparted a sense of vision with regard to this entire issue .
But there are still some small discrepancies between your oral presentation and your written report .
Allow me to highlight a few .
The issue at stake here , of course , remains the monopoly of the pharmaceutical companies , which arises partly from the long lifespan of patents .
We are precluding research by small undertakings .
Holders of licences and patents will focus their research first and foremost on areas where , for example , there are large patient groups .
That has always been a reality which no-one , ourselves included , can ignore .
Discoverers of genes , according to your report , should still equate to patent-holders .
The patent-holder is given virtually exclusive rights to exploit and market the new research findings ; given the near-oligopoly that exists in this domain , there is a particular danger that the SMEs and small research units will be trampled underfoot .
The reverse of your line of argument is true , which is why I see the Gebhardt and Berger amendments as an opportunity to redress the balance in some respects and to make the report approvable .
Madam President , I do not think there is any doubt at all that this debate has been shrouded in misinformation and quite deliberate sensationalist claims about patenting body-parts and the like .
We have to set that aside and look at the reality of it .
Biotechnology is an important industry in the European Union ; it is a tremendously important sector , and we have to be very careful in the way we deal with it .
If we were to reject this , of course , patenting would still continue .
It would not continue in the European Union but it would continue somewhere else and we would have less control over it .
Patents are effectively an award for taking a risk and investing in the development of new medicines , and we should reward our companies for taking such risks .
However , it does not stop there .
If we are to patent biotech inventions , then we must take into account ethical considerations .
It is not enough simply to adopt what I would describe as the ' gee whiz school of technology ' .
One has to recognize that ethical questions have to be asked and solutions must be found .
That is why Ian White 's amendment introducing an ethical committee will give us the kind of directive that we want and need .
We need this because there is a question , not just about the right of companies , but also about the right of patients to have their suffering from genetic diseases alleviated .
That is tremendously important , and we must recognize that there are these ethical questions .
It is not possible to have an ethical assessment of every patent application , because I understand that there are some 10 , 000 applications every year in the European Union , and there are not that number of philosophers to go round .
However , we need to have a framework within which such decisions can be made .
This is the first reading , and it is important that we show the Commission , the Council and the wider public that we are quite serious about this and that we recognize the need for a directive , but one with an ethical dimension .
That is a sine qua non of progress .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament is about to conclude this first reading of the new proposal for a directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions : this was no easy task !
We all remember - and some of you actually mentioned - the vote of 1 March 1995 .
On that occasion and , generally , throughout the whole process of considering the earlier proposal , the European Parliament had voiced its own concern about the consequences that adopting the proposal might have had and raised important issues .
Through that vote of 1 March 1995 and despite the efforts made on all sides during the conciliation procedure , the European Parliament said one thing clearly : that it remained unpersuaded by the reasons and explanations provided .
Straightforward ethical and political questions had not , plainly , received equally straightforward and clear answers .
In this new proposal for a directive , the Commission , basically , set itself one principal objective : to respond to the concerns that had been expressed and to mark out those areas which had previously been insufficiently clear .
That had , naturally , to be done within the scope of a sectoral directive on patents . What then is the central question ?
To provide an absolute guarantee that the reasons behind the research , the industry and competitiveness were set within clear limits that prevent any form of appropriation of the human body , including the smallest elements thereof .
The Amsterdam European Council also clearly affirmed in its conclusions the absolute principle of respect for the integrity of human beings .
It is a question of establishing whether biological material can be patented .
We need therefore to establish clearly the distinction between the discovery of something that exists in nature and an invention that is the product of human activity with a well-defined objective .
The ethical aspect of biotechnological inventions , and particularly those concerning isolated elements of the human body , was therefore the Commission 's starting-point for a thorough review to identify the most appropriate solution in this extremely sensitive area .
The Commission talked to the group of consultants on the ethics of biotechnology about the ethical aspects of patenting inventions involving elements of human origin .
Its opinion was given on 25 September 1996 .
That positive opinion confirmed the Commission in its approach and provided further pointers .
I note , moreover , that Amendment No 1 specifically refers to this .
During the preparatory work for this plenary sitting , no less than six committees of the European Parliament worked on the proposal for a directive and held many lengthy meetings .
The debate was frank , open and far-reaching , and the arguments were entered into fully .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights was therefore in full possession of the facts when it adopted its report on 18 June last , and I should like to extend my special thanks here to the rapporteur , Mr Rothley , for his exceptional work which is much to be admired .
I should also like to thank everyone , including those whose opinions have been less positive because this has been an important and civilized debate .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights adopted 64 amendments .
The Commission is prepared to accept all of those amendments because they provide suitable clarification ...
... of the sensitive matters currently under discussion .
The main points are as follows : a formula that very clearly defines the difference between discovery and invention as regards isolated elements of the human body ; nonpatentability of animal or plant species ; an explicit ban on patenting human reproductive cloning procedures and procedures for modifying the germinal genetic identity of human beings ; the need never to forget the ethical dimension and the possibility of that being the subject of appropriate preventive assessment ; the achievement of a balance between the suffering that some inventions could cause to animals and the considerable usefulness of such inventions in medicine ; and improved presentation of breeders ' privileges .
On all of those points - as well , of course , as many others - the Commission believes that the contribution of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has been crucial to achieving the main aim , namely striking a balance between economic requirements and the absolute need to respect ethics .
The Commission is therefore , I repeat , prepared to accept all of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and to incorporate them into its amended proposal .
Some redrafting will be needed : this will not in any way change the substance of the amendments but simply improve the form to meet legal and institutional requirements .
The Commission considers that Amendment No 1 , for instance , which I have already quoted , would be better inserted into a recital .
And as regards Amendment No 56 which calls for an ethics committee to be set up , the Commission will be referring to the group of consultants on the ethics of biotechnology which has already been set up .
Moreover , the House recently adopted a resolution renewing the mandate of that group of consultants .
As part of the effort to achieve a balance , the Commission is also prepared to consider a number of amendments that were tabled subsequently : Amendments Nos 67 , 69 , 77 , 79 and 99 , for example .
The proposal , as amended , will be submitted to the Council so that it can establish its common position .
The proposal for a directive is of crucial importance to the Council because it is one of the four initiatives under the action plan for the single market that the Member States have been called upon by the European Council to adopt as rapidly as possible and , at any event , by 1 January 1999 .
We may therefore hope that the Luxembourg presidency , which is extremely sensitive to the problem , will be able to arrive at the common position at the meeting of the ' Internal Market ' Council on 27 November next .
The European Parliament can count on the Commission to see that its contribution is respected and retained on that occasion .
Let me thank the House on behalf of the Commission for its contribution , and add my own personal thanks .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I believe we have witnessed an example today - just as we would wish to see , in fact - of excellent cooperation between the Commission and Parliament .
It really does work !
I should like to express my special thanks for your contribution , Commissioner .
Madam President , I have a question for Mr Monti on Amendment 49 .

We have already gone well beyond the scheduled finishing time for this debate .
Perhaps you can have a private word with Mr Monti .
Mr Monti should declare whether he accepts that amendment , because it is basically about the patentability of life .
I shall not allow any more questions , because this has been a very comprehensive discussion .
Perhaps you can sit down again with Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Biotechnology and the White Paper
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0239 / 97 ) by Mr Bowe , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the Commission report ( COM ( 96 ) 0630 - C4-0008 / 97 ) on the review of Directive 90 / 220 / EEC in the context of the Commission 's communication on biotechnology and the White Paper .
Madam President , we have already heard considerable debate this morning on a biotechnologically related issue of considerable importance .
We now have in front of us a report on another biotechnological issue of equal importance .
In this case , before the Commission presents a legislative text to Parliament , we have been given the opportunity to comment on the Commission 's ideas in the form of a report on the review of Directive 92 / 20 , which regulates the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms .
Parliament welcomes this possibility and looks forward to the early publication of a revised proposal by the Commission .
As I have already said , Directive 92 / 20 is intended to secure human and environmental safety for releases and marketing of genetically modified products ( GMOs ) and introduces a single entry point to the Community market for GMO products .
Parliament would unquestionably agree with the Commission that , in the light of recent problems with the operation of the Directive , a review is needed , and we would offer the following comments on the Commission 's proposals , together with a number of additional suggestions for change .
It seems clear that we must continue to establish and use the precautionary principle as the basis on which the Directive is constructed .
It is , after all , better to be safe than sorry .
Nevertheless , there is a clear role within the Directive for a risk assessment of the proposed products , with a centralized definition of the objectives and methodology of the risk assessment that would ensure that all potential risks to human health and the total environment are considered .
We recognize and accept that in the light of experience it is possible to establish a classification commensurate with the identified risks involved for each release of GMOs .
However , we cannot yet find any convincing arguments from the Commission in support of proposals for multi-state releases and we consider that more experience should be gained with the simplified procedure provided for in the Directive before we can consider any reductions in the requirements .
We firmly believe that the Directive would be further improved if there were more consistent and thorough information and data collection during the course of experimental releases .
This would allow proper evaluation of the risks of full commercial releases and would provide a useful addition to a database that the Commission must establish in order to facilitate the exchange of information between Member States and better cooperation on the basis of that information .
We consider also that the Directive would function much better if decision-making procedures inside the Commission were made speedier , more transparent and more democratically accountable .
We therefore think it is important to ensure that the Scientific Technical Committee and the Technical Committee procedures are in line with the agreement known as the modus vivendi , and that these committees should meet in public and publish their minutes .
Citizens should have proper access to this information on the proposed releases , and be consulted .
Further , we are increasingly recognizing that some releases will raise ethical questions .
We ask the Commission to recognize this also and to seek a means by which social and ethical questions can be considered in the decisionmaking procedure .
We must recognize the right of the public to be informed and of consumers to be aware of the origin of products they are offered .
So we welcome the recent reinforcement of the labelling provisions of the Directive by the Commission .
We consider that the producers of GMO products must be ultimately responsible for their products .
We therefore ask the Commission to introduce a special liability provision into the Directive to guarantee that those producers are made responsible and suffer penalties when accidents or problems arise .
In conclusion , whilst there are many serious and important concerns associated with the use of biotechnology , particularly in the areas of food production and pharmaceuticals , the European Parliament believes that policy makers should take a very serious and thoughtful approach to the use of biotechnology in these areas , basing their decisions on sound science and not simply dismissing out of hand this technology which has many obvious benefits if used in a safe and sensible manner .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , First of all , we should like to thank Mr Bowe for having incorporated into his report practically all the amendments adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
That sort of cooperation between farmers and environmentalists does not occur too often , which is why I find it particularly encouraging .
I believe we have to recognize that the agricultural use of genetically altered plants and livestock is an area in which , naturally enough , advantages and risks are especially closely bound together .
Mr Bowe has made it clear that the consumer of the end product is entitled to an unbroken information chain and a fully transparent production process .
The thin line between favourable and unfavourable assessments by both farmers and consumers is illustrated by the example of maize .
When we think about it , very few of us would really object to maize plants being made more resistant by means of genetic engineering if that were to deter insects which might otherwise ruin the plants .
There would then be no need to spray insecticides - good news for the environment !
If , however , the same genetic engineering process also bred herbicide tolerance which maize could transfer to related wild plants , making them resistant to a particularly powerful weedkiller , I should then have reservations .
This also leads us to urge industry to strive for general acceptance of its products and processes , so that people can distinguish between what is useful and what is less useful .
Up to the present time , the exact opposite has been achieved , namely minimal consumer acceptance or even consumer resistance .
The issues addressed by Mr Bowe , such as the liability question , must be resolved .
We cannot take refuge in the argument that general liability law will automatically cover any occurrences in this domain .
This area is too new for that and must be minutely examined for potential liability problems .
I believe our work would ultimately have been easier if the preparation of this paper had included a clearer choice of alternative options .
During the next stages of this process we should make a point of ensuring that the proposals are expressed in legally precise terms and that their substance can be grasped by those who have to deal with them .
Madam President , I should like to thank the rapporteur for his difficult work , in which he has sought at least partially to take into account the views of the Committee on Research .
Directive 220 must be amended in such a way as to simplify unnecessarily complicated procedures .
Provision should also be made for a more effective and open exchange of information between national authorities and the Commission .
One cannot overemphasize the importance of openness at all stages of the regulation of genetically modified organisms .
Consumers ought themselves to be able to choose what products they wish to consume .
Therefore if genetically modified organisms constitute part of a product or if they are used to produce it , this information absolutely must be included in product labelling , and clear , comprehensible and uniform labelling must be introduced .
A method of labelling must be worked out .
I call upon the Commission to respect this view of Parliament 's .
The Commission should also take into account the environmental impact assessment and the findings of social and behavioural research concerning perceptions of risk .
Knowledge is constantly advancing , and further information being acquired .
It is important that assessments should be based on scientific information and that these findings should be used to clarify and broaden the basis for assessing the risks of the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms and their environmental impact .
New characteristics which are considered desirable can be imparted to foodstuffs more rapidly and more precisely by means of genetic engineering than by means of traditional breeding .
For example , the quality and yield of crops can be improved by developing varieties resistant to bacterial , viral and fungal diseases .
The use of pesticides and at the same time residues of them in foodstuffs and the environment can be reduced by combating plant diseases by means of genetic engineering .
On the other hand , genetic engineering may result in more pesticide use .
The first commercial applications of genetic engineering involved imparting above-average pesticide resistance to soya and maize varieties .
Besides giving a plant a characteristic which is considered desirable , transferring a gene may also produce an undesirable characteristic .
Modified plants may contain higher levels of natural toxins .
Products of genetically modified organisms absolutely must comply with the precautionary principle .
As experience and scientific knowledge advance , it must of course be possible to amend the provisions of the Directive .
Madam President , I am going to treat this almost as a continuation of the previous debate , because in his explanatory statement Mr Bowe states : ' As more advances take place in this sector it seems certain further questions of ethical acceptability will be raised .
Therefore , the Commission must examine how an ethical dimension can be introduced into the decision-making process related to the Directive . ' That is quite right and yet , in response to the debate a few minutes ago , Commissioner Monti seemed to be saying that the Commission would refer Parliament 's demand for an ethical committee to the advisory group .
That , frankly , is not , and will not be , good enough .
If you look at the amendment to the Rothley report tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights you will see that we have asked the Commission to come forward with proposals .
Referring it to an advisory group , which is a body outside Parliament , is not sufficient .
Let me make that clear .
I would very much like a response from the Commissioner present , because I know she was also present when Commissioner Monti was giving what I regard as an inadequate reply .
The release of GMOs into the wider world is certainly a question which raises wider ethical issues .
This is exactly the kind of question that ought to be put to such an ethical committee .
Again , when we talk about this in terms of the Bowe report , there is no specific reference to such an ethical committee , because it has yet to be established .
We should be thinking now , in advance of the second reading of the Rothley report and of further developments in biotechnology , how we are to treat this whole question .
It is not going to be enough simply to refer it to an advisory committee which already exists .
That is a sensible first step , but it does not take us any further forward in terms of the structure of a proper ethics committee which will sooner or later have to treat the matter on a wider world stage on behalf of the European Union .
Madam President , the report we are debating on the review of Directive 90 / 220 on the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms falls within the scope of the updating of Community law in the field of biotechnology .
This will make it possible to take advantage of the experience and knowledge gained both from the development and progress of science , and from the application of the directive during the past seven years .
One of the main aspects of this review is risk assessment , of course with the related classification , so that parallelism can be achieved with the corresponding administrative procedures for granting permits for the release of genetically modified organisms into the environment .
Of course , simplification and flexibility of the directive 's procedures must pose no threat to safety , and that is why mainly cases of demonstrated low risk should be involved .
Consequently , when the Commission produces the amended version of Directive 90 / 220 , it must be sure to include clear indications on risk assessment .
In fulfilling the aims of building public confidence , enhancing the competitiveness of European industry and protecting public health and the environment , aims which , be it noted , the Commission itself has stressed in the context of the White Paper , it must take into account a number of factors such as : firstly , the type of genetic modification and in particular whether this relates to a simple property of the colour or texture of a fruit or , in contrast , the acquisition by a plant of resistance to an insecticide .
That , because in the latter case the balance of the ecosystem could be affected , as also could competitiveness , granted that farmers depend on certain companies which hold patents on the genetically modified plant but also on the insecticide to which it is resistant .
Secondly , whether along with the transfer of one or more genes , resistance to one or more antibiotics is also transferred .
Here , it is certainly necessary to take account of the possible transfer of resistance to micro-organisms .
Thirdly , if the genetically modified organism is a plant being cultivated experimentally and commercially , similar but unmodified plants should be protected .
This , because transfers of pollen may take place , when as is quite natural , new varieties of the same plant will emerge which , however , may have different and perhaps undesirable properties .
Here , I would like to stress that the existing Annexes 2 , 3 and 4 of the Directive were commendably complete in respect of various important factors , and of course the fault was that those factors were not translated into a specific assessment of risk .
I will now advance a few more ideas and would like an answer from the Commission .
First , upon what does it base its risk assessment and how does it classify it ?
Secondly , how does it relate the classification of risk with administrative procedures ?
Where the question of insurance is concerned I am in general agreement with the rapporteur . Concerning the labelling of foods , I think that all foods should be labelled so that consumers can always know what they are buying .
Besides , almost all consumers want full information about the foods they buy .
Only in that way can their confidence be gained .
Consumer information should also be improved , to help them choose between products .
I want to stress that this whole area needs monitoring , both by the Member States and by the Commission .
Madam President , this is a subject which - as other speakers have pointed out - follows on directly from that we were discussing earlier in the day .
One might say that they are preconditions for eachother .
I will start by thanking the rapporteur for his work and say that I agree with the main lines of the report .
What I would like to focus on therefore are one or two more specific points , the first one being to ask the Commission whether it is still logical for this subject to be covered by a single directive .
We are talking about , on the one hand , an experimental release and , on the other hand , the marketing of something which has already been subjected to trials .
But , when we get down to it , we cannot say that the same rules apply and I think that , in view of the fact that other directives have been put into effect , one might wonder whether it is still logical to have only one directive , or might it not be easier to deal with if there were two different directives ?
I will also say that , along with others , of course I agree with the Commission 's wish to simplify matters and hence possibly also to introduce a classification of risks .
GMOs are not all equally risky and , as that is what we have also done , for example in connection with the contained use of GMOs , it would be logical to do that .
I also think the Commission is right to propose that we try to establish some procedures so that direct comparisons can be made . I think that is the way we can get the individual countries to accept other countries ' results , rather than saying in blanket fashion that , if a product has been thoroughly tested in one country , the results must also apply in other countries .
It is at least necessary at the present stage to secure some harmonization .
When I put it that way , it is because , regardless of what we may think about the matter , this is still a very sensitive subject in public opinion . That is why it is important to take public concerns in this area into account when we discuss simplification procedures .
Madam President , the Commission has been very good about keeping its promise in the White Paper to produce a report reviewing Directive 90 / 220 / EEC .
It is a pity that in looking at the directive , nothing has been done about the limited use made of it , which would have been helpful .
The subject is too complex and too important to be rushed through quickly .
It seems likely that quite a number of new plants will be coming onto the market in Europe over the next few years .
More than 3600 have been introduced in the United States in recent years , and Europe can expect roughly the same .
However , this should not make us feel any more relaxed about the introduction of new products .
We must still adopt a cautious approach , which means being as careful as possible in both the field trial and marketing phases .
As far as the review is concerned , I think that the Commission has produced a good report .
But it forgot one thing : to include itself .
While the Member States are required to meet specific deadlines , the Commission itself does not have any fixed time limit for reaching a final decision on authorization .
The detailed internal consultation procedure sometimes means that files can spend months circulating around the Commission 's offices .
I entirely agree with the Commission 's proposal that the new directive should also require the benefits and risks of introducing new products to be spelt out .
The public has a right to this information , since they are the ones who are going to have to eat the new foodstuffs .
I do not think the motion for a resolution is entirely clear on all points .
The first few paragraphs , for example , do not make it clear that they apply only to field trials , and other paragraphs too are rather obscurely worded .
Paragraph 12 also does not take account of the recently adopted amendment to Annex III .
I am anxious to see the new proposal from the Commission , but this review has at least made me feel more confident about it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the 20th century has seen the emergence and development of two types of high-risk technology .
The first was nuclear power , and the second is genetic manipulation .
Nobody can say today which of the two will ultimately prove the more dangerous .
Mr Bowe 's report shows quite clearly that those selfsame mistakes which a previous generation of politicians made are about to be repeated .
There was no risk assessment on the use of nuclear power .
The decision to develop nuclear energy was taken on the basis of misinformation about its potential effects .
We only know a tiny fraction today of all there is to learn about the actual consequences of genetic manipulation .
Nevertheless , it is to be pushed through with totally unnecessary haste .
What we must ask ourselves here is this : who needs such technology ?
Who needs it immediately , and for what purpose ?
There are a few industrial groups seeking to maximize their profits without incurring any of the attendant risks .
The Commission report is an attempt to lend them a helping hand .
In my opinion , Mr Bowe has made a very valiant effort to engage in damage limitation here .
One thing is perfectly clear : there is good reason for the haste with which genetically manipulated organisms are being released , because the more information people have about the possible consequences and risks , the harder it will be to legalize this technology .
Our duty as representatives of the people can only be to ensure that any type of danger to human beings is kept to an absolute minimum .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this Directive must guarantee human and environmental safety whenever genetically modified organisms are released , otherwise products containing them cannot be admitted into the Community market .
But if Community research is to be equipped to play its part in making biotechnological products more competitive , uniformly applicable rules and comprehensive , Communitywide data collections and information regarding the results of experimental releases , especially in terms of their environmental impact , must be guaranteed and acted upon .
In so far as the Commission 's intentions reflect these aims , its report is to be emphatically welcomed .
But it is unacceptable , Mrs Bjerregaard , that the Commission should intend to alter the scope of the Directive , in other words its annex , without consulting Parliament , as is implied in the Commission 's report .
I can only warn the Commission against that ; it is not only democracy that would suffer .
In biotechnological research , experimental releases are indispensable as final tests of the harmlessness of GMOs to people and the biosphere .
However , the revised Directive is expected to define clear risk categories for released GMOs and equally unambiguous administrative requirements for releases in each category .
That should reveal whether a so-called simplified procedure is needed at all .
Such a procedure does not seem logical to me , for the lowest risk category should logically have the simplest procedure assigned to it , making any further simplification unnecessary .
So I shall finish with this appeal to the Commission : abolish the simplified procedure , make the Directive clearer and ensure that it is rigorously implemented .

Madam President , I will start by thanking the rapporteurs , Mr David Bowe , Mrs Matikainen-Kallström and Mr Willi Görlach , for Parliament 's response to the report from the Commission on the review of Directive 90 / 220 covering the release of genetically modified organisms into the environment .
This is a procedural directive aimed at maintaining a high level of safeguards for health and the environment , so as to ensure the orderly development of GMO technology .
The directive is of great practical significance and , in the report we are debating today , the Commission undertakes an analysis of how the directive has worked since it came into force .
Let me go through some of the problem areas which have been mentioned here today and which we draw attention to in the report .
There is , for example , insufficient guidance on risk assessment , to which the rapporteur also drew attention in his speech .
We lack a system for the classification of releases , we lack a system for the adjustment of administrative procedures to the release category and we do not have access to the deliberations of a scientific committee on matters relating to health and the environment .
There is also the problem of administratively cumbersome procedures and approval systems for the marketing of products .
There is a need for greater transparency and - as we all know , since it is a matter we have had occasion to discuss before now - there is a pressing need for labelling .
As Parliament knows , the Commission at my instigation adopted a provisional technical amendment of Annex 3 to Directive 90 / 220 / EEC , according to which labelling would be required for all products released .
This amendment has now been finally adopted so that , from 1 August this year , labelling will be compulsory for all products covered by this Directive .
The Commission considers this to be a very important step in the right direction , and we think that in this way we have given the guidance to consumers that Parliament , in particular , has called for on several occasions .
I am very pleased to see that the report has been the subject of very thorough discussion in the European Parliament .
The debate in Parliament has come up just in time for me to incorporate Parliament 's wishes into the proposal for a review which is underway in the Commission .
I just have a few comments to make on Parliament 's motion for a resolution .
The first concerns the special liability provision that Parliament wants to include in this Directive .
This is an important matter , and Parliament knows that I agree that we need liability provisions in a wide range of areas , including biotechnology .
In order to achieve that , the Commission is currently drafting a White Paper on this subject , and I hope that the White Paper will give us the necessary basis on which to establish common rules and hence make it possible to impose requirements on the matter in specific environmental legislation .
The second point I wish to address - which many speakers have also raised - is the question of ethics .
Again , I agree with Parliament 's comments , but , as was also noted in the debate , the Commission has chosen to deal with the ethical dimension in a broader context , not just in conjunction with the release of GMOs into the environment .
Hence that more general discussion must be taken into account before the matter is covered in specific legislation .
As regards the proposals in the report , which were also singled out in the course of today 's debate , for better exchanges of information between Member States and the establishment of a database , it is a special pleasure for me to announce that DG XI has already made all the necessary arrangements .
That means that , later this year , information on GMO releases will be available as regards both scientific and commercial aspects on the Internet .
Thus I fully support the rapporteur 's desire for better information and greater transparency in this field .
Once again therefore , I would like to thank Parliament for its report .
The motion for a resolution has been a significant aid to DG XI in drafting the proposal for an amendment of Directive 90 / 220 / EEC , and I hope to get it adopted by the Commission straight after the summer holidays .
Thank you , Commissioner Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Madam President , as most poeple in this House know , this will be the last occasion on which you sit in the Chair of this plenary before your retirement to take up your full-time career in the National Assembly .
On behalf of my group and I am sure , on behalf of all the Members of this House , I should like to wish you the very best for your career and , in particular , to say that your integrity and the respect in which you are held in this House , for the manner in which you have chaired this plenary over many years are without question .
We wish you good luck and would like to offer you these flowers on behalf of my group and , indeed , of the whole House .
( Loud applause )
I am deeply touched , I would even say completely overcome .
These past sixteen years among you have been such a rich experience for me that I hope to be able to influence some of the questions with which the French National Assembly is involved , especially those that concern the European Union .
You may count on my complete loyalty .
I shall be doing everything in my power to promote the objectives to which we have all contributed over these sixteen years .
Thank you so much .
VOTES
Madam President , this is a rather unusual vote .
The House voted on the report in the spring of 1995 , and then , because the Commission was not willing to accept amendments proposed by Parliament , it was referred back to committee .
In the two years since then , we have negotiated with the Commission and have arrived at a mutually acceptable result .
That result is on the table today .
We have come to an arrangement with the administration that another vote will be taken today on the amendments which were adopted back in 1995 .
We shall then vote on the amendments that have been drafted jointly with the Commission , which means that the whole report will be put to the vote today .
The Commission will then - or so I assume - accept the amendments , and we shall thus be able to take the final vote .
This example shows that , even if we only have a consultative role under Article 43 , codecision is still a legal possibility for us if we can negotiate a waiver with the Commission .
If the Commission and Parliament now adopt a common position , the Council may only reject it unanimously , and this gives Parliament considerable clout , even on substantive issues .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not wish to prolong the discussion here , so I shall continue from where Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf left off .
I essentially intend to refer only to those amendments that affect genetically modified organisms , not just because they are probably the most important but also because of the need for a number of minor editorial adjustments .
Firstly , the wording of Amendment 22 on environmental risk assessments should be slightly amended in the interests of legal certainty .
Paragraph 4 ( b ) should now read , ' The procedures designed to ensure that the environmental risk assessment is similar to that laid down in Directive 90 / 220 / EEC shall be introduced on a proposal from the Commission in a Council Regulation based on the appropriate provisions of the Treaty . '
Secondly , I should like to turn to Amendment 23 , which relates to catalogues of seed varieties and labelling and which expresses the wish of the Commission and Parliament to ensure that the user knows whether his seed is a genetically modified variety .
The labelling provisions , however , must be enshrined in those parts of the legal instruments that refer to the product in question , in this case seed .
For that reason , the labelling clause should not be in the Directive on the common catalogue of varieties but in the Directive on the marketing of seed .
This restructuring does not affect the principle underlying the agreement and can be taken into account in due course in the Commission 's revision of the proposal .
Allow me finally to deal briefly with Amendment 8 , which sets out the proposal for the introduction of mutually recognized inspections , i.e. European inspections .
It was the understanding of the Commission that this amendment would not be pursued any further .
Should that not be the case , however , the proposal would be unacceptable , because satisfactory arrangements are already laid down in the relevant Directives .
Lastly , I too am pleased to be able to inform you that the Commission can accept all the amendments , subject to these editorial alterations , and I should like to express my thanks once again to the rapporteur , Mr Graefe von Baringdorf , for the cooperative way in which this matter has been settled .
On the subject of Amendment No 21
Madam President , there are two points to consider in connection with Amendment 21 .
In the French translation it is apparently difficult to understand the substance of the second paragraph .
The paragraph elaborates on the meaning of ' marketing ' and contains a double negative , i.e. trade in seed not aimed at commercial exploitation of the variety shall not be regarded as marketing .
That seems to have been rather difficult in French , because the words for marketing and commercial exploitation and for trade resemble each other very closely .
However , I would ask my French colleagues to rely on the original text and to adapt the French version accordingly .
My second point is that a separate vote has been requested , essentially on the third indent , which states that the local exchange of seed between farmers for exclusive use on their own farms does not constitute marketing .
This was negotiated with the Commission .
Since then , however , considerable pressure has been exerted by the seed industry for the omission from the Directive of any reference to this practice of neighbourly exchange , which is widespread among farmers in every country , because the seed producers suspect it might lose them some business .
I ask the House to resist this pressure and approve the third indent .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Madam President , on a point of order .
I refer to Rule 53 ( 5 ) .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has let Parliament down by not properly dealing with the legal base amendments I have tabled .
By so failing , this Parliament is in danger of finding itself adopting something which is legally incompetent .
This would not make us look very clever if the matter were subsequently to be taken to court .
I want to register this point of order , and urge Members that the only way out of this is to support Amendments Nos 3 and 4 which , quite clearly , safeguard the common fisheries policy against any tampering with its legal base .
Madame President , after hearing what Mr Macartney said , I think it would perhaps be a good idea , in the interests of informing the judgement of our colleagues , to have the Chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights explain the Committee 's position .
Madame President , the committee does not necessarily have to take account of the amendments tabled .
That is the committee 's position and I have nothing to add .
Madam President , on a point of order .
What Mr Macartney said is correct .
It really begs the question about how the Committee on Legal Affairs deals with issues .
Madam President , the point at issue is that the Legal Affairs Committee did not put the documents before the committee members .
The documents which were needed for the Legal Affairs Committee to come to a legal opinion were lodged .
They were not put before the committee .
That is the essence of this matter .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Madam President , I should like to say again how gratified I am that we were able to vote on the report in this manner and that Parliament was able to secure the approval of the Commission for some of its substantive positions .
Among these substantive points are the principle of labelling genetically modified seed - a labelling provision which goes well beyond the requirements of the Regulation concerning novel foods and which , I hope , will set an example - and the fact that we are undertaking a revision here and that a similar labelling regime will soon be established for consumer goods .
Another very important point in this report is that local varieties have been authorized and can be marketed again and that this will help to safeguard genetic diversity .
What I rather regret - and here I fail to understand the PPE Group in particular , who are normally staunch advocates of farming interests - is that the PPE Group rejected the third indent regarding local exchanges of seed between neighbouring farmers for use on their own farms .
This meant that the amendment failed by a few votes .
I do hope that the Commission will now incorporate this text - which , after all , we negotiated with it - into its implementing provisions , so that the present neighbourly practice can still be legalized by virtue of those provisions .
. ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats abstained from the vote today on the report indicated .
The seed package is based on Article 43 of the EC Treaty , which the Danish Social Democrats can accept as long as it only concerns the amalgamation of trade directives in the field of agriculture .
But in this case it is also a question of inserting part of the Directive on the release of GMOs into the Seeds Directive .
As the Release Directive is normally dealt with under Article 100a , which amongst other things gives individual Member States freedom to apply the environment clause , the Danish Social Democrats cannot accept the loss of this facility .
The remainder of the report is satisfactory .
Our Group has voted in favour of all the amendments proposed by the Committee on Agriculture concerning changes to the directives relating to the marketing of seed , apart from the third indent of Amendment No 21 .
Our Group is more than satisfied with the compromise resulting from the vote in plenary session .
Indeed , undertakings marketing seed need to abide by a number of legitimate requirements , such as those dealing with labelling and user information .
These types of controls should enable bona fide businesses to develop and eliminate less scrupulous operators .
As for the farmers , the amendments tabled and adopted in plenary session essentially safeguards the principle of preferential treatment for farmers .
As regards the third indent of Amendment No 21 , our Group opposed this and notes with satisfaction that it failed to win approval .
Indeed , although the principle of seed exchanges between neighbours may appear quite legitimate , measures are necessary to prevent the establishment of a parallel market and especially the risk of losing all traceability of seed produced from genetically-modified organisms .
On the Souchet report ( A4-0144 / 92 )
. ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats voted for the Souchet report today .
The Danish Social Democrats want the common fisheries policy to be built on principles of rationality and sustainability .
Aquaculture is a major source of pollution in the fishery sector .
The Danish Social Democrats do not therefore want aquaculture to form part of either an employment strategy or an environmental strategy .
The same applies to similar sources of pollution in the fishery sector .
I voted against the Souchet Report as I do not believe that the European Parliament has given satisfactory consideration to the legal base issue which I raised in legal base amendments to the Commission 's proposal to amend the basic CFP Regulation .
I believe that the Legal Affairs Committee has let Parliament down by examining only part of the Commission 's proposal , and not the part of the Proposal which I found the most troublesome .
That is why I do not believe that Parliament may rely with confidence on the Legal Affairs Committee 's Opinion to preclude the possibility that the adoption of the Commission 's proposal could compromise the CFP 's founding principle of relative stability and create unfortunate precedents for the future development of EU fisheries policy .
The future of the CFP 's founding principle of relative stability is at stake and it is absurd that the European Parliament should vote on such a delicate and complex matter without taking due time to reflect on the potential damage which could be wreaked by this open-ended and ill-considered Commission proposal .
The amendments to my report that Mr Macartney had tabled posed a legal problem that went outside the scope of the report , and its is the consideration of this problem that led to the vote being deferred by two months .
Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has just presented its conclusions : it is of the opinion , by a very large majority , that the legal basis adopted by the Commission is correct .
At the time of the vote Mr Macartney had said that the Legal Affairs Committee did not appear to him to have examined the question he had raised closely enough .
In response to my intervention , the Chairman of the Legal Affairs Committee indicated that its conclusions were , on the contrary , sufficiently precise .
On this basis , our Group accordingly decided not to accept Mr Macartney 's amendments and , quite naturally , to vote in favour of the final resolution .
As regards the substance of the report , I can only regret the fact that during the debate in plenary session Commissioner Bonino failed to accept the validity of the two amendments that I put forward in my report and which have been adopted virtually unanimously by the Members of this House .
It is indeed wrong for the Commission to seek to claim rights that it does not actually possess in order to avoid all controls on the manner in which it negotiates .
If , within the framework of international conferences , the Commission accepts new technical restrictions to be imposed on European Union fishermen , it seems to us vital for the Council and Parliament to be able to have their say on the validity of such restrictions .
Since the Council must be in a position to oversee the Commission 's actions at any given time , it does not seem to us to be appropriate to modify the existing decision-making procedure , which does provide for the exercise of such supervision .
I note with satisfaction that Parliament gave its approval to this approach by an almost unanimous vote in favour .
On the Pery report ( A4-0220 / 97 )
We would like to thank the rapporteur for her very thorough work on this report .
But we want to state our own fundamental attitude to fishery agreements of this type .
We think that the European Union should cease this type of expensive fishery agreement and instead support domestic fishing operations in developing countries .
Such a solution would better serve the development of fish as a significant source of food globally , would strengthen economic development in these countries and would also remove the risk which can accompany fishing agreements , whereby fishing operations in certain Member countries receive indirect support to continue their operation in a situation where the whole of the European fishing industry needs to be severely restricted .
. ( DA ) We are voting on the extension of a protocol to an agreement which has already expired , let alone already taken effect .
It is a grotesque situation .
I abstain from voting because I do not entirely approve of the content of these fishing agreements with Senegal , which at the same time we know are not wanted by the local fishermen .
On the Gallagher report ( A4-0229 / 97 )
In view of the European Parliament 's discussion of the above report we wish to state our own fundamental attitude to fishery agreements of this type .
We think that the European Union should cease this type of expensive fishery agreement and instead support local fishing operations in developing countries .
Such a solution would better serve the development of fish as a significant source of food globally , would strengthen economic development in these countries and also remove the risk that often accompanies fishing agreements , whereby fishing operations in certain Member countries receive indirect support to continue their operations in a situation where the whole of the European fishing industry needs to be severely restricted .
We also think that , when the opportunity arises , the European Parliament should consider contributing to the introduction of a fundamental change in attitude in this area .
On the Papakyriazis report ( A4-0211 / 97 )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Ombudsman 's annual report is an opportunity to remind ourselves of the scale of its task .
As a member of the Committee on Petitions , I cannot but pay tribute to the work of the Ombudsman 's office and its contribution to a process that seeks to bring the citizens of our nations closer to European institutions that seem all too remote from them .
Yet , there is one thing that worries me : Mr Papakyriazis ' report speaks of , and I quote : ' supporting the institutional balance laid down by the Treaties and , in particular , the correct exercise of the discretionary powers of the Commission , the European Parliament and the Court of Justice ' .
However , since by definition these discretionary powers need to be exercised acting with complete independence , in other words without any a posteriori control , it is clear that the European institutions and other bodies can never deviate from the rules of fairness and legality that the Member States themselves have put in place , and it is no less evident that Community administration , like any other , has to be flexible .
Without this flexibility it will continue to be - or even become so , if it is not already - labyrinthine and doctrinaire .
Along with the rapporteur , we too therefore stress the need to define the Ombudsman 's terms of reference clearly and , what is more important , the concept of maladministration , to protect him against any interventionist tendencies .
At the end of the day reforms will have to be put through , if that is what it takes , rather than having to make do with the conscience-salving post-facto corrective measures brought by the Ombudsman 's action .
And let us not forget that , as elected representatives of our respective peoples , it is we who are their best ombudsmen in the context of the Union .
Finally , I should like to draw attention to the fact that , in accordance with Article 13 of this Assembly 's decision dated 9 March 1994 defining the Ombudsman 's legal status , the Ombudsman 's headquarters are in the European Parliament .
Now , as the final communiqué of the recent IGC reminded us , that is in Strasbourg .
I would therefore not wish for the setting up - to quote from the Ombudsman 's report - ' of a small outpost in Brussels ' , to be anything more than a practical expedient with no implication of any additional centralizing relocation which could , ultimately , lead to Strasbourg becoming a small outpost of Brussels .
The Scandinavian view is that establishing an Ombudsman to serve the public interest is a good idea .
It is particularly important in view of the democratic shortcomings of the EU and the love of bureaucratic , detailed regulations which permeates the Union 's authorities .
We have voted for the proposal which aims to improve the prospects for the general public to submit a petition .
But we have voted against point 4 in the report which states ' that the Ombudsman 's role should be to support the institutional balance which is established in the Treaty ... '
This conflicts with the very aim of the function of Ombudsman to serve the public interest and to forward their complaints .
Furthermore , this is not covered in the relevant sections of the Treaty i.e. in Articles 8d , 138d , and 138e .
On the Larive report ( A4-0219 / 97 )
Unfortunately , the plain truth is that many big companies invest enormous amounts of money in showering consumers with gaudy advertisements for products which I did not even know existed . The fact that they were lacking in my life was even less obvious to me .
The fact that advertisements , also known as commercial communication , are to be regulated at EU level is bad for consumers .
It would be better if the National States themselves establish regulations on what is acceptable , taking into account any cultural aspects .
I cannot find any mention of the significance of this matter for consumers in the Commission 's Green Paper .
The aim is clear enough , i.e. rules which will apply for companies , but I think it is important to put the emphasis on the situation of the consumer .
It is important that there are strong consumer organisations or public authorities which are responsible for dealing with complaints and ensuring that the established rules are observed .
This is particularly important for ' cross border advertising ' which affects consumers .
This service is best provided free of charge to the consumer .
Of course it is important for the market to be self regulating but companies do not manage this task themselves , as has been demonstrated by the current situation ( otherwise the issue would not have been raised ) .
There must be especially strong standards governing advertisements aimed at young people and children as they are particularly vulnerable .
. ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats today voted for the Larive report , but we are opposed to two points regarding the question of applying the country of origin or destination principle .
In the interests of consumers , the Danish Social Democrats favour a compromise between the two principles , so that a consumer who buys a product in one country on the basis of advertising originating in another should not have to be familiar with the other country 's law and trade practices in order to be able to complain about any defects in the product .
We thus support two of the four amendments which have been tabled on the two points referred to .
At the present time , the problem of commercial communication in the European internal market is regrettably very striking evidence of the EU operating as a ' deregulating community ' as well as being a vivid illustration of how and under what conditions this is being done . The EU is applying powerful leverage to prise away existing regulatory mechanisms in the Member States but is not replacing them with equivalent mechanisms at the European level .
The report before us blindly succumbs to this deregulatory trend , thereby exposing a key area of human culture and personal development to unbridled commercialization .
As Greens we cannot and will not respond to this trend by advocating renationalization , but we certainly can take every opportunity , even before the appearance of the longoverdue European codes of conduct , to insist that steps , however small , be taken to curb this destructive tendency ; this can be done by appropriate use of the Commission 's right of initiative as well as by prudent application of the subsidiarity principle .
It cannot replace European framework directives , but it can help to tide us over the period required for their adoption .
The common internal market of the European Union can coexist with the cultural diversity of its Member States and regions ; there is no reason to use it as a steamroller to enforce uniformity .
On the contrary , a segmented market with human needs at its core actually requires such diversity and the protection it affords .
Only if market development is distorted into an end in itself , if human needs are reduced to nothing more than a market force , does the sort of non-regulation proposed here start to appear rational ...
On the Bowe report ( A4-0239 / 97 )
With regard to the Commission 's communication on biotechnology , our Group believes that a measure of development in this industry of tomorrow should be allowed to go ahead , while keeping a very careful watch to prevent any possible abuses .
Having said that , we believe it is absolutely vital to draw up a rigorous procedure that will allow geneticallyengineered products to be kept under strict scrutiny .
At the time we were having the various debates on genetically-modified organisms , industrialists were repeatedly assuring us that they were quite capable of keeping tight control over their spread .
It is for this reason that our Group has supported the insistent demands addressed to the Commission aimed at putting in place very clear rules relating to the responsibility of the various operators .
The BSE affair has shown the dangers to which we can be exposed when research is allowed to have high productivity as its sole focus in agriculture and pointed up the need to provide for a monitoring system that is genuinely independent of the economic and political powers .
With this in mind we have supported the proposal for the setting up of a central scientific committee .
But care will need to be taken to draw up adequate procedures to avoid a repetition of the problems that occurred in the mad cow disease affair .
In conclusion , our Group stresses the need to preserve the precautionary principle in the interests of protecting consumers and protecting the environment .
Biotechnology will never be truly accepted by the citizens of Europe until real guarantees of safety are introduced .
That brings the voting to a close
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Telecommunications and competition
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
( A4-0215 / 97 ) by Mr W.G. van Velzen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission Green Paper on a numbering policy for telecommunications services in Europe ( COM ( 96 ) 0590 - C4-0658 / 96 ) , - ( A4-0213 / 97 ) by Mr Argyros , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the draft communication from the Commission on the application of the competition rules to access agreements in the telecommunications sector ( COM ( 96 ) 0649 - C4-0010 / 97 ) , - ( A4-0240 / 97 ) by Mr Herman , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Council Directives 90 / 387 / EEC and 92 / 44 / EEC for the purpose of adaptation to a competitive environment in telecommunications ( C4-0306 / 97-95 / 0280 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I am speaking both to present my own report on the Green Paper on numbering , and also on the report by Mr Argyros .
Having dealt with legislation on the operation of the telecommunications market , interconnection and licensing , we have now moved on to directives and green papers concerned primarily with the interests of consumers - namely the content and operation of the universal service - such as this Green Paper on a numbering policy in the European Union .
Clearly , consumers are also bound to reap the benefits of the liberalization of the telecommunications market , in terms of an improved price / quality ratio and a better and more comprehensive service .
There is still a long way to go here , as we can see from the fact that new providers are already offering lower prices and better service deals .
What instruments can the consumer use to obtain better quality or prices ?
Number portability and carrier preselection are important here , since they allow consumers to decide for themselves which operator they wish to use for long-distance calls , which are expensive and therefore where they can make the greatest savings .
Number portability - being able to take your number with you if you move to another operator - is at the top of the list .
It is an extremely effective means of obliging operators to do their best to treat their customers well , knowing that it is relatively easy for them to switch to another operator .
Let us not forget that in the long run-up to the interconnection directive , Parliament always urged that number portability should be introduced as soon as possible .
I am pleased that at its last meeting , the Council came round to Parliament 's point of view and itself recommended that number portability should be introduced without delay .
In my report , I propose that countries which have not introduced number portability by 1 January 2000 should be regarded as countries where full competition on the telecommunications market has not yet been achieved , so that the public are regularly made aware that their country is not yet geared up and that consumers are therefore paying too much .
Number portability will also eventually have to be introduced for the mobile sector , but I know that there are still some difficulties to be resolved there .
Another important point is carrier selection and carrier preselection .
Liberalization is of little benefit to European consumers unless they can choose their long-distance operator .
Because we wish to have fair competition throughout the Union , I think that each country should be obliged to provide carrier selection and carrier preselection .
I would strongly urge my colleague Mrs Read to withdraw Amendment No 1 .
It is not in the interest of consumers , and it protects major operators who charge high costs for long-distance calls while at the same time benefiting from their competitive advantages in continental Europe .
That is not really what you could call reciprocity .
I also propose establishing a legal basis for number portability and for carrier selection and carrier preselection in a review of the interconnection directive .
I hope that Commissioner Bangemann will agree to this .
Another point covered in my report is the development of ' pan-European service numbers ' .
There is expected to be a boom in services based on these numbers over the next few years , and I have stressed that the development of European numbers also needs to take account of the development of global numbers .
I have heard contradictory statements about how much scope there is for special European numbers , and I would like to hear what the Commissioner has to say about developments on a global scale , and what role the European Union ought to play .
I certainly believe that Europe should take the lead if global developments take too long , as many fear .
Anyone who looks at Eurosport 's special offers page - and I know that both the Commissioners are great sports fans , so they must spend hours doing this - knows that the huge variety of numbers does nothing to promote the development of pan-European services .
I also think that consumers should be quite clear about whether they are using freephone numbers or numbers for which they will be charged .
In some Member States , the difference is not always clear and consumers are kept on hold for several minutes without knowing whether it is costing them a fortune .
You cannot keep making changes to number plans .
They alarm people , and anyway they cost both individuals and firms too much money .
That is why it would be better to aim for one successful operation in five years ' time , rather than making changes every year .
I also think it would be going too far to introduce a European country code with the number 3 .
This needs further study .
My group agrees with the main thrust of the proposals in the Green Paper , and we would like to know what the Commissioners think about our proposals and amendments .
I have one final comment on the report by Mr Argyros .
I think that the main point is to clarify the idea of special network access and how it should be interpreted .
I should like to hear what the Commissioner thinks about this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the aim of the Commission 's communication is to secure equal competition conditions in the numerous access agreements that will be concluded between existing telecommunications network and services agencies and their new competitors , in light of the forthcoming liberalization of the telecommunications sector from 1 January 1998 .
As rapporteur of the report on this Commission communication , I tried with my comments to the Commission and the Council to examine and clarify the essential prerequisites for fair competition which would potentially foster development and technological modernization in the telecommunications sector .
The issues I deal with in my report are as follows :
Firstly , the timetable for liberalization and the essential characteristics of the regulatory framework for telecommunications , in other words clarity , flexibility , and compatibility with the international regulatory framework .
Secondly , technological development and modernization in the sector .
Thirdly , the principles for effective and equal application of the competition rules to facilitate the transition of the sector to a competitive environment , i.e. harmonized rules and a harmonized approach by the national regulatory authorities , and objective criteria when assessing whether there has been a distortion of the competition rules .
Finally , I attempt to examine the world-wide dimension of telecommunications .
More specifically , concerning the timetable and the regulatory framework : liberalization is to take place on 1 January 1998 .
It is evident that not all the Member States of the European Union will be ready for that deadline .
This is already a problem for the application of the competition rules .
For that reason , the Commission must consider the ways in which , during this transitional period , it intends to deal with the cross-border issues of distorted competition between liberalized and non-liberalized telecommunications markets .
I think it would be beneficial for all the Member States to speed up their efforts to comply with the prerequisites required for liberalization .
The regulatory framework of the telecommunications sector comprises numerous directives , each covering its respective aspects .
This fragmented regulatory system makes it harder for those involved , who have no clear picture of the legislation in force , and creates an off-putting climate for investment in the sector .
Recalling , then , the need for a clear and flexible legislative framework , I ask for compatibility and consistency between the frameworks regulating interconnections and access agreements .
I also think the Commission should establish an overall text defining the legislative framework for telecommunications in a clear and easily perceptible way .
The report 's second important issue concerns the significant effect of the rapidity of technological developments .
To be competitive in this sector at international level , Europe must adopt up-to-date legislation compatible with recent technological developments , which will allow for the use of new technologies and offer legal protection to interested parties .
Wishing to avoid marginalization of the sector by reason of outdated technology , and granted the convergence shown by the sectors of telecommunications , broadcasting and information technology , I consider it necessary to apply the competition rules to the area of digital broadcasting as well .
Telecommunications are a field of economic activity which is traditionally monopolistic , so as to secure the basic services for all citizens .
The change from a monopolistic to a competitive environment is a sensitive issue , requiring particular care so far as the application of Community rules of competition is concerned .
The transition can only be completed effectively provided the competition rules are established clearly and applied strictly in an equal and harmonized way .
That harmonization can be contributed to by the national regulatory authorities , exercising their responsibilities in the context of the rules governing open network provision , in other words the special legislation for the telecommunications sector .
Those authorities must be quite independent from the public provision agencies , and must follow a harmonized European approach which fully respects the rules of competition .
The Committee was exercised by the fact that to begin with , the existing official agencies will have competitive advantages until new alternatives become established .
To achieve equal conditions in those circumstances , it must be set as a prime obligation for all agencies to provide equal access , and to establish an authoritative position , the Commission must make clear the factors it will be taking into account , follow a more elastic and global approach , and adopt objective criteria .
The last point , but a very important one for Europe 's position in the world system , granted the international character of telecommunications and the efforts in progress to open up the markets , is that the Community 's framework must be compatible with existing regulations in third countries .
Consistency between the two and utilization of Europe 's competitive advantages will make it possible for European companies to compete dynamically against their nonCommunity competitors , with positive results for the economy and for Europe 's citizens .
Finally , let me thank my colleagues for their cooperation and support .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the task that I have to perform is indeed a very pleasant one , namely to report to the House on the highly favourable progress in a procedure that has been relatively closely monitored by all the partners .
I would like here to pay tribute to the Dutch Presidency which has displayed considerable forcefulness , since it has succeeded in persuading the Council to accept solutions that were closer to those advanced by Parliament and the Commission .
I should also like to express my thanks to the Commission , which realized fairly quickly that some of Parliament 's amendments were after all excellent , and that also went for its overall policy .
Lastly I wish to thank my colleagues , who gave me the confidence to see the negotiations with the Council Presidency through to completion .
Let me tell you briefly what was involved .
It was necessary to arrive at a precise definition of leased lines .
The point was accepted .
It was also necessary to ensure - and that is dealt with in the report that Mr van Velzen spoke about earlier - the portability of numbers because , where competition in the telecommunications industry is concerned , portability of numbers is a vital element .
No matter how carefully worded a text , if switching from one telecommunications provider to another were to involve some complex procedure or dialling a long string of numbers , this would clearly discourage competition .
That point too was accepted .
Two or three problems continue to preoccupy Parliament , and their solution does not depend entirely on the Commission but also on the Council .
What problems am I talking about ?
First there is the independence of the national regulatory authorities .
We know that in some countries authorities like that do exist : they enjoy real independence and real power .
That is not the case everywhere .
In other countries such authorities are still in their embryonic stages and seem to be like a fig leaf , which is designed to hide what we are not supposed to see : their total impotence in their dealings with the main telecommunications network provider .
This point has not yet been resolved .
We know that this is not the Commission 's fault and that the problem lies with the Council , which has not quite got there yet .
Another problem that concerns us and one that we are becoming increasingly aware of is the question of the fair enforcement of directives .
We now have directives that are beginning to form a consistent and coherent whole , but they are far from being enforced uniformly throughout the Community .
It would be good therefore to have someone who could cut through the disputes that are bound to arise - indeed , some are beginning to arise already .
We have a written undertaking from the Commission which says , and I quote : ' the Commission has undertaken to check that arrangements in the various Member States for the setting up of the universal service do not entail any distortion of competition ' .
That is a major problem .
The universal service , as we have seen here in Parliament , is an interesting concept , but it does have a certain obvious ideological aroma about it : universal service , public service - there is indeed a danger that it may end up as neither fish , flesh nor fowl .
One must therefore beware of distortion of competition taking place under the very clever and somewhat popularity-seeking pretext of spreading the idea of the universal service , disguising the true objective which is better protection for the national territory or the national market .
This has happened in some countries , including mine I have to say .
We are hopeful that , now that the Commission has given its undertaking , we shall be able to straighten matters out .
I should like to draw your attention to one point over which the Commission has been a little coy : the need to have a European authority .
I can understand that the Commission is none to eager at the moment to claim authority for itself because , politically , this would not be an opportune time to do so .
This does not alter the fact that one day we will need the intervention of a European authority .
One thing that is needed above all else - and that is my one major reproach to the heads of state who met in Amsterdam - is for the powers of the Commission to be strengthened when it comes to negotiations with the outside .
The service industries , and that includes telecommunications therefore , are not provided for .
The Treaty of Rome , as we know , stipulated that the Commission should be the main body to handle negotiations with the outside .
One might have wished that that were so , not only in the case of goods and capital but also with services .
Now , in Amsterdam , we had two or three countries that , for quite illogical and incomprehensible reasons that go against the interests of their own citizens , have refused .
They followed France and one or two others that have been dissatisfied with the way the Commission has been defending their interests in certain negotiations .
This is a problem that is going to crop up on a regular basis .
That said , the result is there for all to see : we have still not had satisfaction on this point .
Finally there is the problem of commitology .
This is another question that has not been properly addressed in Amsterdam , but since we have been promised an intergovernmental conference before enlargement , we shall have an opportunity to put that right .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the introduction of number portability is essential for the successful operation of a liberalized telecommunications market , and it should take place simultaneously in all the Member States in order to provide fair competition for businesses on the internal market .
Legislation needs to be introduced with care , and markets should be established on a reciprocal basis .
The telecommunications sector is a major employer and therefore has much to lose , so the Commission must ensure that the Member States do not delay the simultaneous introduction of number portability for protectionist reasons .
One of the basic objectives of a numbering policy is to promote innovation .
Innovation in the telecommunications sector can lead to a better service , greater use of telecommunications services and therefore more jobs .
Research and technological development can make a significant contribution here , and investment in research by those involved in the market could help to promote the development of software and hardware which would quickly make a user-friendly numbering plan available for consumers .
The introduction of number portability should take account of new technological developments which are leading to the convergence of telecommunications and informatics , and the continuing integration of these various technologies must not be hindered by too much or too little legislation .
My final point concerns legislation on naming on the Internet .
The Committee on Research and Technological Development considers that a solution needs to be found to the shortage of naming capacity on the Internet , preferably by the Internet community itself .
The imposition of rules from above should be avoided if we are not to hamper the development of this important element of the information society , and our committee wishes the rapporteur , Mr van Velzen , every success .
Mr President , I would like to speak on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights to express our opinion on Mr van Velzen 's report on the Green Paper dealing with numbering policy in the field of telecommunications services in Europe .
And , firstly , I would like to thank Mr van Velzen for the way in which he has accepted the conclusions of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights - conclusions which were approved by a vote of 10 to 1 in favour - because , for reasons of procedure , he has made them his own by submitting them to this part-session as amendments .
On behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , therefore , I strongly recommend a vote in favour of the amendments presented by Mr van Velzen .
With regard to the Green Paper and from the legal standpoint - which was the view adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights - this is undoubtedly a necessary and timely initiative .
Necessary and timely because the internal telecommunications market still has to be set up on a proper basis and is an issue we should address without delay .
The report of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights highlights , from the general standpoint , the simultaneity of legitimate interests to be protected - the interests of the industries involved - but , above all , the interests of consumers and also aspects which are not purely economic : for example , aspects relating to the rapid development of technology , or sociological aspects , such as the degree to which each of us identifies with a particular telephone number , the disruption involved for all users - individuals or companies - when a telephone number has to be changed , since this involves an enormous cost which we have to avoid , hence the need for a measure such as the portability or transportability of numbers to be effective .
Apart from these matters , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights concentrated on more methodological issues .
Firstly , from the legal standpoint , any discrimination in favour of mobile operators or fixed operators is pointless .
Secondly , we have to emphasize the fact that a general , systematic approach has to be adopted .
I , as draftswoman of the opinion , have had to summarize nearly a kilo of photocopies of directly relevant texts in order to study this Green Paper - my apologies for quantifying the legal paperwork in this way .
In accordance with the Amsterdam conclusions , we must progress towards clarity and simplification .
In this area , therefore , it is an absolute necessity to have a coordinated text and to impart some order to the morass of rules and regulations which apply in this field .
And , secondly , a systematic approach to this matter does not require the creation of new regulatory instruments in order to take account of the three aspects of selection , pre-selection and portability . What is needed is for us to make full use of the legal instruments which already exist , namely the voice telephony directive and the interconnection directive .
Mr President , I wish to start with my customary , but nonetheless heartfelt , thanks to the three rapporteurs , Mr Herman , Mr Argyros and Mr van Velzen .
Mrs Palacio is quite right about the volume of legislation and documentation surrounding this area .
Indeed , I sometimes think the only qualification you need to be a rapporteur in this area is to be a fast reader .
Nevertheless , I appreciate how much hard work has gone into these legislative and other texts .
It is very good to see both the Commissioners responsible here and I hope they will both have an opportunity to reply in this debate .
I wish to talk particularly about Mr van Velzen 's report and his ideas on carrier pre-selection .
I have put down an amendment with the support of many colleagues and I hope that , in turn , I can persuade Mr van Velzen to withdraw his plea to me to withdraw and also to support my amendment .
I am not asking the Commission to withdraw its proposals about carrier pre-selection .
Far from it , although I would ask them why this is inevitably linked with numbering .
There might be a good case for having a separate directive on these two issues but I would ask the Commission to carry out a further study on the possible consequences of carrier pre-selection .
It is far from clear what these consequences will be .
If it makes it less attractive to invest in competitive networks at local level , if it strengthens the position of existing incumbents , if it detracts from the opportunities for the local consumer who make primarily local calls and favours those who customarily make more long-distance or international calls , it really will not have served our purpose well .
All my amendment does is ask the Commission - and it is a logical time to ask when it is thinking about a directive - to look again at what the consequences will be .
If my fears and those of its supporters are ill-founded there is no problem .
But if there is a case to answer , this is the time to look at it much more carefully and I hope colleagues will support me .
Mr Argyros ' report and Mr Herman 's comments on regulation raised a question we come back to over and over again , namely whether existing regulatory arrangements are going to be adequate in the newly liberalized telecommunications market .
It is difficult because the speed of liberalization has progressed at very different rates in the different Member States .
Parliament has consistently asked the Commission - and I know the Commissioner has done some work on this , for which we are grateful - and the Council to come up with proposals for a European regulation .
Mr Argyros and I have submitted a joint compromise text which I very much hope will meet with the support of this House .
I have a very minor criticism - although I hesitate even to call it that - of Mr Argyros ' report : some of the wording is perhaps over-enthusiastic about liberalization but that is not enough to change the vote .
I would just say that some of the old public monopolies had their advantages and it would be disastrous if we ended up with new private monopolies with all the faults of the old public ones and none of the advantages .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to begin by congratulating the three rapporteurs for the excellent and enormous job they have done , and particularly Mr Herman , whose work on this subject is being concluded after a truly brilliant conciliation process .
I wish to dwell for an instant on the issue of portable phone numbers which is a crucial factor in the policy of competition in the telecommunications sector .
Technology can do amazing things : it makes it possible to link a mobile message in real time to a user on the move , using the cellular technology which is to be expanded through satellite technology , but anti-competitive and bureaucratic barriers can be created that are extremely resistant to the idea of transfer from one carrier to another .
I endorse the principles set down in the Commission communication as well as the recommendations of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , and I therefore urge the Commission to move rapidly along the course it has set , bearing in mind also the growth in the electronics trade and new services like the Internet .
I wish to draw the attention of honourable Members and the Commissioners to one aspect of portability and harmonization that seems to me to have been forgotten : calling cards and prepaid cards .
Based on a comparison with experience in the United States , it seems to me that this call system forms part , in the broad sense , of the issue of portability and the single market , as it is a means that enables the user to make calls any public or private phone , using simple procedures .
In Europe , however , we have a plethora of different phone cards , prepaid and credit cards and cards containing a chip , with a scale of charges that can hardly be described as transparent ; consequently , we are tempted to use cellular phones , that are much more expensive a technology , even though phoning from a public call box would be much cheaper .
I wonder , and I ask the Commission , whether we ought not to be doing something in this sector , by calling for portability of individual numbers and accounts .
Mr President , on behalf of the Liberal Group , I should like to thank the Commission and the three rapporteurs for their work , which is the subject of our debate today .
The European Union plays an important role in terms of competitiveness by removing obstructive legislation and developing incentives , and today 's proposals and reports are a step in the right direction here .
I am delighted to see that efforts are being made to harmonize various essential conditions in the telecommunications sector .
This is a vital move , because differences between the Member States in terms of legislation on number portability , carrier preselection and carrier selection , for example , and in other areas too , have given Europe a very fragmented ICT policy .
Number transferability is essential for the smooth operation of the internal market and will in fact promote competition in the telecommunications sector .
We all know examples of areas where liberalization is still not working , even in countries where it was introduced ten years ago , and this is why it is so important for all the institutions of the Union to make sure that the fullest possible legislation is ready by 1 January 1998 .
I would ask the Commission to check that the Member States are also making an effort to bring their telecommunications legislation into line in the short term .
Lengthy transitional periods for certain Member States must be avoided if at all possible .
I should like to thank Mr van Velzen for agreeing to Amendment No 8 , which contains the proposal I put forward in the Committee on Economic Affairs for number portability to be introduced Europe-wide as soon as possible .
It is certainly technically possible , but it all depends on whether the political will is there .
Much lip-service was paid to these proposals at the successful conference in Bonn , and I only hope that these words will now be turned into deeds .
Mr President , today we are debating some of the most important aspects of the complete liberalization of telecommunications from 1 January 1998 , and also various dramatic side effects of that liberalization , such as its effect on the numbering system .
Technological developments in the telecommunications sector and the multitude of factors that influence it make the new problems continually more complex and involved .
That tendency is reinforced by the fact that liberalization of the telecommunications sector has been mainly approached on the basis of political and economic criteria , with little attention to scientific , technical , organizational and social aspects and consequences .
What has prevailed , is a concept of the complete reversal of the sector 's public character ; the expansionist penetration of major multinational capital aiming to convert to its own ends the vast profits that are interwoven with the sector 's revolutionary development and its definitive role in the context of the world-wide internationalized market .
So definitive decisions about the sector were taken mainly at a political level , while dangerous disregard was shown for the role and contribution of relevant international bodies such as the International Telecommunications Association and the European Conference of Post Offices and Telecommunications , in the development of telecommunications and the necessary international cooperation .
The problems arising in the area of numbering in light of the pan-European and world-wide structuring of classical telephony , mobile telephony , personal communications and value-added services , in combination with full liberalization of the market and the existence of a multitude of service provision agencies , are likely to assume explosive proportions in the near future .
There is also a risk that chaos may be created , or that the market may be completely monopolized by the private giants being created in the sector by mergers and concentrations of large multinational enterprises .
All of this , to demonstrate yet again that despite any measures proposed by the rapporteurs or promoted by the Commission in the name of free competition , liberalization of the telecommunications market has nothing to offer the great majority of citizens but will only operate to the detriment of the public service , monopolize the market by major private monopolies , and ultimately raise prices and make thousands of working people redundant .
It is the Commission 's duty to coordinate its intervention in international bodies so that , to whatever extent may still be possible today , critical problems of coordination and international cooperation can be dealt with after this degree of market liberalization .
Mr President , we are discussing four reports on telecommunications policy and I wish to congratulate all the rapporteurs .
I should however like to pick out the Herman report on the new directive to adapt the sector to a new competition environment , whose final version in codecision will be voted on this week and whose conciliation committee I served on .
I should like to congratulate Mr Herman not only on his report but also on the efficiency with which he conducted the conciliation process on the European Parliament 's behalf , enabling the report to be approved in a very short time indeed and showing once again that the codecision approach is a very good method - not only is it democratic but it is also efficient if both parties show good will .
The fact that the new Amsterdam Treaty substantially increased the areas where the European Parliament will be able to take part in codecision is a good guarantee that its interests will be defended with tenacity , but also with efficiency and without loss of valuable time , by the members of the European Parliament .
These report are part of a set of legislation with an eye to the future liberalization of telecommunications services planned for 1 January 1998 , although Greece , Ireland , Spain , Portugal and Luxembourg have been allowed derogations for periods that ought to be reduced .
I think that the Commission should pay particular attention to five vital aspects : the advantage of setting out in a single text the legal framework for telecommunications , bearing in mind that the sector 's commercial activity should be facilitated , especially that of SMEs ; secondly , access in equal conditions to networks and services as one of the main obligations of telecommunications exploiters ; thirdly , the need to ensure a universal service so that the liberalization of telecommunications infrastructures and services does not act against consumers ; fourthly , to guarantee transparency in the system of prices and the establishment of a fair billing method ; fifthly , to guarantee throughout the European Union a competitive environment enabling Community telecommunications companies to compete worldwide , as provided for in the recent WTO agreement on the mutual opening of telecommunications .
In these circumstances , I feel that European citizens and companies should be able to benefit in the future from a telecommunications service with access conditions ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , it is important that any changes to telecommunications systems are based on the needs of users and that the system is made simple , cheap and reliable .
New numbers and systems must be thoroughly evaluated before they are implemented otherwise they could involve substantial practical difficulties for the user and increased costs for society .
I have a question for the Commission .
I cannot quite see from the report , - and I am referring primarily to the report by Mr. W.G. van Velzen , - that a common prefix within the EU will automatically result in lower costs and better service .
I would be pleased to hear the Commission 's comments on this .
There is a risk , that the use of a lot of digits in a telephone number , 9-10 digits for example , will cause difficulty for the user , at least this is the case according to information which I have received from the Swedish Telecommunications authority .
It is important that numbers which are used often are kept and that we do not change a system which otherwise perhaps functions well .
It is also important to pay sufficient heed to the National Telecommunications authorities and to view the changes taking place at EU level from a global , international perspective as well .
In all other respects we favour the amendment proposals tabled by the Liberal Group .
We are simply highlighting the fact that any changes made to the system must be based on the needs of users .
Mr President , competition , or rather competitiveness , or better still , the huge business potential in telecommunications lie at the bottom of what has been agreed in the sector .
Now we have this package , made up of apparently technical reports and one on competition rules , which head in the same direction that concerns us and that we have denounced .
Two remarks on the lines of others that we have made and that we wish to make as expressions of a position that goes against the current of privatizing liberalization .
First of all : prices should not be re-balanced in accordance with costs , as is being done , at the cost of higher local rates and connections , clearly to the detriment of small companies , local social services and less well off individuals .
Secondly : universal service obligations , seen as a burden , should not be transformed into a means of financing private companies benefiting , already , from the liberalization of the sector .
Mr President , colleagues , at present the most central and open question in the information society is democracy .
Knowledge-intensive enterprises are important and productive , and often operate worldwide .
But what of the other aspect - democracy - which we are building here ?
There cannot be a new society without democracy .
The administration of computer networks is also administration of people .
We need a comprehensive programme from the Commission to establish democracy in the information society .
This is an important issue , and not merely an economic one .
Democracy means control , but it also means spontaneous participation by all members of the public , for example in electronic dialogue .
Mr van Velzen also says in his report that the establishment of a European forum to discuss Internet issues should be supported .
He says that E-mail addresses must be allocated in a fair and nondiscriminatory way to all - that is correct .
But the fair allocation of E-mail addresses will not eliminate the problem of democracy in relation to computer networks .
The scope for both the user and the producer to use services in the information society depend on the availability of modern hardware and general infrastructure , the level of education and financial resources .
The costly investment involved , which is almost entirely to be borne privately , readily becomes concentrated in densely populated areas and , even there , among the affluent .
This adds to the marginalization of population groups and regions that are already suffering from a lack of communications resources .
Now is the right time to develop telecommunications from the democratic angle .
As a result , we shall develop society as a whole , and not only networks .
As far as the technology is concerned , opting for broadband information networks should also be seen as leading to broad social participation without economic or cultural obstacles .
In Finland the number issue has been resolved .
Changing operators does not present any problems , and is part of the everyday routine .
Competition is completely open .
We lead the world as Internet users .
Our country is remote , but we still are not making any progress towards attaining democracy in the new networks , and we need it .
I am glad to see that those in the front row understand what we are talking about here .
Thank you , I am expecting a lot of you .
Mr President , I should like to comment on the reports by Mr van Velzen and by my friend Mr Herman .
Mr Argyros ' report will be dealt with by my colleague Karel van Miert .
I wish to thank Mr van Velzen for what was truly , as always , a very informed report .
The line of argument he set out , as well as the amendments , point in the same direction as the responses we have been receiving to the Green Paper , and this is also the direction in which the Commission wishes to proceed .
One thing is perfectly clear : in both of the areas covered here today , in other words number portability and more especially carrier preselection , we are intervening directly in the competitive system for the benefit of the subscriber .
Let me emphasize once more , partly in answer to the statements made by Mr Theonas , who evoked that old Marxist spectre of a Jurassic Park in which private monopolies trample everything underfoot , leaving not the tiniest plant for the subscriber , that we really ought to face the facts .
Political arguments are a fine thing , to be sure , but a close look at the facts will reveal that in the Member States where competition has been introduced , a few grand old companies have naturally survived , although their survival is due to their having been public monopolies for many years .
The situation of the consumer , however , has improved considerably .
That perhaps explains the enthusiasm which overcomes Mr Argyros whenever he thinks about liberalization and that certain lack of enthusiasm we see in Mrs Read , because anyone still entangled in the thicket of public monopolies will yearn for things to change .
If Mr Theonas does not believe that , he need only look at the countries where deregulation has taken place ; in those countries , besides the quality and universal-service guarantee offered by an efficient telephone network , subscribers have telephone charges which are sometimes only half or one-third as high as in the countries where public monopolies still operate .
Let us take Greece as an example . Greece is the country with the highest telephone charges .
The Commission fails to see any advantage to the consumer in that state of affairs .
That is why we are in favour of carrier preselection .
Which brings me to what Mrs Read said .
I have always agreed with her views on telecommunications in the past , because she normally approaches these matters with a very open mind and takes the right position from the consumer 's point of view .
But when it comes to carrier preselection , I believe she is too strongly influenced by the situation in her own country .
Fair enough ; everyone is used to the system he or she knows from home , and sometimes we consider it better than any other .
In this case , however , 14 Member States agree with us that carrier preselection is very important for competition and for the consumer , especially , of course , because it reduces telephone charges .
There is no carrier preselection in the United Kingdom .
Although it is possible to select a local operator freely , that operator has fixed contracts with long-distance operators , so that anyone choosing a local carrier is practically surrendering all further freedom of choice to the local carrier .
Our first point is that this is not good for the consumer , and our second point , which would be conceded by anyone who studies these systems and was also mentioned by Mr van Velzen , is that authorizing one country to operate a different system to the other 14 countries would distort competition in a way that we ought not to condone .
That is why we cannot support Mrs Read 's amendment .
Of course we can always prepare a study , and we are naturally engaged in constant reflection on these matters , but I consider it wrong to make the timetable dependent on the completion of such processes .
We want to make rapid progress , which is why we have reconsidered the timescale and have opted for 1 January 2000 .
That ties in with what Mr van Velzen has been saying .
The legal basis , at least for call-by-call carrier selection , already exists in the Directive on interconnection in telecommunications , and we shall naturally create a legal basis for carrier preselection , presumably in an addition to the Directive on interconnection , which would be a tidy solution .
Similar remarks may be made about portability of numbers , for it is perfectly clear that the right of subscribers to keep an existing telephone number removes a major obstacle to the exercise of their freedom to change telephone companies for whatever reasons .
Here too , we should like to proceed more swiftly , and I hope that the European Parliament can support this approach .
Such support , indeed , is expressed in Amendment 8 , so we are certainly very willing to endorse that amendment .
At the same time , I can perhaps refer to the amendments to Article 6 that we do not wish to endorse .
We do not consider it necessary to create a legal basis for call-by-call selection .
I have already said something about Amendment 1 , while Amendment 10 , concerning Gibraltar , was not mentioned during the discussion .
Nevertheless , I should like to say that it was better to refer to Gibraltar .
Had there been no reference to Gibraltar , that could have given rise to political speculation .
It was a purely technical consideration .
Our reference to Gibraltar has no political undertones whatsoever .
And so to my remarks on European telephone numbering .
We have jointly received a shortlist for Europe from the ITU .
That is now being tried out , and I hope these experiments will produce some useful findings .
We shall take it from there .
Before I finish , let me deal quickly with the Herman report .
May I congratulate the rapporteur both in my official capacity and on a personal level ; the fact that the President of the Council has appeared at this very moment naturally underlines the significance of my congratulations .
The parliamentary delegation , comprising Vice-President Verde I Aldea , Mr von Wogau and , as I said , Mr Herman as the rapporteur , undoubtedly performed quite outstanding work .
After all , we have managed to formulate clear provisions here for the Member States , going beyond what the Council of Ministers wanted .
Therein lies the importance of the parliamentary delegation and its efforts , which have ensured that independent regulatory authorities will monitor the technical basis as it develops within the market and will ensure that a minimum range of services is available everywhere and , above all , that fair competition can prevail .
Needless to say , I willingly admit to Mr Herman that we had hoped to achieve more , and I can tell you that we will achieve more .
Before that can happen , however , we need the goodwill of the Member States .
They are starting out on a learning process , and we shall probably have to await the completion of that process before they shift their ground and develop greater European solidarity and coordination .
That is the only reason .
Otherwise we should already have proposed an independent European regulatory authority .
Let me say to the President of the Council who is with us in this Chamber that if he promises to deliver such an authority , the Commission will immediately submit a proposal to that effect .
We shall not be the dog in the manger .
Finally - and I apologize for not having said this yet - let me mention the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Of course , Mrs Palacio , you are absolutely right ; we do have a motley jumble of provisions .
We can only change that when we come up with European provisions .
At the moment we are operating with directives .
But we are reflecting on how we can make this jumble of rules more transparent .
We have to do that in any case , since convergence compels us to prepare a completely new set of provisions .
There is one problem I should mention in connection with telephone services , namely that if it becomes possible in future to make the same quality of telephone call via the Internet at 5 % to 10 % of today 's costs , we can forget all of this , because nobody will then use the lines and infrastructure of the old telephone companies ; all operators will be using new infrastructures and new services .
If that day comes , we must be properly prepared to cope with it .
By that time it is to be hoped that there will only be European rules , and the jumble to which you and Mrs Read have referred will be a thing of the past .
In the meantime we continue to march through this jungle .
As I said , we have left Jurassic Park behind , although some stragglers are still there , and we are now moving , so to speak , into the savanna and can see a light on the horizon .
I hope that light represents a good system which will benefit telephone subscribers .
Mr President , as some of you will have noticed , over the recent years Martin Bangemann and I have appeared together here before Parliament , appeared together before the Council of Ministers , and we have tried to speed up the introduction of a coherent and carefully constructed policy by pursuing the aims that Martin Bangemann has just outlined for you , which are designed not only to enable the European Union to make up some of the ground it has lost in this area , but also to formulate a policy that would favour the users - whether corporate or private - and to try by these means to strengthen our competitive position .
Now we are close to achieving our goal , I mean from the legislation point of view .
But it is only the beginning , or the end of the beginning , if I may put it that way , and the early stages of the implementation of a competition policy and a competition regime across the entire European Union , even if in some of the Member States there will be some slight delay .
For my part I should like to concentrate my reflections on the report by Mr Argyros - whom I warmly congratulate on the quality of his work - by analysing a communication from the Commission which clarifies , which seeks to show how we intend to apply the rules on competition in this area .
There are two parts to this : the directives based on Article 90 , on the one hand , and the second part , which is being handled by Martin Bangemann , based on Article 100A , on the other . At this point I need to explain first of all how we are proposing to go about implementing the rules on competition , on the ground so to speak .
The reason why we drafted this communication is threefold .
Firstly , we wanted to offer greater security to operators in the market and to tell them , in advance , how we were proposing to apply the rules of the game and , by doing this , guarantee the necessary transparency .
In other words , this was an exercise in transparency on the part of the Commission .
Next , - and some of you have quite rightly raised this problem - we are trying to draw a clear dividing line between the work done by Martin Bangemann and his departments , based on Article 100 A , and whatever is covered , in particular the ONP , by other directives based on Article 90 .
That is where we need to be as clear-cut as possible because - and I fully agree with some of the comments that have been made - that is where we have a whole series of texts that have been drafted , developed , argued over and decided in recent years , and I have a feeling that some people are beginning to lose sight of the overall picture .
So it is also an attempt on our part to bring matters into focus .
Lastly , we are witnessing a period of extraordinary growth , not just in the telecommunications sector but also in the multimedia sector .
We are seeing a convergence of activities and of sectors and , there too , there is a need for us to explain how we intend to implement the rules of competition .
I should now like to say a few words about the report itself .
First of all , I am delighted with the overall positive tone of the report as regards the Commission 's initiative . The rapporteur and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Relations have of course posed a number of questions - and quite rightly so - and they deserve my putting a few minutes aside to answer them .
But may I say first of all - in relation to the new recital A inserted in Parliament 's text and referring to digital broadcasting - that this document , by that I mean our communication , is not the most appropriate text in which to tackle this question .
I agree with the substance , I understand your concern , and as you well know , when it comes to dealing with concrete cases , it is very much a problem that concerns us too .
There have in fact been a few decisions - the case of MSG some years ago in Germany , for example - where as a matter of fact that has played a crucial role .
So , the reason why we disagree on the substance has nothing to do with my arguing against keeping this addition to the text .
You have also made reference - and again quite rightly so - to the rather difficult period we are currently going through .
As of now , we still do not have full competition : this will happen from next year and , meanwhile , most of the Member States still have monopolies in the area of voice telephony , in particular .
It is true , and you have rightly put your finger on a difficulty that occasionally obliges us to intervene in certain Member States , even though there are those who feel that it would be far better for these difficulties to be resolved at national level .
Let me take the case of the tariffs in Germany .
Under normal circumstances this type of problem should be capable of being resolved internally by the Member State in question , but right now that is still not the case .
Consequently , following a whole series of complaints , we were forced to intervene - and indeed we are still doing so - because in our view the tariffs proposed by ' Deutsche Telekom ' in Germany , especially their interconnection tariffs , are too high .
They are going to have to be reduced .
There is therefore a conflict and we are continuing to deal with this problem while waiting for tomorrow when , hopefully , this kind of problem can be resolved at national level .
I could of course quote you numerous other examples , but the one I have given you will suffice to explain to you how , for the time being , we are coping with these problems .
I take note of your concern but at the same time I think I can say that we are in fact trying to deal with it in the appropriate manner .
Moreover , as you know , some weeks ago now Martin Bangemann and I published a status report , for want of a better term , on how the implementation of a whole series of directives was coming along in the various Member States , and we found that in the great majority of them everything was going forward as agreed - some , like the Netherlands , for example , were even ahead of target .
Others will need to do some catching up .
That is the case with Italy , but Italy it seems to me is in the process of doing just that .
Also , a few days ago I received copies of Belgian Royal Decrees implementing the legislation .
So , as you can see , things are moving along and that is exactly what we are trying to achieve .
And I can tell you moreover that we have - Martin Bangemann 's departments and mine - set up a joint group to monitor , from morning till night , so to speak , what is happening and , if we find that something is going wrong or veering off track , we can step in immediately and as quickly as possible .

Other questions raised in your report , Mr Argyros , fall more directly within the responsibility of my colleague Mr Bangemann , especially where the consolidation of different sets of rules is concerned ; he has already replied on those .
Things are changing so fast that very soon we are going to have to readjust some aspects of the policy , which should not prevent us I feel from making an effort in the coming months .
But , for the time being , our priority must clearly be to implement on the ground whatever legislation has already been agreed together with Parliament and with the Council of Ministers .
I am just finishing .
There are of course other questions , but I am sure these can be discussed between us directly and bilaterally , if you so wish .
Winding up , I should like to say that having received your observations and having received dozens of observations from others on the subject of this communication , on behalf of operators , on behalf of the authorities , etc . , we shall be in a position this autumn to publish the final version of it .
You can see that we are in any event anxious to complete this business before the end of the year , thereby providing for better security and better transparency .
Anyway , let me thank you once again , from the bottom of my heart , thank you very much for your report and for the support in it for the Commission 's policy .
Mr President , I want to say something about Amendment No 10 .
Mr Bangemann , I did not use my speaking time to talk about this amendment precisely because I find that bilateral disputes between Member States should not take up the time of a rapporteur speaking on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Having said that , you say that you have included Gibraltar in this list because you thought that it was technically better to do so .
Well , this seems to me to display a very curious understanding of technical measures , for what we are talking about here is a non-exhaustive list of codes of the Member States .
There is something wrong with technical measures , at least from a legal standpoint , when one takes , among five examples , the example of Gibraltar and when one accords it the status of a country .
Mr Bangemann , I do not agree at all with your referring to this business as a technical measure .
The intention is political , purely and simply political .
Mr President , even speaking for ten minutes , as I did , I admit , instead of the five minutes allocated to me , there was not enough time to answer all the questions !
That is the difficulty .
Three reports were examined together and generated a great many questions .
I believe that these questions do deserve an answer , but for that you need time .
Madam , I made it clear what our intention was .
I repeated it and that is how things are .
If you consider that that is not how they are , I cannot understand why you are protesting against our intention .
My statement is clear .
Now , with your protest , you have created a situation that is unclear , but that is your responsibility .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his explanation .
I would like to dwell on the subject of digital broadcasting . The only reason I included it in my repot is that when the report was presented to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , I specifically asked the representatives of the Directorate-General , of which Mr Van Miert is in charge , whether they intended to give separate consideration to the subject of digital broadcasting , and they answered me clearly that they did not .
I therefore considered myself obliged to include it in my report today .
However , I am pleased that the Commissioner has assured us that it will in fact be given special attention .
Mr President , I thank Commissioner Bangemann for doing me the honour of referring to what I said . However , I should like to note the following .
Everyone is entitled to use both ideological and political arguments to establish his position . However , those positions should be related to the facts .
I would like to point out to the Commissioner that I am in a position to know that Greece does not have the highest telecommunications charges in Europe .
If he thinks that is so , I ask him to put before us a table comparing the prices in the European Union 's Member States , from which he would see that Greece 's charges are among the lowest in Europe .
Mr President , I shall give the honourable Member that list , and he will see that the real situation does not accord with the assumptions on which his speech was based .
Commissioner , please send it to us too .
The subject is of great interest to us .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the three reports will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Maximum speed of tractors
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0218 / 97 ) by Mrs Hautala , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Council Directives 74 / 150 / EEC , 74 / 151 / EEC , 74 / 152 / EEC , 74 / 346 / EEC , 74 / 347 / EEC , 75 / 321 / EEC , 75 / 322 / EEC , 76 / 432 / EEC , 76 / 763 / EEC , 77 / 311 / EEC , 77 / 537 / EEC , 78 / 764 / EEC , 78 / 933 / EEC , 79 / 532 / EEC , 79 / 533 / EEC , 80 / 720 / EEC , 86 / 297 / EEC , 86 / 415 / EEC and 89 / 173 / EEC relating to the maximum design speed of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ( C4-0150 / 97-96 / 0129 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , it was well worth the effort , if only to come and agree with Mr Bangemann - which is a rare occurrence for myself in this Parliament , but I do so very happily on this occasion - and to congratulate the rapporteur .
This is an example of how the European Union does need to take a considered look at the advances in equipment .
A good case already exists for claiming that some of the machinery involved could well cope with higher speeds than are proposed in this directive .
But before we approve those higher speeds , we need to understand what the full implications are : it would be inappropriate for us simply to assume that everything will be fine .
I think that the rapporteur has very successfully acknowledged this point by saying : ' Let us make the decision now that we are confident we have thought it through in terms of safety , in terms of increasing efficiency and everything else ; but let us leave it to separate and thorough studies ; let us flag up that a case exists for going for higher speeds ; but let us do so in a considered way before we actually make the final decision , as that would be irreversible ' .
I cannot but say that I wish this thorough approach had been used on all previous issues .
Mr President , may I begin by expressing my very sincere thanks to the rapporteur .
She said everything that had to be said on the substantive issue .
We have reached a rapid solution which partly covers the present situation by extending the framework to tractors with a maximum design speed of up to 40 kph .
On the outstanding technical questions we shall prepare and table a proposal .
I was quite relieved to begin with when I saw that my friend Mr Barton was not here .
When he arrived I was alarmed , because I thought he would demand the same as he demanded for motorcycles , namely no speed limits , no power limits and no exhaust and noise restrictions .
But I see he has learned from experience .
And once we have tabled the full proposals for tractors , we can deal with motorcycles again .
That might well be an interesting development , for I see that Mr Barton 's thought processes have also been developing .
I confess , I never learned to do such calculations , which are related to bargaining in an area close to me .
I did not know that my friend Mr Bangemann too , who has great experience and has learned much from many , has also learned how to do such calculations .
I will note it for the future , since it shows some originality .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the recommendation for second reading by Mrs Hautala will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .

Supplementary and amending budget No 1 / 97
The next item is the joint debate on the following two reports :
( A4-0232 / 97 ) by Mr Brinkhorst and Mr Fabra Valles , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on draft supplementary and amending budget No 1 / 97 ( SEC ( 97 ) 750-9210 / 97 - C4-0299 / 97 ) , - ( A4-0247 / 97 ) by Mr Tillich , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the ad-hoc procedure for agricultural expenditure .
Mr President , on the question of the draft supplementary and amending budget for 1997 , we have made considerable progress .
The Commission at first was somewhat reluctant to accept that part of the staff would be found by redeployment in the course of 1998 .
However , we have now found a reasonable compromise .
There is the positive fact that the Temporary Committee of Inquiry into BSE can start work quite rapidly , because this is a high priority for the Community .
Thirty-five staff to begin with is quite useful .
I hope we shall see the first results of this by the end of this year , and in 1998 there should be redeployment .
My question to the Commission is : when can you really start work on this ?
When we see the staff going to Dublin it would be partly as a temporary placing before the final Veterinary Agency is created .
I hope that the Commission will soon withdraw , as promised , the proposal for Grange and adapt it to all the other agencies .
The main point of our debate today is on the report by Mr Tillich on the ad hoc procedure .
Firstly , I wish to compliment the rapporteur for 1998 , Mr Tillich , because that is a very important new development .
We started with the issue of agriculture some time ago , and gradually we are getting value for money .
Last year when , for the very first time , we reviewed estimates by the Commission , this was only true in a very minor way .
However , this year the cooperation between the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on Budgets has been very positive .
Moreover , this year the Commission has itself readjusted the estimates so that we will have ECU 329m for the first time put in a special reserve .
It is important that Parliament put it in reserve , because this will mean that the Member States do not have to start paying the money right away .
That is an important element in the criteria for Maastricht and the arrival in 1999 of the Euro .
As a result of the decision by the Agricultural Council towards the end of June , the budget , as put forward by the Commission , will be exceeded by ECU 1.4bn and we often talk about less money than that in this House .
There is an overshoot of ECU 1.4bn because the proposal by the Commission to readjust cereal prices was not accepted by the Council .
From the point of view of the Committee on Budgets , we should return to the preliminary draft budget .
Mr Tillich 's proposal to readjust the budget by a proportionate redistribution of the last three years so that we actually return to the original preliminary draft by the Commission is very welcome .
Perhaps this is a better solution than a linear cut , and here we are quite happy to follow the lead of the Committee on Agriculture , although we cannot accept under any circumstances its solution which involves creative accounting by carrying over the payments for oilseeds to 1998 .
Unfortunately , I have to disagree with the rapporteur on the agricultural budget , who said that this was the solution for last year .
In fact , it was not the solution for last year : perhaps it was the intention , but it was not realized .
Creative accounting , as the President-in-Office of the Council said during our trialogue , is the last thing we want .
This means that the budget for 1998 has to be readjusted in the field of agriculture , and it must finally be to the detriment of those products which have been underspending most over the last period .
All this shows that the ad hoc procedure - although in a formal sense still under the category of compulsory expenditure - is finally working .
It has a real impact now and it also has a real impact both on the behaviour of the Committee on Budgets and on the Committee on Agriculture .
Both of us are now working much more closely together .
I look forward to the rectifying letter from the Commission .
I see also , apart from the Commissioner , a holder of the Legion of Honour , and I would like to congratulate him most heartily - even on 15 July .
That situation will be beneficial perhaps also for the speed with which the rectifying letter is coming .
Mr President , I believe we all still recall perfectly that the most significant point regarding 1997 budgets , vis-à-vis the other institutions , was the matter of zero growth in staff levels .
In actual fact , the only institution fully to comply with this objective was the Court of Auditors .
Therefore , it is logical that it should have been the Court of Auditors which experienced the greatest problems when carrying out the work entrusted to it .
So , although budgetary austerity is indeed an important point , no less important is the fact that we should also take good financial management into account and , above all , cost-effectiveness .
What use to us are institutions which cost little , which we do not allow to grow , if , ultimately , they are not as effective as we anticipated ?
The Court of Auditors , therefore , was asked to conduct an overall study of what its needs were - according to that study , which it submitted to us , it needed 107 new posts .
Admittedly , such a figure is difficult for those responsible for the budget to accept .
It is , however , obvious that the Court of Auditors is , in fact , experiencing a shortfall in numbers of auditors .
This is in addition to the increase in the radius of action of controls on the part of the Court of Auditors and the increase in the volume of work .
Let us take into account the extra work they have with regard to agencies and the increase in statements of assurance .
At this point , I would also like to include some further information for those present : purely as regards multilingualism , an institution such as the Court of Auditors requires a 25 % increase in staff .
We therefore concluded that , between what the Court of Auditors was asking for and what we felt it was possible to grant it , the increase amounted to 48 people .
After contact with Mr Tomlinson - responsible for the 1998 budget - we came to the conclusion that , on the basis of the supplementary and amending budget which we are presenting at the moment , we could , in 1997 , award 23 posts ; the other 25 could be included in Mr Tomlinson 's preliminary draft .
Thanks to the actions of council , which has already granted 5 posts , the 23 I was speaking of for 1997 will , in fact , be 18 .
The reason for bringing forward the allocation of posts to 1997 , by means of this SAB , is justified , firstly , by the training period such staff needs before being 100 % operational and , secondly , by the margin we had available on account of the favourable exchange rate which has applied to date since the budget was drawn up .
I am referring to the exchange rate between the ecu and the Belgian franc .
Furthermore , these 18 new posts which would be granted at this time ( I repeat : 18 plus 5 granted by council equals 23 ) would break down as follows : as regards auditing : there would be one A3 , twelve A7s and three C5s ; in terms of administrative staff , there would be two posts : one A7 and one C5 .
We should be grateful that this increase in staff numbers will not give rise to a need for more office space , or , at least , we shan 't have to discuss buildings , something this House does not really enjoy discussing .
And so that is all - I am convinced that this increase in numbers of Court of Auditors staff will only enhance the rigour we are accustomed to seeing on the part of that institution and improve , if that were possible , its long-standing cooperative attitude towards Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the ad hoc procedure was used for the first time in the 1995 budget procedure .
The tabled report , along with this Thursday 's vote , is intended to provide the delegation of the European Parliament with a negotiating mandate .
The ad hoc procedure and the negotiations on compulsory expenditure conducted between Parliament and the Council with a view to reaching an agreement on amendments to the Commission 's preliminary draft budget mark the start of the budget procedure every year .
The spectators in the gallery , as well as many a Member of the House , may well regard this as something of a technical and intellectual exercise , but it is a highly political transaction , a process of negotiation with the Council and the Commission .
The procedure lays down that the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , at the request of Parliament and the Council or of the Council alone , will agree to initiate the budget procedure .
That was done formally on 26 June in the trialogue framework .
In derogation of the agreed procedure , the Council and the European Parliament jointly decided not to complete the ad hoc procedure before the first reading of the Council 's draft budget so as to give the Commission the opportunity to obtain more knowledge of the state of the market , on the basis of which it may submit a more realistic draft budget for 1998 this autumn by means of a Letter of Amendment .
Both the Council and the European Parliament must then approve the proposal .
For the first time this offers us a genuine prospect of having an annual budget that is more closely in tune with the real situation ; this accords with our earlier decisions on budgetary discipline and better implementation of the budget .
In the tabled report your rapporteur addresses the hitherto unresolved problem of expenditure classification .
The Commission has taken the first step in this direction , albeit half-heartedly .
It has drawn up a list of all the expenditure regarded by the European Parliament as falling into the non-compulsory category .
It has not , however , taken the decisive step of actually classifying the listed items as non-compulsory expenditure .
In the report your rapporteur also proposes the creation of a special reserve for market uncertainties to which the Member States would only have to contribute if and when the money was required .
The reserve would not affect the overall volume of the agricultural budget .
At the present time we have similar practices in the domains of humanitarian aid and currency reserves .
In addition , your rapporteur proposes negotiations with the Council and the Commission on the following key issues : first of all , adherence to the Commission 's preliminary budget and hence compliance with the principle of 0.45 % growth in the agricultural budget ; secondly , no linear cuts in the agricultural budget headings but rather a specific cut on the basis of unused allocations in years 1994 and 1995 , as Mr Brinkhorst has already mentioned , with a view to returning to the Commission 's original preliminary draft .
Unfortunately , the Council of Agriculture Ministers failed to reach a decision at its mid-April meeting .
Accordingly , the Council now has until the second reading to find a solution to an actual overshoot of ECU 1.4bn.
We naturally agree with the Presidency 's proposal that this should be done without recourse to creative accounting .
The parliamentary proposal before us guarantees budgetary neutrality and thereby strengthens the negotiating position of Parliament .
I should like to express my special thanks to the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their close cooperation in this ad hoc procedure and particularly for the pragmatic approach of your draftsman , Mr Mulder .
To the Commission , and particularly to the senior representatives of Directorate-General XX , let me say that you will shortly have to decide who your partners are - the Council or the European Parliament .
We have discussed joint solutions with you too , but when you quite suddenly discover mistakes in specific cuts , please remember that they relate to your calculations for the preliminary draft budget too .
What two grade-A officials can do here , 600 grade-A officials in the Commission are unable to manage !
One more word on the arrangements concerning international fisheries agreements .
At the trialogue it was the Commissioner himself who confirmed the principle that no payments due under these agreements can be made until Parliament has delivered its opinion .
That was agreed at the trialogue , so it is now inappropriate to criticize this practice , as some representatives of your institution have been doing .
I ask the House to approve the report as tabled , thereby giving the delegation of the European Parliament a mandate to negotiate a fair and balanced budget for 1998 .
Mr President , the Committee on Agriculture began discussing this preliminary draft budget as soon as it was published .
We were very pleased with the successful cooperation which we experienced with the Committee on Budgets , and particularly with the rapporteurs .
What were the main conclusions that we reached ?
Firstly , that we support the Commission 's proposal to increase the budget by 0.45 % .
We also reaffirmed our support for the view expressed on many occasions in the House that there should be no cuts in agricultural premiums , which was therefore not merely a decision by the Council of Ministers , but also the decision of the House itself .
How is this ECU 1.4 billion to be found ?
Certainly not through creative accounting .
We have simply taken over last year 's proposal - never in fact put into practice - to defer the payment of premiums for oil seed .
The Committee on Budgets accepted the first two points , but not the last , which we very much regret .
We cannot see why something that was regarded as possible last year , though never applied , is now not possible this year , and particularly not in special cases .
The Committee on Agriculture rejects the idea of reserves , and we are in good company here , if I understood Mr Brinkhorst correctly , because it seems that the Council shares our view .
He referred to the Council several times , and I think he said that the Council too was against the idea .
The committee as a whole put forward a number of amendments which all had a neutral effect on the budget .
A total increase of one million on a budget of ECU 41 billion is hardly excessive , I believe , and we therefore feel that the Committee on Budgets does not have the right to change many of the Committee on Agriculture 's technical priorities .
We shall be looking at this again in the plenary , and we also look forward to examining the amending letter from the Commission later in the year .
Mr President , at the European Parliament 's request , budget heading B7-800 was subdivided into two : the new heading B7-8000 ' International fisheries agreements ' and the new heading B7-8001 ' Contributions to international organizations ' .
This new accounting approach makes for a clearer reading of the expenditure relating to the fisheries sector .
Within the framework of the ad hoc procedure , an initial report on the implementation of the Joint Declaration on improving feedback from the budget authority on the fisheries agreements of 12 December 1996 was forwarded to the Committee on Budgets .
It can only be confirmed in the same terms at this stage of the procedure .
As regards showing the appropriations in the 1998 draft budget , the Commission has followed the distribution proposed in point 1A of the Joint Declaration to the letter .
The Commission had in fact proposed entering the amounts relating to the international agreements coming into force at the start of the 1998 financial year under heading B7-8000 and to put into reserves the amount necessary to cover agreements due for renewal and any new agreements that may be signed .
The Committee on Fisheries is of the opinion that the sums relating to agreements already concluded and that Parliament has yet to approve could also be placed in the reserves .
The recent agreements concluded with Senegal and Guinea Bissau do therefore need to be taken into account .
The sums set aside in reserve will need to be continually adjusted throughout the budget procedure depending on the outcome of other negotiations and Parliament 's reports on them .
In conclusion , there are clearly no differences between the Committee on Fisheries and the Committee on Budgets in the context of the ad hoc procedure .
I would simply like to stress the importance of international agreements , both for the European fishing fleet and for the third countries which are , most of them at any rate , bound to the European Union by ACP agreements .
A good international fisheries agreement is an arrangement that helps at one and the same time save jobs both afloat and in coastal regions and also helps promote effective management of fish stocks in third countries .
For example , under the fisheries agreement with Senegal , which we looked at this morning , we have emphasized the benefits of devoting - as the government of Senegal has decided to do - a part of the European Union 's financial contribution to the non-industrial inshore fishing sector , especially in the area of training .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by commenting on the draft supplementary and amending budget No 1 which Mr Brinkhorst and Mr Fabra Vallés have explained to us .


I wish to emphasize quite clearly at this point that the decision which the Committee on Budgets has proposed to the House represents a new departure in staffing policy .
And it assumes even greater importance because it is intended as a benchmark for the development of Community staffing policy in the coming weeks and months .
The Commission had initially requested almost 160 posts in order to deal with the BSE problem , a new Community priority .
We now have 35 new posts and have also linked this allocation to an internal restructuring , for the equal numbers of C and A posts suggest that something is rotten in the state of the Community .
If , as we have now proposed , expenditure on grade-C posts is reduced by the amount required for an increase in the number of grade-A posts , that will effectively demonstrate that the lid has been firmly screwed down , and it will remain screwed down in 1999 too .
It will be necessary to undertake the new tasks that will be put before us here tomorrow , when the major report on Agenda 2000 is presented , by reallocating tasks and reordering priorities , and hence also by redistributing personnel , and not simply by popping into the great European supermarket to pick up some new posts .
The second point I should like to deal with is the question of the ad hoc procedure .
Allow me to make a few comments on that .
The ad hoc procedure was conceived in an Interinstitutional Agreement and was the result of a lengthy discussion process and a dispute about the dividing-line between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure .
It had always been clear to our side , to the European Parliament , that it is fundamentally impossible for a figure , a specific budgetary amount , to be compulsory .
Market regulations can be compulsory , but their precise financial implications in terms of a budgetary allocation cannot be compulsory , for we cannot legislate in advance for weather and for world market prices .
That is why the dispute or discussion of recent years has invariably focused on the amount of funds assigned to each item of compulsory expenditure - especially since our experience of the last fifteen years has shown that the amounts allocated are always higher than the payments the Community actually makes .
That is an invitation to engage in creative accounting .
You have just heard Mr Mulder say again - and Mr Sonneveld also said it in committee yesterday evening - that you intend to postpone payments to the oil-seed sector from one year to the next , which is what we are now describing as creative accounting .
But all those who advocate such postponement must answer the following question : what is to happen in 1999 ?
That , you see , is when the Financial Perspective ends , so postponement will no longer be an option .
We shall then be confronted with the problem of funding the oil-seed sector twice over in 1999 - once for the year from which payment was postponed and once for the current financial year , i.e. 1999 .
The budget , however , will not yield an allocation of that size .
For that reason we have explicitly welcomed what the Council presidency said at the trialogue : not creative accounting but a real solution .
What we are proposing here in the Tillich report is an invitation to the Council of Finance Ministers to comply with its own stipulations .
It is not obliged to accept the invitation ; this is an offer of negotiations to the Council , and after all we did reach an agreement at the trialogue that we should receive amended figures this autumn , so today 's discussion will not mark the end of the ad hoc procedure .



Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Brinkhorst , Mr Fabra Vallés and Mr Tillich on behalf of my group , and say that I support their reports .
I should like to thank Mr Brinkhorst and Mr Fabra Vallés personally for their efforts to resolve the problem relating to the Veterinary Institute in Grange and to express my satisfaction with the outcome .
I agree with the Tillich report , and particularly with the author 's strategy of improving budgetary procedures and working towards the preparation of correct projections so that the budget as we see it projected is actually the budget that is necessary to fulfil its objective .
On the other hand , I would like to draw attention to a point made by Mr Mulder in his report on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development : he points out that , with an eye to Project 2000 , we cannot expect to finance the enlargement of the European Union out of shavings off agricultural spending .
Agriculture is the single rural affairs policy for which the Community has total responsibility .
We cannot undermine this policy in order to create or finance another objective .
Whatever savings can be made from agriculture will be necessary to prevent the environmental , and indeed the economic , deterioration of rural Europe as it is .
We should remember that at the moment , within the limits of the money available to us in the financial perspectives , we could raise a further ECU 10b for next year 's budget .
That amount of money would finance the needs of a common agricultural policy for the first enlargement .
But we have to remember that we cannot finance a meaningful regional policy for the new Europe out of the present budgetary resources .
I would imagine that it will take at least a doubling of the present structural funds to finance a new regional policy for the new and wider Europe if we are not to create immense dissatisfaction in the countries which join and if we are not to alienate many of the citizens already in the Community .
While I agree with the general procedures that are being laid down in the Tillich report , I disagree with some of the concepts that are creeping in .
Through a rearrangement and a paring down of our present policies we can find the resources that are necessary to finance the enlargement of 100 million people .
If those people come in and if we are to realise the benefits of the enlarged membership through trade and economic growth , then we have to have something resembling a little Marshall Plan to help them to get off the ground so that all of us can reap the benefits of the wider Union .
Mr President , in presenting his proposals within the framework of the ad hoc procedure for agricultural expenditure in the 1998 budget Mr Tillich embarked on a difficult , not to say perilous , exercise .
Whilst the rapporteur 's approach , which follows the European Parliament 's traditional steadfast determination to reduce overall EAGGF expenditure , has the merit of being rational , it nevertheless relies , in my view , on an erroneous perception of agricultural expenditure .
The fact is that there is something unique about agricultural expenditure which makes it different from other expenditure in the budget .
Agricultural expenditure is an economic tool for regulating the markets , whose expression , if not their actual nature , is budgetary .
I have now been saying this for a long time without , unfortunately , ever being truly understood .
And yet , despite the high regard I have for him , I have to say to Stanislas Tillich that his approach , based as it is on a perceived underspend of appropriations for agriculture in previous budgets , on an inference of deliberate overbudgeting by the Commission in its estimates , and which also makes cuts in appropriations under most of the budget headings , is the product of an exclusively arithmetic view of agricultural policy .
The consequences of such an approach could prove disastrous for certain economic sectors of production in farming .
I have in mind , in particular , the financing of ancillary measures , which has suffered major cuts , for example in the case of beef and veal .
Given the uncertain situation as regards the attempts to eradicate BSE and in the light of recent events revealed by the Commission , who today can say that the appropriations allocated to Community beef and veal producers have been overestimated ?
I was also surprised to find that the rapporteur has included in an annex to his resolution a list of EAGGF budget heading classifications , in which expenditure that the Treaties , in their wisdom , had classified as compulsory expenditure was now classified as non-compulsory .
We regard this kind of approach unacceptable , which is why the UPE Group will not be voting for Mr Tillich 's report , which would have the effect of putting agricultural policy at considerable risk .

As regards the draft supplementary and amending budget No 1 for 1997 , may I be permitted , while saluting the excellent job done by the rapporteur , Mr Laurens Brinkhorst , who has succeeded in putting the emphasis on such priorities as creating new posts at the Commission , to express my Group 's concern over the grant to the Trademark Office in Alicante , the entire allocation of 12.5 million ECU of which has been put into reserve .
A fairer decision would have been to put no more than half this sum into reserve , as indeed the Board of the Trademark Office had requested , to enable this energetic and go-ahead body to develop its programme of activities .
I believe , in fact , that the drastic measure of withdrawing the allocation results from a misunderstanding and a confusion between liquid assets and financial commitments , and that this error should be put right in plenary .
This is why our Group will be tabling an amendment insisting that allocations placed in reserve are not allowed to exceed 6.5 million ECU .
Mr President , the estimate of agricultural expenditure is the largest expenditure item in the Union 's budget .
The purpose of the ad hoc procedure for agricultural expenditure is to arrive at a budget which is realistic in the light of the latest forecasts .
There are many reasons why it is difficult to estimate expenditure accurately .
Because of variations in harvests and in world market prices , it is not easy to estimate the need for export support from the budget , for example .
In addition , the budget has been affected by the BSE crisis and swine fever , which could not readily have been predicted .
These cuts are not easy for farmers , either : the annual cuts in EU support are generating constant uncertainty with regard to farm incomes .
The reform of the EU 's agricultural policy also stresses the EU 's competitiveness on world markets more than previously , while US producers - for example - are competing on those markets on the basis of seven-year agricultural and budget frameworks .
There is a need to invest in the longer term in the EU , for example by adopting agricultural policies and budgetary frameworks valid for between seven and ten years ahead . The current cuts are hard to reconcile with the development of agriculture and efforts to improve competitiveness .
Jan Mulder , the draftsman for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , has proposed as a possible means a reserve system whereby resources saved from the budget would be placed in a reserve for future use as need arose .
I should like to conclude by asking Commissioner Liikanen 's opinion of the reserve system proposed by Mr Mulder .
Mr President , just a few words about the ad hoc process since the other two reports posed us few problems .
We have reached a good understanding over those two ad hoc processes . For us they are the only way of ensuring that the European Parliament takes part in the proper definition of compulsory spending , especially on farming .
This should be the precise meaning of these processes , i.e. ensuring that the European Parliament can make a major contribution for an appropriate and rational provision of expenditure in an area where it does not yet have recognized competences .
This does not however seem to be the meaning behind the proposals approved yesterday by the Committee on Budgets .
The concern to make savings in agricultural spending prevails , i.e. imposing grater rationality .
We all know why .
Of course , we cannot agree with this approach . That is because we know that these spending cuts in agriculture - and now in the fisheries agreements - have been adopted in full or in part by the Council and would inevitably go together with other cuts in other budgetary sectors .
The experience of last year showed that .
We reject outright the idea of the European Parliament abandoning any possibility of influencing a correct distribution of compulsory expenditure or setting itself up as the champion of a restrictive policy .
But there is another reason , one of principle , for us to disagree with the report approved yesterday by the Committee on Budgets .
In admitting and even recommending that the Member States will only hand over to the budget the amounts placed in reserve in that the reserve is unblocked would create an unprecedented and extremely serious situation. it is obvious that the main aim is to make savings but it essentially calls into question the very nature of the Community budgetary process .
Sooner or later we shall end up with an à la carte budget , and we cannot agree to that .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Commissioner Liikanen who associated with his own distinguished presence in the House that of the Directorate General for which he has responsibility .
We consider it important that he should be here because he will be able to pass on the message that we are today seeking to send , particularly through this supplementary and amending budget , a message which I at least interpret in this way and which concerns the well-known question of the additional posts for DG XXIV .
It seems to me evident that events of recent weeks make it plain just how far behind we are .
Without wishing to attribute blame for this delay , which was in fact a matter of circumstance , we have to stress the urgent need to reinforce that Directorate and give it the resources that will enable it to improve controls , as far as possible , to prevent further disasters , such as mad cow disease .
In the vote that we shall be holding on Thursday , it is our intention to unblock 35 posts but , above all , to request , seeking a specific result , that the Commission do all in its powers - and I think it has plenty of scope for that - to allocate the posts requested by DG XXIV , by deploying internally the other human resources needed , as of 1 January 1998 .
That is the intention of this House , and it is in that spirit that my group , which to begin with had reservations about the procedure adopted , now considers the procedure adopted by Mr Brinkhorst - very wisely in my view , including in an effort to secure the appropriate interinstitutional dialogue - to be the right one .
It involves allocating those posts immediately and requesting that , in 1998 , the internal deployment of resources should focus on the requests of DG XXIV .
Mr President , although the proposals of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development make good sense on the whole , are realistic and at any rate sympathetic to farmers , the ultimate objective seems to be - does it not ? - to finance policies other than European agriculture , to prove to all that the policy that works the least badly since the signing of the Treaty of Rome is no longer working , and in that way to take its financing away from it .
There has been no shortage of pretexts for it : diversity of our territories and our productions , disparities between Europe and the rest of the world , compliance with criteria .
Neither has there been any shortage of fake excuses : the cost of the BSE crisis , the sums overestimated and not used , the giveaway to beekeeping - 3 million ECU - , measures to combat fraud . What does all this mean ?
It means 310 million added to be added to reserves .
Knowing the problems of the countryside , and more specifically the problems of farming , I can only deplore this token 0.45 % increase allowed for in the 1998 budget and seeing this budget shorn of some 2.4 billion with respect to the guidelines laid down in the Edinburgh compromise .
In his report our colleague Mr Tillich confirms the hidden conversion of compulsory expenditure into non-compulsory expenditure by the ingenious trick of setting up a reserve .
Last year our colleague Mr Brinkhorst told us that the solution of the reserve was an effective one because it enabled agricultural expenditure to be adjusted according to financial needs and linked to fluctuations in world prices , production and consumption .
Our Group had opposed this .
We were able to establish that the reserve of 1 billion ECU , which was the figure set for 1997 , has been completely scrapped .
Today , even though we do not know the scale of the swine fever problem , do not know what the quality of bread wheat is going to be , do not know how good harvests are going to be overall , the Committee on Budgets for its part is proposing cuts in certain budget headings in order to create this reserve .
In conclusion , may I say on behalf of our Group that the Council has the final say on so-called compulsory expenditure .
We do not want to accept any kind of devious machination which , through a fictitious increase in the European Parliament 's powers , seeks merely to reduce the agricultural budget .
Within the framework of Agenda 2000 we would wish to see proposals for a fair and realistic farming policy , and one that would help to halt the desertion of the countryside .
Mr President , the Brinkhorst / Fabra Vallés report deals with a very sensitive aspect of the European Union .
It is a fact that fraud , wastage and mismanagement in particular are bringing the European ideal into disrepute .
Every possible step must therefore be taken to arrest this development .
It is primarily the Member States , of course , which must clamp down on irregularities .
At the same time , however , it is essential that the Commission should provide its controlling bodies with the staff and equipment they require to perform their tasks efficiently .
It goes without saying that this also applies to the Court of Auditors , whose duty it is to discover irregularities in the course of its audits and whose proposals for improvements can reduce wastage levels .
In this respect the additional posts for the Commission and the Court of Auditors are to be welcomed .
At the same time , however , we must proceed on the assumption that at least some of the necessary posts can be obtained by efficiency savings within the Commission 's own administrative apparatus .
Another point I wish to emphasize is the need to grasp every available opportunity to make more funds available for specific measures in the domain of research and development .
The rapporteur 's proposal that the sum of ECU 100m from the reserve be redistributed among operational lines where it can be put to good use is therefore to be most warmly welcomed .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Brinkhorst for the work we have done together on the SAB .
I would like to address my remarks to two particular dimensions of the SAB , firstly on the consumer health policy unit , and secondly on the transfer of funds for the trademarks agency in Alicante .
If we can deal first with the consumer health policy unit as covered in the SAB , I think that following the conclusions of the first committee inquiry it was quite clear that there was a need for real action to be taken on food safety at EU level .
However , it is equally clear that the Commission 's original and rather limited proposal to set up a vets agency at Grange was overtaken by events .
There is no question about that .
More importantly , it was ill-thought out and did not give even the proper legal basis for setting up such an important organization .
I would like to stress that the opposition to the initial scheme for a health policy unit was not an opposition in principle to an agency established in Ireland or to the improvement of consumer safety .
It was opposition to knee-jerk politics and to the writing of blank cheques for the future .
What does concern me in the proposal from the Commission for the office in Ireland was the discovery that the Commission had already leased a working area in Dublin , outside the normal places of work of the European Union , for workers whose recruitment had not yet been approved - a fact made even more reprehensible by the existing agreement to freeze staff numbers within the Commission .
This lack of regard by the Commission for the wishes of Parliament does not bode well for the future of the second committee of inquiry .
But I am happy to say that some agreement has now been reached with Mr Brinkhorst , the Commission staff and Mr Tillich in the meetings we have had on the future of the health and safety unit , and that is now evidenced in the SAB .
The Commission has agreed to withdraw the existing proposal for a vets agency and to come back with the full and detailed proposals for a new food and veterinary unit which will cover the work programme , the staff envisaged , the buildings , policy , locations and so on .
Parliament will then have the opportunity to discuss this proposal in full .
Parliament too , in the Budgets Committee , will approve the decision to grant the Commission 35 additional posts to assist with the reorganization of DG XXIV and to improve coordination with scientific committees and in the meantime , thirdly , to ensure sounder and more efficient management .
We can agree on 70 new posts to be created in Dublin as a temporary measure and 35 posts are to remain in Brussels until the vets and phytosanitary agency are properly set up .
Finally and most importantly it has been agreed that the consumer health policy unit will remain in Brussels .
As regards Alicante , as far as the transfer is concerned , I feel it is of the greatest importance that the agency is able to call on the budgetary authority for a contribution if necessary .
It has that written into its regulations .
The EU set up this agency as part of the work essential for the completion of the internal market .
The staggering success of this agency has far outstripped every expectation .
We must not now allow it to be punished for its own efficiency .
For that reason I am suggesting that the Commission 's proposal to put the whole 12.5 million into a negative reserve be rejected and I propose that the whole amount remain in reserve subject to a detailed application from the trademarks agency justifying transfer of all or part of that money for their use .
To Mr Giansily I would say that if we do not do that , then we as a Parliament , as a Budgets Committee , will lose control over the funding of that agency .
That must not be forgotten .
Can I say of Mr Brinkhorst that , as Margaret Thatcher said of Mikhail Gorbachev , he was a man it was a pleasure to work with .
On this issue of the SAB , particularly with regard to the new consumer health policy , it has been a pleasure to work with you .
Mr President , the ad hoc procedure for compulsory expenditure in the budget is gaining in importance both in Parliament and in the Council .
The rapporteur , Mr Tillich , and the draftsman of the Committee on Agriculture 's opinion , Mr Mulder , have worked hard to try to achieve a balanced approach to the budget , taking account of a general political wish for budgetary restraint and at the same time consolidating what had already been decided in terms of policy .
Agricultural expenditure is to increase by no more than 0.45 % , although under the Interinstitutional Agreement , the figure should have been 2.1 % .
Severe cuts are therefore going to have to be made under certain headings so that others can be increased , such as export refunds for beef .
Three possible instruments are being discussed .
A linear reduction for all headings was rightly rejected by the Committee on Agriculture and Mr Tillich , who instead prefer a reduction based on the possible level of underspending , calculated on the basis of the last three budget years .
The Tillich report also proposes a new kind of reserve containing more than ECU 300 million , so that surpluses under certain agricultural headings are kept available for other headings which have been cut .
It would be good if this approach were to secure general approval , since this would oblige the Council to be a little more flexible and creative .
Finally , there was the possibility of deferring one typical budget item : the oil seed advance totalling ECU 1.4 billion .
These advances are paid around October , and there is nothing unusual about financing them under the current year 's budget or the next .
It is an option which we have already been able to put to good use on a number of occasions , but the Council and , apparently , the Committee on Budgets both classify this as ' creative accounting ' .
This is unfair .
To deny ourselves this possibility would be budgetary masochism .
Let us not tie our own hands here in Parliament , but keep enough options open to be able to settle the difficult problem of compulsory expenditure within a well-ordered and disciplined budget .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group and the Committee on Budgets , I rise to speak on Mr Tillich 's report .
The debate we are holding today on Mr Tillich 's report represents the second stage after the guidelines to the resolution in March of Parliament 's preparatory work on the 1998 draft budget for the Commission 's appropriations .
This will receive its first reading in the Council on 24 July and in Parliament on 23 October .
On behalf of the Socialist Group , I should like to congratulate Mr Tillich for his report and for all the work he puts into guiding us through the jungle of regulations , institutional agreements , trialogues and conciliations which represent the annual budgetary negotiating fare .
Furthermore , I should like to congratulate and thank Mr Tillich for his willingness to show flexibility in order to arrive at the broadest possible consensus .
We are discussing the ad hoc procedure on compulsory expenditure in plenary today in order to give a strong mandate to our delegation to the trialogue with the Council and Commission and in order to increase transparency and maximize the involvement of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on Fisheries in the determination of this mandate .
This ad hoc procedure has served us well this year and is a procedure which has acquired added significance given the fact that there was no reform of the budgetary decisionmaking process in the Intergovernmental Conference concluded in Amsterdam .
I would , therefore , like to dwell briefly on the results so far .
The key result has been the adoption of a joint declaration on agricultural expenditure , allowing the Commission to submit a letter of amendment to its preliminary draft budget even outside the procedural provisions of the financial regulation .
This will allow preparation of an agricultural budget based , one hopes , upon the most up-to-date forecasts and hypotheses , and should go some way towards countering the constant problems we face with forecasting the budgetary requirements for agriculture .
Such an extension of the ad hoc procedure was a request of the Agriculture Committee , and I would like to emphasize here the close and excellent cooperation that has been established this year between the Committee on Budgets and the Agriculture Committee with respect to the preparation of the 1998 budget .
Nevertheless , we have been unable to accommodate all the Agriculture Committee 's requests .
Given that the Commission has updated its requirements for 1998 for compulsory expenditure with a reduction of ECU 329m , we believe that these appropriations should be placed in reserve , and secondly , that we should not have to resort to any form of creative accounting in order to remain within the 0.45 % increase foreseen for the agriculture budget compared with 1997 .
We are glad to be in agreement with the Agriculture Committee 's thinking that the review of arable income support is ultimately desirable , but we would take a more positive view with respect to the Commission 's proposal of cutting income supports by approximately ECU 1.4 billion .
We are certainly prepared to discuss the specific aspects of implementation of such a cut .
The principles of good budgeting would suggest that the most up-to-date forecasts and hypotheses should be used as well as the most reliable procedures and methodologies .
If we are finding that current procedures are unreliable and therefore resulting in misallocation of resources , we should not hesitate to amend those procedures .
We must also be careful that we do not endanger the balance of spending between budgetary lines too much , because many are near the minimum possible level of appropriations .
Where it is reasonable to find savings due to over-estimation , then we should do so , but we should not excessively burden particular sectors in a search for savings in order to achieve the particular fiscal discipline being sought in the Community budget this year .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the agreement between the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament on agricultural expenditure in the budget is what we describe as the ad hoc procedure .
What is incontestable is that we are increasing this expenditure by 0.45 % , I repeat 0.45 .
What is absolutely contestable , and what I cannot support at the present time , is the proposal for both a linear cut - although I learned today that this part of the proposal has now been dropped - and above all for a specific cut .
We farmers cannot accept that .
What is the reason for the missing 1.4 billion ?
It is quite simply the collateral for the financing we obtained because of the BSE crisis .
In October 1996 the Council made provision for a possible postponement of payments to the oilseed sector from 1996 to 1997 .
We did not need to take up the option , and to that extent it would not perhaps be very fair to speak of creative accounting in this instance .
Mr Samland , you asked what would happen in 1999 or 2000 if there were a postponement from 1998 to 1999 .
I simply assume that we may well have a situation like this year 's and shall not need to defer any payments .
That , in purely theoretical terms , is also the essence of Mr Mulder 's proposal , whereby in the event of the whole amount not being used up , even in situations outside the domain of compulsory expenditure , a balance can be struck .
We shall perhaps be discussing this again in a year 's time , but I do believe that this is certainly possible .
On the price package , the Council of Ministers of Agriculture gave a pledge to the Commission to keep the EAGGF Guarantee within the budgetary limits laid down for 1998 .
Unfortunately , the Council did not comment on the possibility of a further postponement of the oilseed advance .
That would have saved us a great deal of bother .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteurs for their work .
The cooperation between the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Agriculture was open and really quite constructive .
Long experience has shown that rapidly changing market conditions and constant over-budgeting have affected appropriations for agricultural expenditure from year to year .
The budget should be based on information which is as up-to-date as possible , as this information can be obtained with relatively little difficulty provided that the will to obtain it exists .
Cereals , in particular , are a sector where it is well known that various persistent uncertainties exist .
The problems with meat production - for example , the BSE crisis and swine fever - serious though they have been , have been one-off incidents and ought , we hope , never to be repeated .
When tailoring agricultural expenditure to budgetary frameworks , greater attention than at present ought to be devoted to the Community 's peripheral regions , such as Finland and Sweden .
Agriculture there is significantly less productive and viable than elsewhere .
Although it seems likely that a time will come when cuts in income support for arable farmers have to be placed on the agenda , I wish to stress that a radical shake-up of the system is likely to be fatal , especially to farmers in the northern Member States .
Even under the present system , agriculture is struggling in the north , and its position would become even more difficult if what we have heard about future changes is correct .
Experience of the ad hoc procedure has been reasonably good to date .
In order to secure further improvements , it is to be hoped that the Commission will continue to appreciate the importance of constructive cooperation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if I may refer to my own report , on which we voted only a few weeks ago , on 12 June 1997 , Parliament voted by a large majority against cutting compensatory payments for certain crop plants and for set-aside .
At the same time , Parliament backed the Committee on Budgets in opposing deferment of the oilseed advance .
In a further amendment contained in my report it was also decided that the payments per hectare envisaged in the CAP reform package should be guaranteed in full for 1998 and 1999 .
I do find it quite astonishing that there should now be moves to deviate from this line without a reasonable alternative being presented .
Yesterday the farming press was already telling us that land and animal premiums were to remain the basis of future EU agricultural policy .
Commissioner Liikanen , as a Member of the Commission you no doubt played a part in that decision .
Regrettably , we have learned about it from the newspapers before it could be announced here .
On enquiring , we are told that the newspaper reports are accurate .
I am very interested in what you are going to say to us , how you intend to secure the acceptance of the farming community for a future agriculture policy if it is merely a continuation of present policy .
The fact is that we rather believed you stood for a new agricultural policy , for a policy that we could sustain , instead of which we are to have more payments per hectare and livestock premiums .
And you believe , do you , that farmers would approve of our continued support for this system ?
I am very eager to hear what you have to say .
My special thanks go to our colleague Mr Mulder , who presented a very cogent argument ; we fully endorse the points he made .
We do not want to run our heads against the wall . We should far rather continue to work in harmony with the Committee on Budgets .
Tomorrow morning the President of the Commission , Mr Jacques Santer , will present the Commission 's Communication on Agenda 2000 .
The first presentation will happen here , in the European Parliament .
The huge speculation in the European press is no more than we have come to expect , but the first presentation of the documents will be made tomorrow in Parliament , so that the honourable Members of the European Parliament are in the privileged position of starting the debate before the other European institutions .
The ad hoc procedure with regard to compulsory expenditure was created by the interinstitutional agreement of 1993 .
The thorough discussions within and between institutions show that this procedure is living up to expectations .
It permits the Council , Parliament and the Commission to review in detail the amounts to be entered for compulsory expenditure in the 1998 Community budget .
As far as the agricultural budget for 1998 is concerned , the key factor is that the Council has not accepted the Commission proposal to reduce direct payments in the cereals sector .
The Council has also refused to adopt any equivalent real savings .
The Council has not received much encouragement from the European Parliament either .
This is disappointing .
Balanced budgetary rigour also requires real budgetary savings in this sector , which absorbs 48 % of the Community budget .
In this situation , with unchanged underlying regulations , the main responsibility of the budgetary authority is to predict spending needs as accurately as possible .
It was therefore an important achievement of the trialogue of 26 June to agree on a letter of amendment in the autumn to take account of the latest information .
Furthermore , the discussions between the Commission and Parliament have already achieved improvements in the forecasts in some sectors which amount to a reduction of needs by some ECU 300m .
It should be one of the subjects for the conciliation next week to agree when and how this should be budgeted .
I note Parliament 's suggestion to put ECU 310m in a reserve for market uncertainty .
In principle , the idea of such a reserve in Category 1 seems worth exploring but the regulatory requirements appear too stringent for this to be achieved in the short term .
For the 1998 budget an alternative would be a straightforward adjustment of the budget lines concerned which would go some way towards providing the sum of ECU 400m needed to get back to the PDB .
Both Council and Parliament seem to agree that the lack of real savings should be offset by a general cut in forecasts across all budget lines .
The methods used , however , are different .
The Council is oriented towards a linear cut ; Parliament is advocating a more complicated approach based on the under-execution of the recent past .
An agreement on the method should be possible , given that in both cases budget execution will have to rely on transfers to bring the budget into line with actual needs .
With regard to the international fisheries treaties , the joint declaration of 1996 on a code of conduct is a very useful framework for the information to be provided and the budgetary consequences .
I have noted Parliament 's hesitation with regard to agreements which have been initialled but not yet ratified .
I will reflect together with Commissioner Bonino on how we can reassure Parliament about those treaties which will be enforced from the beginning of next year and for which the funds should therefore be on the budget line .
Regarding supplementary and amending budgets , I would like to make only three remarks .
Firstly , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Brinkhorst , and the European Parliament for the constructive discussion of the need for reorganization of the Community 's consumer health services .
The solution which is now proposed for adoption by Parliament allows the most urgent needs to be met in 1997 .
The Commission recognizes that .
Obviously that is not the end of the story .
We shall need some more reinforcements later .
Secondly , the discussions have also clarified other aspects of the future organization of the services concerned .
In particular - I would like to stress this again - the Commission has always taken the view that only the food and veterinary office would go to Ireland , and not other services of DG XXIV .
I would like to underline the desirability of a rapid adoption of the supplementary and amending budget .
I hope that the productive discussions between the Council and Parliament in the context of the trialogue of 26 June 1997 will permit an adoption in one reading .



I thank all the rapporteurs , Mr Tillich , Mr Brinkhorst and Mr Fabra Vallés , as well as the chairman of the Budgets Committee , Mr Samland , for their efforts in this procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B4-0349 / 97 ) .
We shall consider a number of questions to the Commission .
Mr President , Mr Truscott has asked a question concerning restrictions on travel within the European Union for people from third countries .
The Visa Regulation adopted by the Council of Ministers in 1995 only provides a list of countries , citizens of which require a visa in order to enter any of the countries of the European Union .
Visas themselves are actually issued in the individual Member States .
This means that not all citizens of third countries are guaranteed a visa .
The Commission has tried to improve the procedure for granting visas to people from third countries .
In the original proposal for the Visa Directive , for example , there was a section covering the recognition of each others ' visas by the EU Member States .
But this proposal was removed during discussions in the Council of Ministers .
The European Parliament was not even consulted about this .
Because Parliament was not consulted , the EEC Court rejected the decision of the Council of Ministers .
But the current Statute must remain in place until a new Regulation has been adopted .
The concept of mutual recognition of visas was also present in the proposal for the Convention on the Control of External Borders which the Commission presented in 1994 .
Unfortunately , as you know , it has not yet been possible to reach agreement on this Convention .
The problem raised by Mr Truscott would not have arisen if the Visa Regulation in its original format or the Convention on the Control of External Borders had been in place .
The right to introduce visa requirements for citizens of third countries who are members of the family of an EU citizen is regulated under Community Law .
It is quite obvious that Member States should provide visas for these people free of charge .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for her detailed reply but I wonder if she is herself aware that third-country nationals applying for visas in London to visit Belgium have to wait at least three weeks , and all such applications are processed by the Foreign Ministry in Brussels , which leads to quite extensive delay .
Therefore I would like to ask the Commissioner whether she regards such overblown bureaucracy as a hindrance to the free movement of people in the European Union .
It is up to the countries themselves , as I said in my answer , to make the practical arrangements for the visa and if it is delayed it is up to the countries themselves to reorganize their work .
Is the Commissioner aware that 1997 is the European Year against Racism , a relevant issue given that the majority of the 12 to 14 million third-country nationals living in the European Union are actually black , and does she not think that the Belgian authorities may be taking that into account as they move at a snail 's pace to deal with this issue ?
In the Treaty of Rome it says we should have free movement of goods , services , capital and people .
We clearly have free movement of the first three , but the free movement of people , particularly legal residents of the European Union who are third-country nationals , who comprise a population twice that of Belgium , is actually being impeded by the Belgian authorities in a way that I consider to be completely unacceptable .
Does the Commissioner agree ?
I would like to remind the honourable Member that the Commission tried to implement an external border control convention but a certain country prevented us from allowing freedom of movement , which I would also have liked for third-country members .
This was not possible , which I very much regret because , if it was up to me , I would like people legally residing in the Union also to have the right of freedom of movement .
Question No 39 by Daniel Varela Suanzes-Carpegna ( H-0525 / 97 ) :
Subject : Commission position on joint Spanish-British fisheries undertakings
Following the recent Amsterdam summit , the British Prime Minister announced to the press and the British Parliament that he had received written support from the President of the European Commission for plans to amend the current legal status of joint Spanish-British fisheries undertakings operating in Community waters off the United Kingdom .
Given that the planned measures have already been rejected on several occasions by the Court of Justice on the grounds that they infringe Community law :
How can the Commission justify its intervention in support of the government of a Member State in connection with this matter , given that the Court of Justice has on several occasions in the past rejected the various proposals put forward by the UK , on the grounds of systematic violation of Community law , and found in favour of the undertakings concerned , recognizing their right to compensation by virtue of the fact that they had acted fully in keeping with the fundamental principles and freedoms enshrined in the Treaty on European Union ?
The basic regulation establishing the Community regime for fisheries and aquaculture provides that the Member States are to inform the Commission , every year , of the criteria they have set for the allocation of the fishing quotas they have been assigned .
It is therefore for the Member States to allocate their quotas and for the Commission to check that , when quotas are allocated , the principles of the Treaty , the provisions governing the common fisheries policy and case-law are all respected .
That is the spirit in which there has for more than 20 years now been a dialogue between the Member States and the Commission concerning the national conditions for the allocation of the quotas themselves .
In that connection , the United Kingdom , like all of the Member States , asked the Commission for its opinion on a system of allocating the fishing quotas , based on proof of the existence of a real economic link between vessel and flag , in line with the practice established in other Member States .
On 17 June , President Santer replied , on behalf of the Commission , to the requests for clarification from Mr Blair .
President Santer pointed out that the Court of Justice has recognized that the system of quotas may justify the adoption of conditions able to guarantee that there is a real economic link between the fishing vessel and the Member State in question , if those conditions are designed to ensure that population groups dependent on fishing and industries in the sector benefit from the quotas .
In his letter , the President of the Commission also stressed that the proposed measures should be compatible with Community law and should therefore not be discriminatory , be proportionate to the objective to be achieved and provide alternatives by offering fishermen the possibility of complying with one or more measures , or possibly other factors designed to prove that there is an economic link with a flag State .
To conclude : the Commission will later be giving its view on the measures the British authorities intend to take ; when it conducts that review , the Commission will check on the compatibility with Community law of all of the measures adopted to establish , specifically , that they are not discriminatory , that they are proportionate to the objective sought , they offer alternatives and are fully compatible with the decisions of the Court of Justice , taking into account , as it must , the legitimate interests of all of the Member States .
Madam Commissioner , I am most grateful for your having clarified this issue , since , being of a delicate nature , it is one which requires a meticulous approach .

I would firstly like to ask whether the statements by the President of the Commission , Mr Santer - to which you referred - officially represent the position of the Commission , that is to say of the College of Commissioners ; whether there has been a pronouncement regarding these statements and , therefore , whether you are able to advise me of the date of this , including whether they were made with the mandatory legal reports .
If such reports exist , I would like to know whether I could obtain a copy , because I am extremely interested in examining this interpretation , since the interpretation contained in this letter complies , as you say , with the judgements of the Court , although not in every respect since there are a number of paragraphs or subparagraphs in these recitals which always go further , alluding to unspecified legal concepts such as , for example , ' which do not affect the general principles of the Treaty or Community law ' , ' which should not impede the normal operation of the undertakings ' , etc .
And , therefore , when it is stated that the measures cannot be discriminatory and have to be proportionate , we have to examine the issue carefully and know when they are proportionate and when they are not discriminatory .
All this naturally gives rise to a great many problems and I would be grateful for the Commissioner 's opinion regarding my specific questions .
In my opinion , there was absolutely no need for any discussion within the College of Commissioners because there was no new interpretation , nor did anything new arise .
President Santer 's letter - you may check for yourself - refers to only two things :
Firstly that the Commission will have to verify all initiatives on the part of the British Government regarding the Treaty .
There are therefore no measures which the British Government could apply without prior consultation with the Commission , just as is the case in other Member States .
Secondly , that this deals expressly with the economic link referred to in the Court 's Jaderow Case .
It is not , therefore , a new position on the part of the Commission .
The President did no more than confirm the existence of these options , which exist amongst others ; however , the United Kingdom , before deciding upon any measure , has to approach the Commission which will at that time give its own opinion as to whether the measures could be discriminatory , proportionate or alternative , or not , as may be the case .
Madam Commissioner , as Mr Varela has said , this is an important and highly delicate matter .
The Single Market offers advantages to all countries and each one uses it as it sees fit .
There are weaker countries and stronger countries and Spain could complain about the imperfections which , on occasion , the Single Market generates in its economy .
Specifically , the question I would like to put to the Commissioner - sticking to the matter in hand - is as follows : can the Commissioner confirm that it is an infringement of the right to freedom of establishment - of the fundamental principle of freedom of establishment - to require crew members of a specific vessel - a British-flag vessel in this case - to be resident in Great Britain ?
Can she confirm whether , in her opinion , it is or is not an infringement of the right to freedom of establishment to require that such a vessel 's catch be totally or partially landed in British ports ?
Because the opinion of the Court of Justice was precisely the opposite : that this - requiring such measures - is an infringement of the principle of freedom of establishment .
No Member State can , in fact , require that catches be landed in its ports nor that crew members be nationals nor that undertakings be established on its territory .
Bearing in mind that , according to the Court of Justice , one of the purposes of the quota system is to benefit coastal populations , what a Member State - for example , the United Kingdom - can do is to ask all undertakings without discrimination ( and not only those involved in ' quota hopping ' ) what type of economic link they intend to establish with the coastal regions .
Criteria may be set up with a view to assessing the economic link which certain vessels have with a country , but discriminatory measures may not be imposed .
I am pleased that Commissioner Bonino has clarified the situation , because there was a perception as a result of the statement after Amsterdam that the UK Government and the UK Prime Minister were given preferential treatment .
The response today indicates that they were not , and I commend the Commissioner for giving us this statement today .
I should like to point out to the Commissioner that within the rules of the common fisheries policy what is good for the UK is good for Ireland or indeed any country .
I know that as the custodian of the industry and of fishermen 's interests , she will recognize that .
But could the Commissioner indicate what is an economic link ?
Who will decide ?
Who will arbitrate ?
Who will judge and who will take the decision in relation to that ?
I would ask the Commissioner to ensure that an economic link does not just consist of using a port in Ireland , the UK or wherever to land the fish and then have them transported immediately to Spain or any other country .
That is not enough of an economic link , it must be greater than that .
In fact , there is no preferential treatment .
This is contrary to the law of the European Community under which all Member States are equal .
This is something I could not endorse .
Quite the contrary .
In the past year we have been making proposals and suggestions to the UK authorities on how to implement the economic link the Court of Justice talked about .
The Commission will examine the implementation of the economic link in a non-discriminatory and proportionate way once it has received a proposal on criteria from the UK Government .
But that cannot be imposed .
The UK Government can say to each vessel : in order to get a quota you have to prove that you have an economic link .
This economic link can be one of the criteria that the Commission has accepted .
But it is not in a position to impose any of these criteria on anyone .
Let me remind Members that , for instance , Denmark has a national law requiring 50 % landings in Danish ports .
That is one of the possibilities of having an economic link with the flag state .
Mr Varela would like to speak on a point of order .
Which rule of the Rules of Procedure are you invoking for a point of order , Mr Varela ?
Mr President , I do not have the Rules of Procedure to hand and am unable to cite any article , but I had no intention of addressing the heart of the matter .
The Commissioner mentions ' quota hopping ' vessels and I would just like to ask her , if I may , not to use Englishlanguage terminology . Could she please translate it into Italian or , as appropriate , into Spanish , because such terminology has negative connotations .
We are discussing direct investment by one Member State in another Member State .
I , therefore , refer to joint ventures .
Mr Varela , I am not sure to what extent this is a point of order and not purely a point of semantics , however , at any rate , I have been lax enough to allow you to speak and I thank you for your information , as I have noted Mrs Bonino has thanked you , with her customary grace .
Since its author is absent , Question No 40 lapses .
Question No 41 by Sirkka-Liisa Anttila ( H-0575 / 97 ) :
Subject : Possible exports of beef from the United Kingdom in contravention of the embargo
According to news reports , the United Kingdom may have disregarded the embargo and exported beef to a number of countries , including Holland .
If these reports are accurate , the United Kingdom acted in contravention of the embargo imposed following the BSE crisis .
For that reason , it is particularly important to establish whether the information is correct and , if the breach occurred , what quantities of beef were shipped to which countries .
It is also extremely important to clarify this matter from the point of view of the credibility of the European Union as a whole .
It should not be forgotten that the European Union has endeavoured in a variety of ways to restore consumer confidence in beef , not least by means of a campaign to encourage consumption funded to the tune of ECU 32 m and a system for the certification of the origin of beef .
The failure to comply with the aforementioned provisions will nullify those efforts .
The protection of the rights of consumers requires that they should be informed of the countries to which BSE-contaminated meat may have been exported .
If the health of consumers is to be safeguarded , this is an extremely urgent and serious matter .
What measures does the Commission plan to take to establish whether the news reports are correct , i.e. whether the United Kingdom has exported beef in contravention of the ban , and if so , what quantities of beef have been shipped to which countries ?
Yesterday I made a full and detailed report to the temporary committee established for the follow-up of the recommendations on BSE .
But in the plenary perhaps I can just recall some basic elements .
The detailed report is available to all parliamentarians .
On 29 April the Dutch authorities suspected that 1 , 650 tonnes of meat sold by a Belgian company , named TragexGel , stored in Vlissingen , constituted illegal exports of beef from the UK .
More than 100 tonnes were sold to European export companies and subsequently exported by these companies to third countries with refunds .
The remaining quantity of 700 tonnes were seized by the Dutch prosecutor .
Thereafter , in early May the Dutch veterinary services informed the Belgian authorities and the British Minister of Agriculture about their findings .
On 7 May the Dutch Ministry of Health informed UCLAF but requested strict confidentiality with regard to the investigation undertaken at the same time by the Dutch prosecutor .
On 26 June the Commission services were informed and on 26 and 27 June an inspection mission was undertaken by the Food and Veterinary Office .
The British authorities confirmed that the meat seized by the Dutch authorities was of UK origin , so confirming a breach of the embargo .
The mission team was of the opinion that the controls on meat are insufficient so to this effect a pre-Article 169 letter was sent to the UK authorities by the Commission on 8 July .
The UK authorities answered today and the Commission is examining the letter .
By the way , you may know that the Minister of Agriculture , Mr Cunningham , is at the moment attending a meeting of the BSE temporary committee .
On 2 July the Commission informed all Member States , the European Parliament and the public of the illegal meat exports and the third countries identified as possible destinations at this stage have also been informed .
These are Russia , Egypt , Equatorial Guinea , Bosnia Herzegovina and Poland .
An inspection visit to two Belgian plants took place on 3 July .
The situation was considered unsatisfactory in terms of control and there was certain evidence concerning the link between Tragex-Gel and the British plant concerned .
On the basis of these findings , on 4 July the Commission asked the Belgian authorities to withdraw the approval of the two companies immediately and on the same day the Belgian Minister of health informed the companies Tragex-Gel and Lefevbre of the envisaged withdrawal of their approval and decided that no meat could leave these establishments .
The Commission is also examining whether the Belgian authorities have correctly applied Community legislation .
On 4 July the German authorities informed the Commission that they had discovered that a consignment of 172 tonnes was stored in Hamburg , originating from the two Belgian establishments .
Therefore , on 8 July a mission took place in Germany and the 172 tonnes of suspect meat were seized by the German authorities .
A specific mission to British companies started on 8 July in cooperation with the UK services and based on evidence provided by the Commission services the competent UK magistrate issued search warrants for different British establishments , possibly involved in the illegal traffic .
Evidence was found that British meat is likely to have been given a Community origin other than the UK .
On the basis of evidence found in Safex Cold Store and Heine Foods on 14 July we asked the UK authorities to withdraw these companies ' approvals .
Mr Cunningham confirmed to me yesterday by phone that he will withdraw approval from the two companies concerned .
So , at the end we have now found 1 , 650 tonnes .
In one week we have been able to trace all of it .
We know where it is .
What I cannot guarantee is that this is the full story or , because the inquiry is going on , if we will discover other quantities somewhere else .
Mr President , I should like to thank Commissioner Bonino for her excellent answer .
Such flouting of EU rules and the export ban further undermines consumer confidence in beef , which is extremely regrettable given that the EU 's beef sector is already facing a serious crisis .
What does the Commission intend to do to improve monitoring and inspections in the future and prevent any recurrence of such fraud which jeopardizes human health ?
There ought to be harsher penalties for gaining financial advantage by means of deception which even runs the risk of endangering people 's health .
Let me ask therefore , whether the Commission has considered recommending that the Member States introduce heavier penalties ?
Firstly , I would remind you that inspection is the responsibility of Member States .
What the Commission is entitled to do is to coordinate the control .
I would remind you that the Commission has 27 veterinary inspectors for 15 Member States , to deal with all the legislation , third countries ' imports and so on .
This is the reason why the Commission has been asking for a total of at least 200 veterinary inspectors and I am pleased to hear that apparently Parliament will permit the Commission 35 more inspectors by the end of the year .
Nevertheless , the Commission has only two possibilities .
If we get more human resources we can intensify the spot checks and in so doing intensify also , if necessary , the infringement procedures .
However , I must confess to this House that we are late with inspections in other fields which are of enormous importance .
But with only 27 veterinary inspectors - and I cannot clone them , because that is forbidden - we cannot do much more .
I am pleased that we were able to trace all this beef in only one week .
Mrs Bonino , I will not refer at present to the Commission 's lack of caution or its haste - we discussed that issue sufficiently yesterday within the follow-up committee - and I am not concerned with potential breaches because the perpetrators will be prosecuted and will feel the full force of the law .
What does concern me is that the inspection and supervision systems are not working , and that some Member States continue to breach the regulations .
Is the Commission , therefore , not of the opinion that , with the current inspection system - irrespective of the number of inspectors , which is a solvable matter - such controls are not working ?
Should not consideration again be given to the previous system of using waybills which accompanied a product , both live animals and carcasses , from its origin to its destination , since such waybills - as they are called in our country - were fully sanctioned by the competent veterinary inspector ?
From their origin to their destination , therefore , goods were fully identified and monitored .
Should such a system not be reconsidered , given that it is cheap and would not involve additional expenditure for the Commission ?
Indeed , the previous method may have been better , but this did not prevent a serious crisis and the Commission 's being criticized on the grounds of insufficient inspection measures .
In any case , there is a rule to be applied and I believe that things can always be altered .
However , before changing the rule , we have to allocate ourselves the human resources which are essential for changing the position .
You should also be aware that , in the next few months , we will be drafting a report on inspection systems . This could give this House and the Commission the chance to discuss the issue , comparing the two methods and the two experiments , and to decide which is the better method .
This could be a combination of the two , for example .
I am giving the matter some thought , but I think it would be better if we were to gain a little more experience with this method so that later we can draft a report for discussion by Parliament and the Commission , enabling us to work out how we can improve it .
I am very pleased with the positive response which Mrs Bonino has been able to give .
But unfortunately it is always the bad news which gets the big headlines while the good news , that we have actually managed to trace so much of it , receives no publicity at all .
So I wonder , firstly : can the Commission , via their information offices in the cities , give us an update on what progress has been made , in other words have you succeeded ?
Secondly : is this not a reason to press on with the introduction of a regulation on the labelling of beef products ?
I am afraid that many more similar situations could arise , if the regulation does not come into force more quickly .
Thirdly I am pleased with the humility which Mrs Bonino shows when she asks whether everything really has been disclosed .
Are there perhaps signs of further fraud in Great Britain , for example ?
To avoid any misunderstanding , I just said that we have been able to trace the full quantity related to the 1 , 650 , but I cannot say if this is the total fraud or if there are other amounts , because the inquiry is continuing .
We are just at the beginning .
New checks and inquiries are being carried out in the UK , for instance .
The two enterprises have been closed for the moment and we are scrutinizing all the papers , dossiers and so on .
As far as the 1 , 650 we know what happened , but I cannot say that this is the whole story .
It may be that there are other quantities around . I hope not .
On the second issue : you are aware of the position of the Commission on labelling .
The decision and the reaction of all Member States was to make compulsory labelling begin from the year 2000 , and to have voluntary labelling for the moment , provided that it is possible to trace this meat .
I hope that not only this crisis but also the greater awareness among consumers will push Member States to at least speed up voluntary labelling as far as possible .
Given that its author is absent , Question No 42 lapses .
The Commission agrees with the Honourable Member that the establishment of programme contracts can help overcome the administrative demands of project-by-project financing .
The Commission is therefore planning to introduce the possibility of programme contracts into its revised general conditions for cofinancing with NGOs .
Revision of the general conditions is currently underway .
Such programme agreements will be started up on a pilot basis with those NGOs which can demonstrate an appropriate development approach in partnership with local NGOs and with whom the Commissioners have a long and satisfactory co-financing relationship , and will be built up progressively .
Programme contracts will account for only a certain percentage of co-financing funds each year since the Commission will continue to finance individual projects for those European NGOs who continue to operate on a project-by-project basis or are too small to engage in programme contracts .
The Commission has already made use of this instrument , notably in the field of humanitarian aid , through the framework partnership contracts .
The framework partnership contracts were instituted in 1993 and provide an overall legal framework for relations with humanitarian agents , that is to say NGOs and international organizations , thus helping to streamline and expedite procedures for managing humanitarian operations .
I would like to thank you for your very positive response which pleases me a great deal .
This framework agreement ought to reduce administrative costs both for the Commission and the individual organisations .
In so doing we will have more funds available for the subsidies themselves .
The framework agreement is not necessarily only of use in big projects .
Many of the larger non-governmental organisations also have local organisations which may want to set up smaller projects .
I think that the larger organisations , if they have the framework agreement , should also be able to take responsibility for smaller projects which their local organisations wish to set up .
As the Commission has rightly pointed out , this has been tested with great success within ECHO .
Such success ought to form the inspiration for continuing in other areas as well .
Mrs Lööw , I fully agree with you that , if one takes into account the fact that support for NGOs in the twenty years has moved from 2.5 million ECU to 175 million ECU , that is a huge increase and the number of projects which have to be handled surely require as much simplification as possible in their management .
We have worked with the liaison committee of the NGOs in order to create this so-called co-financing support programme .
The objective is to help NGOs to prepare properly for the demands for financing , reporting and so on and so forth .
We hope that through these co-financing support programmes , the quality and the accuracy of reporting will improve , and therefore the idea is to extend progressively these pluriannual schemes to as many NGOs as possible .
I can assure you that so far the work we have been doing with the liaison committee has been extremely encouraging and I am confident that it is just the beginning of a new type of relationship with NGOs .
Mr President , I have a brief specific supplementary question .
Is there a complete catalogue or list of all governmental and non-governmental organizations working on our behalf and with our funds , not only in the domain of development cooperation but in third countries in general , and , if so , where can the list be obtained ?
All the projects could be in DG VIII for development as far as ACP countries are concerned .
I am sure that in each of the geographical DGs there is a full list of NGOs .
As you know this has been handled mainly on a geographical basis .
If you are interested and made a request , I am sure the reply would be very quick .
Question No 44 by Graham Watson ( H-0431 / 97 ) :
Subject : The Kenyan elections
During the course of this year Kenya will hold Presidential , Parliamentary and Civic elections .
Will the European Commission comment on the continuing restrictions on the freedom of assembly and association of political parties and will it extend an offer to send election observers to Kenya and , in addition , call on the government to accord the Electoral Commission of Kenya the independence to which it is entitled under the Kenyan constitution , so that the voters of Kenya may enjoy free and fair elections devoid of suspicion and fear ?
The European Commission has participated in the framework of the socalled Donors ' Democratic Development Group in Kenya in the drafting of a joint declaration on free and fair elections later this year in Kenya .
This declaration emphasizes the importance of the following four prerequisites for a more level playing field for Kenya 's second multi-party elections , namely : access to the ballot ; access to the electorate ; access to information ; and freedom of assembly .
The Commission considers these four points as an irreducible set of conditions to arrive at free and fair elections in Kenya .
On 6 May the declaration was handed over to President Daniel arap Moi .
During that meeting it was agreed that the Donors ' Democratic Development Group would meet regularly with the highest Kenyan authorities to have a dialogue on basic questions concerning the forthcoming elections in Kenya .
As a result , another meeting with the President took place on 1 July .
The European Commission agrees that the role and independence of the Electoral Commission is crucial for administering the elections .
The European Commission , together with the Member States of the European Union will carefully scrutinize the undertakings of the Electoral Commission in order to increase the transparency of the election administration process in Kenya .
Currently , the Donors ' Democratic Development Group is elaborating a recommendation concerning election monitoring , including the possibility of sending observers and setting up an election monitoring secretariat .
An ECfinanced expert is part of the technical team which is assisting the Donors ' Democratic Development Group .
The events which took place last week in Kenya , during which 14 people died in violent confrontations sparked off by police efforts to break up rallies called to press for constitutional reforms , proved that the situation is deteriorating and that the need for dialogue between the government , the opposition and the donor community is all the more necessary and urgent .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for his answer .
As he will be aware , the economy and the security situation in Kenya are worsening .
Not only are roads falling apart and hospitals and schools lacking basic supplies , but robbery is rampant ; the ruling party is using its force against rallies for constitutional change .
Indeed the recent storming of All Saints Cathedral and the beating of the Reverend Timothy Njoya are just one example of this .
I am grateful that the Commission is proposing to look at the sending of observers to the elections , but I wonder if the Commission will also look at the other things that are needed : the appointment of an independent electoral commission to run the elections ; the repeal of the public assembly legislation which gives the government control over opposition rallies ; and the question of independence of broadcasting with access to all parties .
In particular I would ask the Commissioner if , since Kenya has clearly violated Article 5 of the Fourth Lomé Convention , the Commission will consider suspending the aid that it grants to Kenya under the Lomé Convention ?
It is obvious that the importance of creating a level playing field as a precondition for free and fair elections is reflected in the statement that I just made , and I think the four conditions I have enunciated , namely access to the ballot , access to the electorate , access to information and freedom of assembly , incorporate , if I may say so , some of the aspects you mentioned like access to the radio , which is not the case nowadays in Kenya .
We all know that press freedom exists in Kenya but we are also aware that radio is the only means of communication with many remote areas .
Hence the importance that not just the European Union , but all the group I referred to , attach to the monitoring of how the electoral committee is working .
I must say that we are also extremely concerned with the so-called bad governance which has been noted by some of our embassies and delegations in Kenya .
During the visit I made to Kenya I myself made it clear to President arap Moi and his team that we would be willing to cooperate and even intensify our cooperation , but that our conditions are clear and have been clearly restated in the revision of the Lomé Convention , particularly in Article 5 on civil rights and political rights , but also with regard to good governance .
You referred to the bad situation of the economy at the present moment .
That is true , and has led the IMF to consider that Kenya is no longer ' on track ' .
This means that the second tranche of the structural adjustment facility which the IMF was about to grant has been suspended and as a consequence we ourselves have also decided to suspend our structural adjustment facility support to Kenya , this despite the fact that we recognize that the Finance Minister is someone who is worth supporting on a personal basis and whose action is extremely positive .
I have also noticed that we have made the reference that we would be prepared to use Article 5 if we were convinced that these conditions of free and fair elections were not met .
Question No 45 by Clive Needle ( H-0511 / 97 ) :
Subject : Commission steps to eradicate polio in Africa
Will the Commission set out the steps it is taking to assist the eradication of poliomyelitis by programmes of vaccination in developing countries , with particular reference to Africa ?
Mr President , in Africa in particular , the Commission is already engaged in a major effort to support vaccination programmes .
The main aims are to guarantee a lasting supply of priority vaccines - against diphtheria , tetanus , measles , whooping-cough , TB and poliomyelitis - and to develop and improve the so-called routine vaccination activities .
This is done mainly by supporting the basic health services .
The aim of these activities in the near future is to reinforce national capacities in terms of epidemiological vigilance and to improve the ability to react to epidemics .
If national authorities make a specific request , the Commission can help to fund any additional expenditure linked to the programme to eradicate polio , including , if specifically requested , support for holding and running national days for polio immunization .
I repeat that our main aim is to ensure that vaccination supplies are maintained and that countries can carry out routine vaccination measures to combat all of the diseases I have just mentioned .
Thank you , Commissioner , for that general response .
During the course of it you said that if there were requests from national authorities for extensions , then you would be amenable to considering those requests .
I would be grateful to know what response you made to the letter you received from President Mandela of South Africa in March on behalf of a number of organizations broadly representing a coalition whose aim is to kick polio out of Africa .
You have had correspondence , I know , from the World Health Organization and others who have made it absolutely clear that one of their major priorities is to have major programmes on the days of vaccination that you have referred to .
Yet they are saying to me that the EU is lagging significantly behind the US and the UK and national authorities .
I would like you to tell me what specifically is being spent in that field , how , specifically , you are responding to President Mandela and the African countries who are asking for the EU 's help , and whether you will make this a real priority so that the EU is a proper contributing partner in kicking polio out of Africa by the WHO target date of the year 2000 .
The reason why I underlined the request of national authorities in my response is because we have been turning down demands from the World Health Organization for the support for the so-called ' days of vaccination ' .
Why ?
It is because we think that the resources have a much greater multiplier effect if they go through the normal routine procedures and through the basic health care which has been developed in a few countries .
We accept that in some instances this service cannot provide the vaccination routine which is well established in many African countries and for all the diseases I referred to .
So in those cases in which specific countries ' national authorities ask us to support this kind of ad hoc initiative , we are ready to do so because we feel that the national health authorities are better placed than us to judge how best to invest resources .
This has been our policy in the fight against some diseases as I explained to the Director of the World Health Organization and to some NGOs from the other side of the Atlantic and elsewhere who visited me for that purpose .
It is a flexible approach and so far the countries have been happy with it , either opting for the reinforcement of their normal programmes or , in other cases , having a campaign to raise awareness in the population .
So , I imagine that the answer to President Mandela was Yes .
It is very difficult to say No to Nelson Mandela .
Question No 46 by Glenys Kinnock ( H-0556 / 97 ) :
Subject : Conflict prevention and development
Does the Commission support the general principle that security assistance should be integrated into development programmes in conflict prone regions ( the ' security first approach ' ) ?
If so , how does it intend to ensure that National and Regional Indicative Programmes are organized in such a way as to allow for such assistance at short notice ?
The Commission continues to attach great importance to the issue of conflict prevention .
The Commission has taken the lead within the European Union on the dialogue with the Organization of African Unity , in particular with regard to assistance to the OAU conflict mechanism .
The Commission has taken the necessary steps to give shape to the so-called conflict prevention network and the Commission has played a very prominent role in the elaboration of the SAC guidelines on conflict , peace and development cooperation .
The Commission was also the driving force behind the adoption of the common position and Council conclusions on conflict prevention and resolution in Africa , adopted by the General Affairs Council on 2 June 1997 .
These documents reflect the main ideas and recommendations of the Commission 's communication on peace building and conflict prevention in Africa of 6 March 1996 .
The Commission was also instrumental in bringing about the resolution on coherence adopted by the Development Council on 5 June last in which peace building and conflict prevention feature as a specific theme .
The latter two documents are fully complementary and they give a very firm basis for a number of concrete activities in various fields .
Those documents confirm that development assistance has a prominent role to play in peace building and conflict prevention .
However , if we want to employ our assistance effectively , with the goal of peace building , it must be clear that we need to rethink the objectives of our aid .
I firmly believe that it is time to stop focusing on economic development alone and that we must believe , and act in accordance with , the principle that economic growth alone does not prevent or resolve conflicts .
Sometimes economic growth may even trigger or intensify tensions in society .
I believe that politics - functioning political systems - is the key for Africa 's wellbeing .
State failure , ineffective and illegitimate governance , corruption , imbalance of power and opportunities , the theft of national wealth by a small elite , and the repression of democracy , rights and freedoms : these are the key problems that need to be addressed .
They are root causes of violent conflict and our assistance must target them .
Our communication on conflicts in Africa in early 1996 has spelled these problems out in very clear terms .
Assistance to developing countries , including the programmes within the framework of the Lomé Convention , must be designed and implemented in a way that helps to address the root causes of violent conflicts .
In this sense I fully support the idea that , in principle , security assistance should be integrated into development programmes in conflictprone regions .
To that end the Commission took a more strategic approach during the programming of the Lomé IV second financial protocol .
Strategy papers place great emphasis on analysing individual countries ' and regions ' constraints to take account of past , current and likely future crises .
I just wish to add that these strategic papers were for the first time drawn up after prior consultation of the Member States , the World Bank , UNDP and , in some instances , the United States .
I firmly believe that it was a very encouraging result , but one which still falls short of what I consider to be a strategic paper oriented towards full and comprehensive development .
I thank the Commissioner for his response .
He will be aware that I and others were somewhat concerned that in the Green Paper there was very little , if any , reference to the issue of conflict prevention .
I naturally welcome the reference he just made in his reply to including security within the framework of the Lomé Convention .
May I ask the Commissioner in what practical , tangible ways he will ensure that it is actually incorporated into Lomé ?
May I also ask him a question about the importance of maintaining peace .
Demobilization is an important part of this .
I have written to the Commission about the demobilization of over half the UNITA forces in Angola .
It seems to me that we lack the mechanism for the speedy release of funds in these post-conflict situations .
I know that we have cumbersome procedures but that cannot be the only reason .
The Commissioner needs to address that .
Is it not the case that the partnership principle in Lomé actually might lie at the heart of the problem ?
Will the Commissioner be considering instituting a financial instrument that will overcome the problem he clearly sees as needing to be addressed ?
I thank Mrs Kinnock for emphasizing the importance of conflict prevention and the fact that it is not present in the Green Paper as it should be .
Nor are other aspects such as human and social development or the gender issues that the Commission dealt with very recently .
We thought that they were so recent that they would be taken along with the Green Paper as very important current issues .
But I have no doubt whatsoever that we have to have a more mature political dialogue with our ACP partners and discuss the questions I have just referred to on a mature basis .
Otherwise we will be going round in circles without tackling the real problem .
So , I think that will have a pre-eminent role in the next Lomé Convention .
With regard to the second aspect of the problem Mrs Kinnock mentioned , I have been very much involved in discussing the Angolan problem with the Angolan authorities .
It is true that in the Convention we have constraints which render it extremely difficult .
I will just mention a few .
Firstly , since we cannot pay for or give assistance with any military aspects , should demobilization with the assistance of the army be seen as a military or non-military matter ?
I think it is non-military but there are some doubts about the soundness of this judgment .
Secondly , there is the question of mobilizing funds for this .
Each case of demobiliziation is unique .
For instance , in Liberia we had ' guns for jobs ' and it is working .
In Angola it would have to be quite different because villages and towns have been wiped off the map .
It is a matter of rebuilding towns and villages from scratch .
This is something which is totally new .
Some have suggested that we could route it through NGOs but our financial lines for NGOs are insufficient , if you take the 60 , 000 people or so who need immediate demobilization and resettlement somewhere outside the towns .
So , it is one of the issues which DG VIII is looking at , mainly because I am going to Angola at the beginning of October and at the top of my agenda for discussion with the Angolan authorities and UNITA is exactly how we are going to address on a short-term basis the problem of the demobilization of between 60 , 000 and 90 , 000 men who have been fighting for thirty years .
I will be very happy to invite you to come along with me because I think it will be worthwhile having this trip and discussions .
As its author is absent , Question No 47 lapses .
Question No 48 by Mr Barros Moura has been withdrawn .
Question No 49 by Ian White ( H-0494 / 97 ) :
Subject : Restrictions on regional development funds
Written Question E-1395 / 97 was tabled on 7 April asking whether any specific restrictions were put on European Union Funds being spent on civilian facilities rather than military ones , in terms of the development of airport facilities at Benbecula in the Western Isles of Scotland .
The Commission replied that it had asked the Member State concerned for information regarding the facts .
Has such information been received ?
Two grants were awarded from the European Regional Development Fund for Benbecula Airport under the Highlands and Islands National Programme of Community Interest during the period from 1988 to 1991 .
The first grant was for the construction of a new terminal , while the second was for a project to develop the runway and apron .
The following information emerges from the details provided by the responsible implementing authority : firstly , the airport terminal cofinanced by the Regional Fund is not used by military personnel unless they travel as fare-paying passengers on commercial flights ; secondly , there are no restrictions on the tarmac .
The armed forces may use the airport for transit operations , but civilian aircraft have priority .
The airport may be used for very occasional military exercises but remains open to the public throughout the entire exercise .
There are no permanent military installations at the airport .
Military flights are subject to standard commercial tariffs , which helps to ensure the viability of the airport .
Military flights , however , represent a very small percentage of all air traffic at Benbecula Airport ; the EU grant was awarded on the basis of the airport 's impact on the regional economy .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for that very useful reply .
I suspect that the information supplied by the ' responsible authority ' , as she put it , is not altogether accurate .
I speak as somebody who was at Benbecula Airport , and the reason for my question was simply that I was there as a civilian passenger and witnessed the arrival of a number of military aircraft .
I also witnessed the fact that immediately adjacent to the airfield is a large RAF military base and that just down the road from that the Royal Artillery have a massive base .
I seriously wonder whether in fact the European Union has , unwittingly it seems , partly subsidized what amounts to a major military base in the Outer Hebrides .
I should like to put the Commissioner on notice that I am interested in the answer but I think we should go further .
Mr President , I appreciate that my answer might be considered inadequate .
The decision , in fact , was taken back in 1988 .
The funds have been accounted for in the meantime , and to my knowledge they were used exclusively for the grant-aided project .
As its author is absent , Question No 50 lapses .
Question No 51 by Gary Titley ( H-0507 / 97 ) :
Subject : Future of the KONVER programme after 1999
In the light of the restructuring going on in the European defence industry , does the Commission envisage giving greater importance to the KONVER programme post-1999 ?
Mr Titley , today is not the best time for such a question , because - as you know - the President of the Commission will be presenting Agenda 2000 and the various changes that will influence the Structural Funds programme .
I hope you will understand my reluctance to steal the President 's thunder ; at the present time , therefore , I should just like to make a few general remarks .
You will be aware that the current Community initiatives come in for heavy criticism because they are too numerous and because there are too many single programmes relating to Community initiatives .
Of our overall total of 800 programmes , 400 relate to Community initiatives .
However , this only applies to about 9 % of all Structural Fund resources .
That reveals a disproportionately large amount of administrative expenditure and an overlap with the content of programmes under Objectives 1 to 6 .
Since I do not wish to anticipate the President 's address , let me just say that any Community initiatives which are to be discontinued will be integrated as far as possible into the mainstream programmes .
Given that the answer was basically ' wait until tomorrow ' , it is difficult to ask a supplementary .
My concern , however , is that if some of the stories about Community instruments are true , the KONVER programme is likely to be lost .
The KONVER programme covers areas which are not currently covered by Objective 1 or Objective 2 ; nor , indeed , are they easily fitted into any of the other objectives of the Commission .
Nonetheless , they have been important in developing the conversion of defence industries , which is a key factor we have to play .
Could the Commissioner tell me whether she accepts that the KONVER programme has a legitimate aim , and that she would like to see those aims fulfilled in whatever programme takes place after 1999 ?
Mr Titley , I understand your arguments in favour of KONVER , and I am also aware that there was a very specific reason why KONVER has been important to certain regions .
Nevertheless , we must develop an overall strategy that takes account of everyone 's reservations .
We shall have to find the best way to continue meeting needs in this area too .
However , I would ask you to bear in mind that it will be very difficult to maintain all our activities at the present standard as well as doing even more in other areas .
For that reason we shall ultimately have to find a fair compromise which serves the interests of all concerned and , above all , gives help to the regions where the need is greatest .
As the Commissioner knows , the west of England is the most heavily dependent region in the entire European Union on defence-related industry .
This is why KONVER is so important to us .
I should like to ask her , on behalf of the trade unions in the west of England , whether the Commission has a plan to assess the way in which KONVER has been effective during the first few years of its existence as a Community programme .
Has the Commission carried out an assessment , and would it maybe even be possible to consider a conference or some kind of meeting to which the trade unions are invited to give their views on it ?
I can tell the Commissioner that there is widespread dissatisfaction amongst trade unions at the way in which this programme has operated in the past , because it is felt that those in the workplace have had insufficient input into it .
Mr White , we shall naturally assess the results , just as we do with all our programmes .
But please remember that , since some parts of KONVER were extremely late in starting , an evaluation will not be possible until we can determine some results .
I do not have your figures to hand at the moment , but if I remember rightly we have completed about 6 % of the whole initiative .
I will gladly look up the UK figures for you afterwards .
So what this all means is that we have scarcely spent any KONVER funds yet , so it stands to reason that we have registered few successes so far .
We shall begin by considering the impact of the KONVER programme as a whole and then we shall provide opportunities , as has already been done , for exchanges of information relating to the various areas of the programme .
A few conferences of KONVER regions have already taken place .
Madam Commissioner , I would like to ask a question about the future of the RECHAR initiative which , it would appear , will no longer be included .
I am aware that Agenda 2000 is to be presented tomorrow , but I wanted your opinion on whether such restructuring operations are going to continue , moreover , owing to Community prerequisites , owing to the powers the European Union has under the ECSC Treaty , something which will continue to affect countries such as Germany , Spain and even France .
I also wanted to ask you if you are aware of the fact that when the ECSC Treaty - and therefore all the reindustrialization aid which used to be received - lapses - and in view of the decision of the Amsterdam Council to channel these remaining funds - the ECSC reserves - to other purposes , there would , in actual fact , be no need to devise a transition programme for such regions .
Mrs Wulf-Mathies , as you will have ascertained , Mrs García Arias 's supplementary question is outside the scope of the question initially put to you .
However , you may answer if you wish .
I believe I ought to be fair here .
If I have not told you today what is to become of KONVER , I must not say anything about the future of RECHAR either .
I hope you will understand .
But you know that we are trying to solve the problems associated with RECHAR , that we are very familiar with these problems and that we shall continue to try and offer whatever type of help we can to solve such problems .
But I would also ask you to appreciate that we must naturally respect Council decisions with regard to the ECSC .
Question No 52 by Miguel Arias Cañete ( H-0515 / 97 ) :
Subject : Capital Region network
Is the Commission aware of the special nature of the problems affecting the European regions within which their country 's national capital is located ?
Does the Commission know of the activities of the Capitals Network , of which the Madrid , Brussels , île de France , Athens , Lisbon , Rome , Stockholm and Helsinki regions are members and in which Berlin , Dublin and Vienna are involved as observers ?
Mr President , I need hardly say that it gives me particular pleasure to reply to the chairman of my committee , whom I am pleased to tell that the Commission held an exchange of views with representatives of the Network of Capital Regions in 1996 .
The discussion served as an opportunity to examine , among other things , the special problems of the European regions in which the national capitals are situated .
In this context , the Commission asked the Capitals Network to make representations in connection with the regional development strategy currently being devised in the framework of the European regional planning blueprint ; as you know , this blueprint deals with the urban system in the European Union and the different functions performed by individual towns and cities .
The Commission noted with interest the Charter of the EU Capital Regions , which highlights the main problems facing capital regions .
In its communication of May 1997 on European urban development , the Commission invited interested institutions to join it in a dialogue .
At their informal meeting in Noordwijk in June 1997 , the Ministers responsible for urban policy and regional planning in the EU Member States emphasized their great interest in the idea of the relevant organizations exchanging views and sharing experiences in a European framework .
The opinions of the European institutions , of the European Parliament , but also of the Committee of the Regions , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , as well as the proposals of urban organizations such as the Network , can provide important ideas for the urban policy forum that the Commission has planned for 1998 , and I therefore expect to receive an opinion from this institution too , which can help us to build up an accurate picture of conditions in a wide range of towns and cities with a variety of problems .
Madam Commissioner , many thanks for your reply . Allow me to inform you that capital cities , insofar as they are cultural , financial and political decision-making centres , have the highest concentration of services in the country in question , but that this concentration also makes them a centre of attraction for local immigration and immigration from third countries , resulting in a most appreciable increase in the marginal population , the unemployed , and the consequent depopulation and impoverishment of the surrounding region .
Moreover , the relatively high income levels of that sector of the population which is genuinely in work diverts Structural Fund aid towards other regions .
Hence my question , Madam Commissioner , is whether , in new Objective 2 , referred to in Agenda 2000 , the Commission intends to examine , amongst the eligibility criteria , the situation of such regions which include the capital city - they have a highly specific problem , are often the focal point for a great many citizens , even for a Member State , yet to date have not received structural aid .
Mr President , I must ask the honourable Member not to expect me to refer to the subject of Agenda 2000 , because the President of the Commission will deal comprehensively with it tomorrow .
Let me mention , however , that it would in fact be important to examine what distinguishes capitals from other cities with similar problems , cities which have to deal with immigration and environmental pollution and which also perform particular central functions for their respective regions .
I would therefore ask such cities , as we have already asked the capital regions , to describe their problems to us , because I feel it will be more fruitful to deal with the various problems in the framework of municipal and urban-policy initiatives , irrespective of whether these problems occur in capitals or in other cities .
A serious problem is a serious problem , wherever it arises , and the same problem will affect people in capital cities just as much or as little as it affects people in other cities .
The time allotted for questions to Mrs Wulf-Mathies has run out so Questions No 53 to No 58 will receive written answers .
Given that its author is absent , Question No 59 lapses .
Question No 60 by Anne McIntosh ( H-0440 / 97 ) :
Subject : Recognition of ski instructor qualifications in France
What action will the Commission be taking to guarantee the proper implementation of the applicable legislation to recognize ski instructor qualifications in France , avoiding the practice of aptitude tests being used to discriminate against non-French instructors ?
As far as establishment is concerned , what remedial action will the Commission be taking against the French authorities if there is a failure to amend the rules on granting authorization to holders of diplomas issued by other Member States , in particular in line with Directive 92 / 51 / EEC ?
Mr President , the Commission is well aware of the problems encountered by ski instructors with British diplomas in having their qualifications recognized in France .
Indeed , the Commission has already done a great deal of work in an effort to resolve this problem .
I would point out that , following intervention on the part of the Commission , France has now properly transposed Community law .
As far as freedom of establishment is concerned , infringement proceedings have been set under way .
The matter ought soon to be resolved , given that the French authorities have recently issued a decree incorporating into French law Directive 92 / 51 / EEC on the recognition of diplomas .
The proper application of the new provisions of French law will have now to be established in practice , and the Commission intends to continue working towards this .
The Commission has also sought to set up a dialogue between the British Association of Ski Instructors ( BASI ) and the French authorities .
The aim of that initiative is to encourage bilateral discussions of the conditions governing recognition of the BASI first grade diploma .
There have already been meetings between French officials and representatives of the British Association of Ski Instructors .
The Commission has also asked the French authorities to provide an initial assessment of the decree on providers of services , and this should arrive during the next few weeks .
Should it emerge that aptitude tests are being automatically required , the Commission will ask the French authorities to change that practice .
Mr President , while I welcome the Commission action to date , I am afraid it is simply not good enough .
As a founder member of the European Union , the French Government ought to know better , and it ought to know that , as the Commissioner has said , it is in flagrant breach of both the Treaty provisions on the freedom of establishment and , in particular , the implementing directive which , I may remind him , was adopted in 1992 .
On behalf of the British skiers , many of whom have written to both myself and other British MEPs , could he please tell us at what point a British national holding a British diploma will be able to take a position on equal terms under Article 7 of the Treaty with a French national ?
It is simply not a level playing field and I repeat that France is in breach of the Treaty and of the implementing directive .
Mr President , perhaps I may provide the latest details concerning this dossier , to which the Commission is as attached as you are , Miss McIntosh .
First of all , last year great efforts were made , through meetings , informal contacts or official letters , to solve the problems encountered by foreign ski instructors wishing to pursue their activities in France , and real progress was made .
We cannot forget the two French decrees .
Secondly , the Commission has asked France to examine all the pending individual cases known to the Commission .
Thirdly , a new complaint by Mr Holmes , a BASI lawyer , has just been received by the Commission .
It has now been officially registered as a complaint .
Mr Holmes ' concern is that aptitude tests could be systematically required for providers of services .
If this is the case , the Commission may decide to take action .
Fourthly , on 17 June 1997 I received a delegation of basic ski instructors headed by Mrs Billingham .
Finally , a letter dated 3 April 1997 signed by Director-General Mogg was sent to the French authorities , asking them to provide the Commission with a first evaluation of the decree on service providers .
The Commission has just received the elements , in June this year .
So I think these facts may convince you , Miss McIntosh , of the very close attention with which the Commission is following this important dossier .
I thank you , Commissioner Monti .
It is no surprise to you , I am sure , to see me rising on this issue even though my question is further on .
I thank you for the acknowledgement that you have made already of the very important meeting that we had with the chairman and the chief executive of the British Association of Ski Instructors .
You will note from Mrs McIntosh that exasperation is rife , I have to say , on this particular issue .
I am delighted to hear that there is progress being made but there is some scepticism .
We are looking for action rather than words in this issue .
I do not need to tell you that this is a microcosm of your whole action plan for the single market .
If we cannot get this issue right , what chance and likelihood is there of getting all the other , very many more complex issues put to right ?
As far as the ski instructors are concerned , their row with the French is only part of the argument .
I am sure this is going to have a resonance over the rest of Europe .
I wish to thank Mrs Billingham for the interest she takes in the Commission 's activities in this area .
Allow me to say that the words I spoke are indeed only words , but words about facts .
These facts may not have been sufficient yet .
We will take all the necessary action .
We speak about actions by using words , but action is the key in this area .
I share your view that this free movement of people , in a broad sense , is essential to the single market .
That is why we are so keenly pursuing this .
Since its author is absent , Question No 61 lapses .
As far as the two problems raised by honourable Members and currently under discussion are concerned , the Commission has already on a number of occasions expressed its view on the problem of acts of vandalism repeatedly committed by some groups of French producers and their associations targeted at agricultural food products from Spain .
A few days ago , I myself sent a letter to the French minister for European affairs to stress the Commission 's concern over this .
Moreover , similar incidents in past years led the Commission to bring proceedings for infringement under Article 169 of the Treaty , and that case is currently pending before the Court of Justice .
Advocate General Lenz recently submitted his opinion to the Court and endorsed the view taken by the Commission .
There is no doubt that if the Court of Justice finds that France has failed to fulfil obligations under the Treaty and if the measures adopted by the French authorities do not remedy that situation , the Commission would be able to bring an action under Article 171 of the EEC Treaty and , in this case , ask the Court to order France to pay a lump sum or a fine .
Moving on to the general steps which could be taken in the near future - the subject-matter of the other question - the Commission is aware that the conditions for applying the procedures set under way under Articles 169 and 171 do not allow problems that arise in the kind of circumstances described by the honourable Members to be rapidly resolved .
The Commission drew the attention of the Member States to that point in the opinion published in February 1996 on the occasion of the Intergovernmental Conference .
Thereafter in the action plan for the single market , the Commission made it clear that where there are serious breaches of Community law with grave implications for the operation of the single market , the Commission ought to be able to adopt urgent measures against the States in question , by imposing penalties , if necessary .
The reinforcement of the Commission 's executive powers will help cut delays in resolving the problems .
However , the Intergovernmental Conference came to an end without any amendment to that effect being inserted into the text of the new treaty .
But the Amsterdam European Council did itself ask the Commission to consider how to guarantee the free movement of goods effectively , including the possibility of imposing penalties on Member States , and asked it to submit proposals on this before the next meeting of the European Council in December 1997 .
It is too early to say how the Commission intends responding on this .
But it has certainly begun to consider all the opportunities the Treaty affords to respond in full to the request from the Heads of State and Government at their last meeting .
Mr Commissioner , the Intergovernmental Conference was disappointing in this respect , and remains so .
I am most grateful to the Commission for its attitude prior to the Intergovernmental Conference and , I note from your words , Mr Commissioner , after the Conference as well .
Given this attitude of mutual support , therefore - because the problem remains - I would be most grateful if you would give a copy to Parliament and to this Member in particular - so that Parliament and European public opinion in general might be informed - of the letter you sent to the French minister .
I would like to thank you for your attention to this matter and , in future , I would also be grateful if all such Commission actions aimed at solving the problem were as transparent and as widely publicized .
I believe the European Commission is doing much more than people are aware of .
I should like to inform Mrs Izquierdo Rojo that on 8 July , when I sent the letter I mentioned to the French minister for European affairs , the Commission issued a press statement on the content of that letter .
Mr Commissioner , you will be aware that , despite your letters of rebuke to the French Minister for European Affairs - both in the previous and in the present government - acts of vandalism continue to be committed against Spanish lorries and the French Gendarmerie turns a blind eye .
Witness , for example , the outrage committed in Cintegabelle on the 2nd of this month .
I assume that the Commissioner will experience a great deal of frustration upon hearing that his good intentions of settling the matter during the recent Amsterdam Intergovernmental Conference , when he proposed that sanctions should be automatic , have come to nought .
I understand his frustration , since we Europeans are well aware of his strength of mind and , I might say , obstinacy in defending , come hell or high water , the free movement of goods in the Union with a view to achieving completion of the Single Market , an objective we simply cannot give up .
I understand your frustration , Mr Commissioner , but you have to understand that ours is greater because , as the previous speaker mentioned , we are still faced with an unsolvable problem .
There is , of course , frustration , but there is also a growing awareness in the Institutions and among the public and a desire to have these problems properly resolved .
The Commission and I myself were encouraged to hear of the opinion Advocate General Lenz delivered to the Court on the earlier cases that took place in 1995 .
I agree that it has taken a long time , these things proceed slowly , but if the Court of Justice goes along with the opinion of Advocate General Lenz this will be a real case of substantial progress being achieved in enforcing the free movement of goods .
As the time allotted for Question Time to the Commission has run out , Questions Nos 64 to 114 will receive written answers .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.20 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Road passenger transport
The next item is the joint debate on :
the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0234 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Regulation laying down the conditions under which non-resident carriers may operate national road passenger transport services within a Member State ( C4-0172 / 97-96 / 0002 ( SYN ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Killilea ) -the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0233 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Regulation amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 684 / 92 on common rules for the international carriage of passengers by coach and bus ( C4-0173 / 97-96 / 0125 ( SYN ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Killilea )
Madam President , Parliament cannot be entirely satisfied with the way in which the Council has chosen to act in the field of international carriage of passengers by coach and bus .
The Commission accepted only 9 of the Parliament 's 26 amendments and the Council has accepted even fewer .
However it must also be recognized that the decision to introduce a Community licence is of course a major step forward in itself .
The Council 's common position has made further changes to the Commission 's text .
Among other things it provides for the establishment of a consultative committee to assist the Commission in adopting and implementing measures relating to transport documents .
Although many of the amendments adopted at first reading by the European Parliament have not been incorporated into the common position , the Committee on Transport and Tourism has chosen to concentrate action on only a few objectives which it sees as being the most important .
These are contained principally in amendments Nos 15 and 16 from the first reading , now amendments Nos 1 and 2 of this recommendation , which concern the need to meet the legal requirements concerning social benefits as well as road safety in respect of access to the market for drivers and vehicles .
I also chose to retable amendment 24 for the first reading , that is now amendment 3 of this recommendation , calling on the Commission to submit before December 1999 a new draft regulation to further extend the scope of the present proposal .
Given the amount of time needed to carry through and implement this regulation , it could be a good idea to begin work immediately on a new proposal in order not to postpone indefinitely the process of further liberalization .
By way of introduction to my second report on cabotage , I think it may be useful to give a brief historical account of this proposal which has had a curious fate and , I must say , a very tortured route .
On 23 July 1992 , the Council adopted Regulation No 2454 / 92 laying down the conditions under which non-resident carriers may operate national road transport services within a Member State , so-called cabotage transport operations .
The regulation has since been annulled by the Court of Justice in a judgment handed down on 1 June 1994 after proceedings had been instituted by Parliament itself .
At the same time , the Court ruled that the new operative part of the regulation should remain in force until new legislation had been issued .
The Court decided to annul the regulation because the Council substantially altered the Commission 's proposal on which Parliament had delivered its opinion in adopting the final version of the text ; and everybody knows - the Council above all - that to make such a significant change it ought to have consulted Parliament again .
In the final text some of the procedures and formalities laid down could have made it more difficult to exercise the freedom to provide passenger transport services .
A year and seven months after the judgment of 1 June 1994 the Commission submitted the proposal now under consideration , which is largely modelled on the annulled regulation itself , but of course widens the extent to which cabotage transport operations will be liberalized .
Following Parliament 's first reading , the Commission accepted 9 of Parliament 's 16 amendments but the Council regrettably only accepted 3 of these .
However , there have been a number of positive developments .
The Council 's common position introduced a greater degree of liberalization than the old Regulation No 2254 / 92 in so far as all specialized regular vehicles such as workers ' and students ' transport have been liberalized , provided they are governed by a contract between the organization and the carriers .
Moreover , the admission to a national market of passenger services provided in the context of international transport constitutes a first step in recognition by the Council of the principle of cabotage within the Community territory .
For these reasons I am not submitting many of the amendments adopted at first reading that were not accepted by the Council , because I realize that the common position does represent an improvement on the previous legislation .
However , Parliament should not ignore its responsibility to encourage further progress in this field .
Amendment No 1 of the draft recommendation therefore seeks to encourage the Commission in its future efforts to liberalize the sector , taking account of Parliament 's previous position .
This amendment refers to the final declaration which the Commission has annexed to the Council 's common position , stating its commitment to preparing new legislative initiatives in this sector on the basis of reactions to the Green Paper on the citizens ' network .
The Transport Committee wants to encourage the Commission by adding a recital providing for further liberalization in the future which makes the amendments that the Council has made to the initial proposal temporarily acceptable .
The adoption of this recital is therefore of greater significance than might appear since it expresses Parliament 's keenness to seek further progress in the matter of passenger transport legislation .
Amendment No 2 emphasizes the European Parliament 's incontrovertible role of scrutiny , specifying that the Commission will undertake to inform Parliament of the operation both of the regulation in question and of the regulation annulled by the Court of Justice .
The Commission should in particular submit before June 1998 a report on the operation of the old regulation , and before December 1999 a report on the operation of the present regulation , on the basis of data collected periodically by the Member States .
The amendment also takes up the content of the recital by referring to future legislative developments in this sector .
In conclusion only 2 amendments are being retabled at second reading .
However these are amendments which summarize Parliament 's determination to remain vigilant with regard to cabotage and passenger transport services within the Community , in the name of the principle of free movement of people and freedom of establishment in the internal market and more generally in the interests of the European citizens .
These were amendments tabled by political groups .
One amendment only was tabled by Mr Grosch from the EPP Group .
It concerns the addition of the word ' regional ' .
After having contacted Mr Grosch it seems that the transport organizations in Belgium , as in Germany , organize bus transport in urban areas , but that these are on a regional basis .
Taking account of his explicit explanation and the diversity of the bus transport organizations within the EU itself , I propose to support this amendment .
I thank the Committee on Transport for bringing this report to this stage , and the Commissioner personally and his staff for their assistance and help in trying to make this as good a piece of legislation as we possibly can .
Madam President , on behalf of the European Socialist Group I would like to speak briefly , first of all , on the proposal by the Commission for the amendment of the Council regulation governing the rules for international carriage of passengers .
Our group , as we stated at first reading , welcome the Commission proposals which we believe will bring about further liberalization in this sector , in particular simplifying the rules applying to international passenger coach and bus services .
Whilst I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate and thank the rapporteur for his efforts , I share with him his disappointment at our failure to make much progress on our amendments .
It is important , this evening , that we dwell on the very positive aspects of this particular proposal .
In particular , we ought to draw everyone 's attention to the fact that , for example , the improved wording of the definition of occasional services will greatly simplify the application of the regulation and contribute to the development of a more efficient sector .
Secondly , the abolition of the definition of international shuttle services , which never existed in national legislation , will , again , greatly clarify matters .
Last , but not least , as noted by the rapporteur himself , the creation of a uniform , simplified control document , a Community coach licence , will avoid the present confusing situation whereby old documents are amended by hand .
Taken together , I believe these particular proposals are worthy of the support of this Parliament at second reading .
I now turn briefly to the proposals for non-resident carriers operating national road passenger transport .
The objective of this proposal , as the rapporteur has stated , is to lay down harmonized conditions under which nonresident carriers may operate national coach and bus services within a Member State .
My group shares and applauds the objective to establish the freedom to provide transport services and eliminate all discrimination against carriers on the grounds of nationality .
The objective is to ensure compliance with the Treaty and , in particular , the single market .
Taken together with the other measures that I have mentioned the abolition of frontier controls means that we will now see cabotage systems extended to all transport services by bus or coach operators , including regular services .
I welcome these measures .
In particular , taken together , they will , in my view , offer new opportunities for bus and coach service operators which will in turn generate much needed new jobs in the transport industry .
New standards will be introduced and greater flexibility will open up new markets .
The abolition of the current restrictions will enable transport companies to optimize the management of their activities and the profitability of their vehicle fleets .
In conclusion , the Socialist Group is pleased to support these measures because they will create a new fast-track system , where bus and coach services can be operated for the good of the bus companies themselves , the passengers , the economy and the environment .
Madam President , I also would like to congratulate the Commission on reaching the stage of the common position and the rapporteur for all his hard work on these two proposals .
In accepting the common position , I welcome this as a first step along the path to recognizing the principle of cabotage within the European Union territory .
However , I wish to express my concern , and the regret and disappointment of myself and the Group of the European People 's Party that progress towards liberalization in this field is painfully slow .
Regrettably , the possibility of non-resident carriers being able to operate national road passenger services within another Member State is still severely limited .
I dream of the day when a coach can travel through France from Britain to Bordeaux , picking up and dropping off passengers in Paris en route .
Such a move would make a reality of the single market in road transport for buses and coaches , encourage more people to use such transport and ensure a real value to a people 's Europe of which we all talk .
The benefits of the proposals before us this evening for coach operators are both tangible and positive .
Transport operators will be able to take advantage of their entitlement to undertake services in another Member State , and , obviously , would only do so when it was in their commercial interest to engage in these operations .
International coach operators would be able to benefit , at no additional cost , by filling the empty seats on existing services .
The further liberalization set out in the common position and in Mr Killilea 's reports would help to reduce costs and save time for operators .
This streamlining of procedures will only be slightly offset by the need to review the Community licence every five years , which , of course , is part of the proposal .
I would like to take this opportunity to support the common position and Mr Killilea 's reports and commend them to the House .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , thanks to the two reports by Mark Killilea , we are now reaching the end of a very important legislative procedure for the passenger road transport sector .
I am convinced that the adoption of these texts and that of the application regulations are going to give a fresh boost to the transport of persons , offering a greater choice of services at more attractive prices .
There is a considerable coverage of the car or bus market .
Thanks to the authorization of cabotage , the free provision of services is introduced , eliminating any discrimination with respect to the service provider by dint of nationality or the fact that he is established in another Member State .
We should also stress the simplification to international passenger transport by the introduction of a Community licence , to become in the end the only document needed to transport passengers across the European Union .
That is why I call on you to vote for both motions for recommendations tabled by Mr Killilea , whom I thank very warmly !
This remarkable progress should not , however , make us lose sight of a major imperative : safety .
In addition to common rules on the free provision of services , we must also bring into line the conditions required for access to the transporter profession .
That is what lies behind another report , that by Mrs Berger , which we shall vote on after the Killilea report .
I regret very much that the Committee on Transport and Tourism did not examine in depth the points that seem vital to me , i.e. training for drivers , individual reliability or the content of aptitude tests .
These obviously go hand in hand with a greater opening of the passenger and goods transport markets .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , like the rapporteur , the Group of the European People 's Party sees the Council 's position as an important step - although not the final one - in the process of liberalizing international transport .
The provisional exclusion of local bus services from the scope of the legislation was something that Parliament had requested .
We therefore find it surprising that regionally based local bus services are not treated in the same way ; however , it may be possible to correct this when we vote tomorrow .
In the meantime , I should like to thank the rapporteur for encouraging the House to support this additional amendment .
It makes sense , in our view , to proceed along the lines that the rapporteur has suggested - proposing changes which are geared to specific objectives , rather than simply deluding ourselves by retabling all the amendments that were proposed at first reading .
Legal requirements concerning social benefits and road safety are certainly among the major criteria that should determine access to the market .
We all know - and the Council , we hope , will take the same view - that liberalization and the competitive conditions which go with it cannot be allowed to produce a situation where social and safety legislation goes by the board .
In our opinion , the rapporteur 's last amendment is also logical if , as I said to begin with , we do not regard this as the final step .
As far as we are concerned , the dates which he has set out are the latest possible deadlines for initiating a new legislative procedure .
We would also expect - and hope - that before then , Parliament will have an opportunity of expressing its opinion on transport issues more forcefully .
As to whether the Council is yet prepared to take our opinion into account , that may be more of a pious wish than a hope .
Nonetheless , it is a wish that I felt should not go unstated .
Madam President , I wish to begin by responding to the generosity of Mr Killilea 's remarks in thanking my services - the people who work with me - and myself , but also to apologise for being three minutes late and having therefore missed some of the pearls that he cast before the Commission swine .
I apologise very much for that .
I can only explain that I was engaged in intense discussion with my Member of the European Parliament in my office on the vexed subject of the painting of our kitchen and , consequently , was detained longer than either of us intended .
I hope he will forgive me .
I am sure he does .
The two common positions before the House obviously command widespread support , as evidenced by the debate this evening .
No doubt that is a tribute to Mr Killilea 's widely recognized quality of promoting consensus , not only in his native country but here in the European Parliament .
With regard to international bus transport , the common position takes up most of the refinements recommended by the Commission and Parliament at an earlier stage , and it also incorporates the proposed introduction of a Community licence for coaches .
Although Parliament , as honourable Members will recall , agreed with the Commission 's wish to delete the so-called ' rail protection clause ' , there was insufficient support in the Council to achieve that , despite the fact that the provisions of the clause have never ever been used by any Member State .
Instead the Council reached a compromise so that the protection clause will be maintained until the end of 1999 and then replaced by a safeguard clause .
The Commission will naturally keep a close eye on the use which Member States make of these clauses so as to avoid a distortion of competition between different transport modes .
Colleagues will recall that Amendments Nos 1 and 2 , before the House today , were rejected at the first reading by both the Commission and the Council .
As I understand it the Committee on Transport and Tourism is anxious to ensure that legislation on driving and rest periods is respected , and naturally I concur strongly with that aim .
I can assure the House , however , that this is already provided for in the existing text , and I therefore ask honourable Members to reflect on that , especially since on this rare occasion the wording proposed by the Transport Committee would not bring any greater clarity to the existing provision .
I have to tell honourable Members that Amendment No 3 cannot be accepted , not for reasons of principle but mainly for reasons of practicality . While the Commission will , of course , draft a report on the application of this regulation , it is simply not realistic to do so before the end of 1998 .
The regulation will be adopted in or around October of this year and will enter into force about 12 months later .
This would quite obviously leave too short a time to draw any practical conclusion about its application , and when the House takes these calendar considerations into account , I hope that honourable Members will reach a similar judgment .
The situation of bus cabotage is satisfactory , although the position of the Council is not as ambitious as that proposed by the Commission .
It is , nevertheless , an acceptable first step in implementing the freedom to provide services in regular bus services .
I may also add that the Commission will review the situation of regular bus services that are excluded from the scope of the present regulation when we consider the revision of the regulations concerning public services , as we stated in the citizens ' network Green Paper last year .
I am also pleased to advise the House that the Commission will accept a redrafted version of Amendment No 1 , as well as part of Amendment No 2 - that part which dealt with the report on the application of Regulation 2454 / 92 .
This will , as requested in the amendment put before the House , be presented in the course of next year .
I cannot , however , accept Mr Grosch 's amendment which seeks to exclude regional bus services from the scope of the amended regulation - that would be a backward step from the progress already achieved .
I am very grateful to Mr Killilea and his colleagues for their work and , indeed , for their continuing interest which is , of course , of great help in achieving sustained progress with the operation of common rules for bus and coach transport in the Community .
Thank you , Mr Kinnock . I see that Mr Killilea has something more to say .
You have the floor .
Madam President , I just wanted to make a point of information to the Commissioner .
With regard to Amendment No 1 , you say that it does not add any greater clarity .
Its inclusion therefore does not take away any greater clarity either , so I do not see what the logic of it is .
But it is the question of Mr Grosch 's amendment that I want to refer to for a moment , because I think , Commissioner , you should call Mr Grosch to your office tomorrow to have a word of discussion with him , as I myself had to , so that he can explain the technical meaning of his amendment .
It is quite different to the interpretation you have given of it , and I would appreciate a little arbitration on this particular matter so that it can be clarified once and for all .
I expect you will do this , because I know you are a man who respects a small desire , and I think that when Mr Grosch has finished with you , you will have had explained to you the detail of what he is talking about .
After his explanation to me , I do not think he seriously means any wrong by what he is trying to do .

Madam President , I should have advised myself better before offering commendation to Mr Killilea on his gift for consensus .

After his last words I feel bathed in a sort of warm oil , and I am drifting off into paradise at the way in which he offers sweet blandishments that make it absolutely essential for me to see Mr Grosch ; If we can get an understanding of the technicalities that assists with joint progress , I will certainly do that ; but clearly I cannot promise the outcome that Mr Killilea so clearly wants before I give further consideration to the matter .
As far as Amendment No 1 is concerned , I think he will acknowledge that the constant pursuit of the Commission is to add value , clarification , simplification and transparency .
And even when a form of words does not subtract from any of that , it always remains inferior to something that adds to it .
So the consequence is , I must insist on the point that I made earlier to the House .
I will certainly pursue the issue raised by Mr Killilea in the hope of getting a satisfactory solution , but with no guarantee .
Thank you Mr Kinnock .
I think that Mr Grosch appreciates that opening .
Mr Watts also has a request for you , I think .
Madam President , very briefly , on a much sadder subject .
As the Commissioner will be aware , my colleague , Mr Titley , only on Monday raised the issue of the tragic loss of life involved in the coach crash in the French Alps in which three young people from his constituency were killed on a coach hired locally in France , without seatbelts .
I know Mr Titley has already paid tribute to the endeavours of Commissioner Kinnock to ensure coaches are as safe as they possibly can be .
Clearly , I do not wish to put the Commissioner on the spot this evening but I am sure we would all welcome this opportunity , sad though it is , to review whether or not there is anything more we can do to ensure safer coaches throughout the European Union and learn from this tragedy to ensure that it does not happen again .
As Mr Watts says , this is a matter of the gravest concern .
I have been in touch with his colleague , Mr Titley , who quite properly raised the issue with me in the immediate wake of this awful tragedy which occurred to pupils of St. James ' School in Mr Titley 's constituency .

What I was able to tell Mr Titley is that we have already achieved the legislation necessary to ensure the universal installation of seatbelts in new coaches and , indeed , in all coaches manufactured towards the end of this decade , throughout the European Union .
We are also proceeding with legislation that will provide much greater security against injury caused in the course of roll-over of coaches .
It is a particular tragedy in this case that a school that fastidiously had only used coaches fitted with seatbelts , because of the break-down of a bus , had to resort to a different vehicle .
Those young people are dead , possibly because of that unavoidable change .
We will constantly review the whole issue in the hope of gaining faster and more widespread implementation of changes to improve the security of coaches and buses that any civilized person in Parliament , the Commission or indeed , anywhere else would want .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Charging of HGV
The next item is the report ( A4-0243 / 97 ) , by Mr Jarzembowski , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Directive on the charging of heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructures ( COM ( 96 ) 0331 - C4-0027 / 97-96 / 0182 ( SYN ) )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Transport and Tourism has given very close consideration to the Commission proposal for a new directive on vehicle taxes for heavy goods vehicles and the imposition of toll and user charges , and I am very pleased to say that it has reached a consensus as regards the report and adopted an agreed position by a substantial majority .
In our view , the system which the Commission is proposing for motor vehicle tax rates is far too complicated and needs to be simplified .
This should involve abandoning maximum rates and introducing only minimum rates .
However , the minimum rates should be graduated in such a way as to reflect the road damage and pollution ratings of the vehicles , and thus also to encourage the purchase of more environmentally friendly vehicles .
In our view , the rates of tax for Euro I and Euro II vehicles should be set at 80 % of the rates for the more heavily polluting non-Euro vehicles .
In any event , we believe that minimum rates of tax cannot be reduced below these levels , even where a Member State is levying user charges .
The fact is that the substantial differences in the rates of tax currently levied in the Member States are already distorting competition between businesses in the Community , and this is detrimental to the concept of the internal market and to fair competition .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism is also proposing that the system of minimum tax rates should be reviewed , with the first review to take place on 1 January 2002 .
I would add that , in my personal opinion , vehicle taxes should be dropped completely , because they are not really environmentally relevant taxes .
Even more importantly , however , the committee has also reached an agreed position on toll and user charges .
As we see it , the Commission 's next step should be to produce its White Paper on the internalization of external costs , and also the study that was specifically requested in the Schmidbauer report , giving evidence of the external costs of all modes of transport .
We maintain that it is unacceptable to introduce a cost component into toll charges now to cover external costs , payable only by heavy goods vehicles .
We also take the view that higher charges for the use of so-called sensitive routes should not be permitted at this stage .
Specific arrangements for defining heavily polluted corridors would first have to be worked out and incorporated into Community law .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism is calling on the Commission to submit appropriate proposals to that effect , as well as evidence of external costs , within the next twelve months .
However , in view of the serious pollution of the Alpine region by heavy goods traffic , the committee is very much in favour of special arrangements in respect of the Brenner motorway .
However , these arrangements will have to be fleshed out by the Commission - taking account of the transport negotiations with Switzerland which we hope to see concluded shortly - and then carefully considered by Parliament and the Council .
The user charges system proposed by the Commission should also be simplified so as to make it easier to apply .
The system should be structured to reflect more accurately the emission and road damage ratings of the vehicles .
Another important consideration here is that the Member States are free to set rates at between 50 % and 100 % of the maximum figure .
We should also bear in mind that five years will have elapsed between the fixing of the present maximum rates and the introduction of the new maximum rates on 1 January 1999 .
The committee is therefore proposing a substantial increase in the maximum annual charges , to between ECU 1500 for environmentally friendly vehicles and ECU 2500 for polluting vehicles .
We are very keen to hear how Mr Kinnock will respond to our proposals .
In committee , the Commission representatives described our draft report as very realistic .
I hope that you will take the same view today , Commissioner .
For the sake of good cooperation , I hope that the Commission will accept all Parliament 's proposals , because it is very rare for a parliament to agree by such a large majority on a report on such a difficult issue .
However , I also believe that it is incumbent on the Council to lose no time in adopting a common position on the basis of our opinion and the accompanying opinion from the Commission , because the directive will still have to be transposed , and the hauliers who are affected by it will have to be informed in good time of what they will have to deal with on 1 January 1999 .
Finally , I should like to express my sincere thanks to my colleagues in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , the committee secretariat and also the representatives of the Commission .
I think that together , as Commission and Parliament , we conducted our deliberations in the Committee on Transport and Tourism in a positive atmosphere and I hope that we shall be able to maintain our good understanding on this important issue .
Madam President , after hearing Mr Jarzembowski speak , I wish to begin by pointing out that , although some of the amendments contained in the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection were accepted by the Committee on Transport and Tourism - the reference to the Alpine Convention , for example - the approach taken in Mr Jarzembowski 's report is very different from that adopted in the opinion that I have drafted and that has been approved by the Environment Committee .
I wish in particular to say that as far as the assessment of the proposal that has been submitted by the Commission is concerned , we welcomed the introduction of the possibility of an external cost element in the tolls and user charges , and in fact we considered it necessary to improve and clarify those aspects further on the basis of proposals and amendments .
Moreover , we thought it right and necessary to extend the concept of sensitive itineraries , presented in the Commission proposal , to cover sensitive areas so as to avoid shifting traffic from those roads defined as sensitive to more vulnerable and less safe roads in the area concerned - viewing the whole of the Alpine zone as a sensitive area , for example .
I wish to make it clear here that , since the Committee on Transport and Tourism has also inserted the reference to the Alpine Convention as an amendment in the recitals , I think it is right to say that the whole of the Alpine zone , and not just the Brenner , should be taken into account in the directive .
For that reason , although I appreciate that the question of the Brenner has been looked at , we have to remember that the whole of the Alpine region is affected by the problems we are discussing .
We have only to bear in mind that , between 1970 and 1995 , transport through the Alps increased from 28 m to 112 m tonnes and that the bulk of that increase was accounted for by road traffic .
I therefore thought it appropriate to table a number of amendments which are designed to restore the approach contained in the report approved by the Environment Committee . I hope the Commissioner and the House will take account of this .
Madam President , as a former Member of the Dutch Parliament , I well remember the day we heard that the German Government was planning to introduce a user charge , and the growing tide of heavy goods vehicles heading east would slowly but surely have to pay for the privilege .
There was a great deal of fuss , especially behind the scenes , and the Court of Justice found in favour of those who opposed the idea and ruled that it could not go ahead .
But the cat was already out of the bag , and after long and difficult discussions , the charges were introduced .
Because the European Parliament had not been sufficiently involved in this process , the Court ruled that the directive was null and void , though its effect was not suspended , and the Commission set about drafting this new proposal , now about one year old , on which Mr Jarzembowski has produced this report .
In the intervening period , it has to be said that this issue seems to have been under a curse .
Despite all the various discussions that have taken place in the Council , no decision has yet been reached and , if my information is correct , it is quite possible that the final outcome - the talks are to continue on 4 October - will still be different from what the Commission proposed .
We cannot afford to be blind to reality .
There is something else that needs to be said .
However much we appreciate the work done by Mr Jarzembowski - and we most certainly do - we are by no means entirely happy with the outcome , as he well knows .
The talks we held did not produce any result at all at first , and the main thing we agreed on was that we disagreed .
My group continues to believe that both external costs and the sensitivity of certain areas must be seen as key elements of a balanced transport policy .
We continue to believe that , following the adoption of the Schmidbauer report , we must devote all our energies to developing an intelligent approach to the problems which remain to be tackled , and that the Council owes it to itself and the people of Europe to play an active part in developing a policy which offers genuine prospects for the future .
Several years ago , one of Commissioner Kinnock 's predecessors , his present colleague Mr Van Miert , asked a committee of experts to produce a report on the impact of the heavy increases in transport .
Since then , there have been a great many studies , discussions and reports on every conceivable solution , but too little has actually been done in practice .
I am not saying that nothing has been done , just not enough .
Instead of having cleaner transport , we simply have more .
Solemn declarations are made about environmental objectives , which are then pushed onto the back burner .
Not enough viable alternatives are being developed for passenger and goods transport .
It would have been a bad sign if Parliament 's two largest parties had opposed each other on this issue : good for political transparency , perhaps , but bad for any prospect of continuing the line taken in Mrs Schmidbauer 's report .
If we are honest , we have to admit that Parliament does not have the final say on what is decided as regards this directive , so it is all the more important to make it clear that , for all the differences of opinion there have been , the vast majority in Parliament will again , we hope , support the philosophy described in the Green Paper on pricing .
This may be cold comfort for many colleagues , perhaps , and not exactly what I would have hoped for myself , but it may , in the long run , prove more important than we now imagine .
So we wholeheartedly support both the Commission and those in the Transport Council who do not just say what is going to have to happen , but actually make every effort to ensure that it does , both in their own countries and throughout the Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on his report and thanking him for his efforts in seeking out - and finding - compromise proposals .
As a Belgian , I know the value of compromise , Mr Jarzembowski , but I know too that , on the whole , the only advantage of compromises is that they are a way of reaching a solution where there is a lack of agreement between most of those involved .
Bearing that in mind - and I am not the first to make the point - I am sure we would all recommend that certain elements of the report should be seen as effective compromise solutions , but compromises nonetheless .
In terms of the efforts to promote an environmentally friendly and safe transport policy , no one would claim that road transport provides the best example .
However , it has been by far the most successful form of transport in adapting to modern market requirements .
In my opinion , and that of many of my colleagues , imposing charges on road transport will not help to revive other forms of transport , such as rail or water .
Nor should we forget that the imposition of charges , in a sector which still has many small operators , for example , may threaten the livelihood of those operators .
That is only too clear , because demand is rising and the number of companies is declining , while the large operators are expanding .
If charges for road use are unavoidable , then they must take greater account of road damage and emissions .
As I see it , the classification system which is proposed in the report seeks to do precisely that .
We are also agreed on the need to protect sensitive areas .
However , just like the question of calculating external costs , this is another case where we need more detailed investigation by the Commission to enable us to make practical and logical proposals .
In my opinion , however , the fact that the Brenner motorway is specifically mentioned at this stage requires no special analysis or further argument .
As we see it , retaining minimum rates is part of the idea that there is a need for minimum criteria in the field of taxation too , if tax is not to become a factor which distorts the market .
However , the proposal before us does not yet offer any guarantee that the suggested charges will have the same impact in all the Member States .
Finally , I should like to welcome the rapporteur 's proposal for reviewing the minimum rates by the year 2001 .
Technological development and , I would hope , developments in other areas of transport will provide a sufficient argument for doing so .
Madam President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on his report and also the Commissioner , because with New Labour he is going to have a new colour in his kitchen , which I am sure will be a very pale shade of pink !
Madam President , the subject we are dealing with today has kept us occupied for years , and now , at the very worst possible moment , it has come before us in plenary .
The problem is that we are currently negotiating with Switzerland and we are now showing our hand quite openly , while the Swiss are happy to pass the buck .
So we could hardly have timed things worse .
The second unfortunate fact is that the directive concerns a tax and it will therefore be the Finance Ministers who decide on it .
This means a unanimous vote , but there is no unanimity .
The rapporteur must be aware of this , which is why his report is really just carrying coals to Newcastle .
The third problem which the rapporteur unfortunately does not deal with , or at least does not adequately acknowledge , is the growth of reciprocal trade within the Union , which means that there is more transport in general .
As things stand at present , with road transport accounting for 75 % of the modal split , despite Parliament 's repeated calls for greater use of rail and inland waterways , road transport looks set to remain the main mode .
This means that we must do everything we can to ensure that the damage that road transport causes , which I fully acknowledge , is kept to a minimum .
We should therefore have taken the opportunity in this report to offer a real incentive for using the least environmentally harmful option .
But the proposals put forward by both the Commission and the rapporteur make far too little distinction between the most environmentally harmful and the better classes - from Euro , Euro 0 , Euro I to Euro II - providing absolutely no incentive to change to an improved version .
And this means that we are missing out on other opportunities too . Let me give you just one example .
Last year in my country , there was a 3.5 % reduction in nitrogen dioxide - NOx - emissions as a result of using Euro II .
Between 1990 and 1996 , the number of vehicle kilometres increased by 13 % while emissions fell by 11 % , or 16 % for SO2 .
We therefore need to promote the use of Euro II and Euro III .
Madam President , the question of how to finance an expensive road infrastructure makes the debate on the imposition of charges on heavy goods vehicles a very topical one throughout Europe , and especially in Austria .
Situated in the centre of Europe in geopolitical terms , Austria is also a sensitive Alpine region which is difficult to cross .
This puts an increased strain on its sensitive environment and means that road-building and maintenance costs are correspondingly higher .
The proposals in the report to place greater emphasis on use when calculating charges and to differentiate more clearly between types of goods vehicles , on the basis of emissions and road damage , deserve to be warmly welcomed .
We also support the thrust of the constructive amendments that have been tabled by the Green Group , particularly Amendments Nos 31 , 34 and 41 , which to a large extent reflect our own list of demands as independent Members .
The internalization of external costs remains an inescapable requirement , despite the committee 's failure to support it , and despite differences over the precise definition of the concept .
However , it would be an important signal to give now in terms of environmental policy .
Identifying sensitive areas in the EU and specifically defining the whole Alpine region as a sensitive zone would seem to be far-sighted measures which point the way ahead .
As someone who lives in what is , in all probability , the most sensitive European transport region - the valley of the Inn where it flows through the Tyrol , and the Brenner Pass - I am directly affected , and I know how it important it is to increase , or to have the ability to increase , toll charges in that region by including a cost element , thereby creating the basis for the development of environmentally friendly mobility .
Madam President , the directive on toll and user charges is long overdue , and has been since the annulment of the first version by the Court of Justice in 1995 .
The directive that we are discussing today goes significantly further than the first proposal , and I have to welcome that in principle .
As rapporteur on the Commission 's Green Paper on internalizing the external costs of transport , I see the Commission proposal as a first step towards the practical implementation of a fair pricing system , based on the principle that the polluter pays .
The proposal would allow the Member States to impose differentiated user charges where this was justified beyond doubt in terms of traffic congestion , pollution and accident rates , and it would also allow for the designation of sensitive routes .
In his first draft , the rapporteur took the radical step of deleting the words ' external costs ' and ' sensitive routes ' .
My group agreed to a compromise - although personally it pained me to do so - on condition that it would remain free to decide at second reading .
Amendment No 1 calls on the Commission to draw up a report within a year , giving precise details of external costs and how to charge them to the various modes of transport , and to submit a proposal accordingly .
Until then , the only differentiation is to be on the basis of road damage and pollution from emissions , with reference being made only to the Alpine region , rather than to sensitive routes .
It is also planned to allow differentiation in the form of additional charges at peak times or at night .
Although the compromise means that external costs are not to be taken into account immediately , I am fundamentally optimistic , since what it does is to open up the possibility of legislation that will go significantly further , once the Commission has submitted detailed proposals on external costs .
But if the rapporteur intends to use the Transport Committee 's compromise decision and the airing of the issue in the press this week as a way of finally burying discussion on the internalization of external costs - and it is the press coverage which has given me that impression - then I have to say that my group will not go along with that ; because while there may be problems with some elements of the Commission proposal , particularly as regards the charging structure , the overall intention means an improvement in the whole approach to transport - and , most importantly , a fairer system is to be introduced that will spread the burden of costs according to the principle that the polluter pays .
Madam President , Community institutions have long been concerned about charging and external costs regarding transport .
This issue has been ongoing since the early 1960s and has been the subject of formal proposals .
The first of these was to charge infrastructure costs to road vehicles , the central issue in the harmonization of costs and taxes .
In 1986 , the Commission submitted a document on the abolition of distortions in fiscal jurisdiction where the carriage of goods by road was concerned , that document envisaging taxes on vehicles , taxes on fuel and tolls .
In early 1988 , the Commission presented its draft directive to the Council on the introduction of charging road infrastructure costs to HGVs .
This included a call for the Council to give legislative force to the measures necessary to abolish the jurisdictional distortions which had been observed and which were due to the different ways of charging infrastructure costs .
However , the Commission 's initiative received no response .
The proposal was , in fact , modified twice - in 1990 and in 1992 - in an ongoing attempt to find positive solutions .
The reason is none other than the accumulation of interests surrounding road haulage and the various methods used for charging and not charging existing costs in the Member States .
And , to cap it all , when the Council finally managed to secure an agreement and presented Directive 93 / 89 / EEC of 29 October 1993 on the application by Members States of taxes on certain vehicles used for the carriage of goods by road , such as tolls and fees for using certain infrastructures , it was annulled by the Court of Justice of the European Communities on the grounds that the European Parliament had not been sufficiently involved .
Add to all this the contents of the Commission 's Green Paper on the internalization of external transport costs in the European Union , in which the proposed procedures raise serious doubts as to the capacity to deal with so complex a problem , since the information it offers is scant and unreliable , and let us also take into account the fact that the Commission itself confesses to doubts regarding the calculation of external costs .
We are therefore able , ladies and gentlemen , to conclude that this is a highly complex issue requiring global formulae which take account of the various modes of transport in existence , if we are finally to solve the problem ; on the basis of the information available to me , it will be difficult to reach an agreement in the Council of Ministers , despite the excellent work done by the rapporteur , Mr Jarzembowski , whom I congratulate and who , with his amendments , has improved the content of the proposal for a directive that we are currently debating .

Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have to extend my congratulations , not only and not so much because of what the report actually says but because of the skill with which our rapporteur , Mr Jarzembowski , has successfully completed a veritable institutional obstacle race and managed to bring this report here to the House for a debate which appears fairly calm despite the fact that views , inevitably , differ .
And yet the subject itself was engaging and calm : fair and effective pricing of transport , indicating the long term guidelines for a now mature policy of charging the costs of infrastructure and congestion in road transport .
A fundamental principle - and one that has been repeated this evening - involves recovering in full the costs of equipment and administration which should be charged to the different users , on the basis of harmonized criteria .
The Brenner has been mentioned , and of the many elements of Alpine transit , it certainly has the most serious problems .
Questions , opinions and amendments have led the Brenner Pass to be identified as more or less the pilot case to study how transit could and should be managed in a so-called ' sensitive ' zone .
But there is some inconsistency here - Members from Germany , as well as from Italy have made the point clearly - because it is perhaps too unique a case .
Currently , Germany , the Netherlands , Denmark , Belgium , Luxembourg and , starting this year , Sweden also , are applying a common system called ' eurovignetta ' .
Austria has its own system and this seems destined to continue .
In point of fact the Austrian Government has been making strong representations to have transit through the Brenner , currently subject to quota under the ecopoint system , indirectly limited , even after the deadline provided for in Protocol 9 of the agreement on accession , that is to say after 2004 .
To do this and following the example of Swiss initiatives , Austria has proposed that the tolls for passing through the Brenner should be higher than is necessary to recover infrastructure costs in order to discourage transit traffic through this very sensitive pass .
That is certainly a principle we can support - provided it can be extended to other Alpine zones also , in particular the valley bordering on the Brenner .
It is in fact incomprehensible why different rules should be applied in so vastly different a way to identical valleys , divided only by a border , between the North Tyrol and the South Tyrol .
I therefore agree with the differences between Euro 0 , Euro I and Euro II , but subject to compliance with the rules .
Income should not exceed construction , management and development costs but , above all , we should take into account certain criteria that no-one has really stated clearly yet .
Who , for instance , has established the parameters for deciding whether an area is environmentally sensitive ?
It is not clear to me where they are , and so we may find arbitrary decisions being taken .
Everyone will consider to be sensitive , and indeed more sensitive than any other , the area around their own territory : I am thinking about the toll for the Europa Bridge which I shall be crossing by car in two days ' time and for which I , like everyone else , will be paying an exorbitant amount .
There is also a problem of employment : many road haulage companies have already closed , and we certainly do not wish to be responsible for further closures .
Madam President , I should like to take up the point which has just been made by the previous speaker .
I was very pleased to hear him emphasizing that the solution to this environmental problem must involve the entire Alpine region .
I am firmly convinced that the Committee on Transport and Tourism has made a mistake in not following the line taken by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , which wished to see the concept of particularly sensitive routes replaced by that of particularly sensitive areas .
The whole question of the Alpine region and the traffic pollution there is a European problem .
This is not a matter of local interests , although of course it is also very important to the people who live there ; the point is that we have to find a European solution , because the Alps are a European problem and not just an Austrian , Swiss or Italian one .
That is why I would urge the Commissioner to focus all the political efforts on finding a broadly European and environmentally sound solution for the sensitive Alpine region .
It is the only type of solution that will work .
We must avoid shifting the problem of pollution from one route to another , because that is not a political solution .
Madam President , my group has asked me to speak on this issue , which is not within the sphere of my particular competence .
In principle we agree with the report by Mr. Jarzembowski .
However I would like to make the following points :
The first point we consider important is that it advocates a system simpler than the complexities embodied in the Commission 's proposal .
The second point is that its approach is realistic in relation to the upper tax limit , and this will contribute towards reaching agreement with the Council .
A third and very important point is that the lower tax limits are worked out so that they take into account the wear on roads and emissions of pollutants by vehicles , and encourage the use of more environment-friendly vehicles and systems .
And the fourth and last point I want to stress is that looking ahead to the review in 2001 , it offers the prospect of advancing towards more flexible systems .
Madam President , I should like to congratulate Mr Jarzembowski on his report , for which he managed to gain the support of almost everyone in the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
I feel it is also important to win the support of the Commission and the Member States , as well as backing from the general public .
There are only two points that I should like to make .
Firstly , if we are to gain the support of businesses , it is important that they should not feel that they are being ' squeezed ' , in other words that this is a fair charge and that the principle of ' sauce for the goose and sauce for the gander ' will apply for all forms of transport .
My second point concerns Annex III .
I am grateful to the rapporteur for going some way towards meeting my wishes in his Amendment No 26 by making a greater distinction in the user charges between ' Non-Euro ' and ' Euro II or better ' .
I should like to go somewhat further , and now that Mr Wijsenbeek has been kind enough to incorporate the proposal which I made during our discussions in the Committee on Transport and Tourism in Amendment No 28 , I should like to ask the Commissioner to give his reaction to this .
My point is whether a greater differentiation between the various categories would promote the development and use of cleaner vehicles , which is what we all wish to see .
I should therefore be very grateful to hear what the Commissioner thinks about this .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , once again the European Parliament is addressing the question of a European road tax for heavy goods vehicles , and once again we have sparked off a radical debate about the whole issue of road haulage .
But that is precisely what we do not need at the present moment .
All that we need to consider is the contribution which heavy goods vehicles should make to road maintenance and infrastructure costs .
As the rapporteur has said , we agreed that as regards external costs , we would begin by carrying out a study of the problems we are actually facing .
So this question has no place in the directive which is before us today .
The same applies to the sensitive corridors that were referred to in the Commission 's original proposal .
The present directive cannot address that issue either .
Is it really our intention - and I am framing the question somewhat differently here - to increase the price of goods and services in particular regions ?
The people who live in those regions would curse us for doing so , because the arrangement would affect not only through traffic but also , of course , traffic to and from the region , so suddenly we see the whole question of tax revenue from heavy goods vehicles in a different light .
This applies particularly in the case of the Brenner route .
I fail to understand - and this is the only point on which I disagree with the rapporteur and the Committee on Transport and Tourism - why we should wish to allow special arrangements for the Brenner route .
What I would like to see - as would many of my colleagues - is a single solution for the entire Alpine region , in other words all the countries that are signatories to the Alpine Convention .
However , such a solution cannot emerge from the latest proposals which are being made at Swiss national level .
Nor can it form the basis for a common policy .
What we need here is a uniform set of rules for the whole Alpine region .
In my opinion - and I would like to be very clear on this point - special arrangements for one particular route are a nonsense !
I should like to conclude by thanking the rapporteur for his excellent report and for his commitment to achieving a broad degree of consensus in the House .
I should be pleased if you too , Commissioner , would accept all the proposed amendments , with the exception of that concerning the Brenner Pass .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Jarzembowski for actually taking the trouble to seek a balance between the various interests that are at work in the European Union , particularly in the transport sector , and indeed for finding such a balance the first time round , as it were .
I wish to support the compromise amendments which the rapporteur has tabled in this report concerning user charges for heavy goods vehicles .
I believe that placing the burden of external costs solely on heavy goods vehicles would produce a distortion of competition .
However , taking account of the Brenner route has to be a matter of urgent concern for the Union .
It really is of paramount importance that we should recognize how traffic is polluting this sensitive Alpine region .
In its proposal , the Commission merely allows for the Member States to include a component in their charges to cover external costs , but the maximum amount would be ECU 0.03 per kilometre .
By contrast , the proposal from the Committee on Transport and Tourism refers specifically to the Brenner motorway .
It would enable the Council to give the Member States in question the power to add a cost element to toll charges , so as to achieve a sustainable distribution of traffic in the Alpine region as a whole .
I also welcome the call from the Committee on Transport and Tourism for the Commission to adopt a special procedure for studying and defining not just sensitive routes , but also sensitive areas .
I believe it is important that this procedure should not only involve representatives of the Member States , but also give a voice to representatives of the regions concerned .
And it is important for Austria that a reference to the Alpine Convention should be included in the recitals of this Council directive .
As I said at the outset , I reject the notion of charging external costs solely to heavy goods vehicles , but I would emphasize once again that I am prepared to support the compromise amendments as a whole , because I hope that a start is at last being made towards recognizing the interests of Austria and the sensitive Alpine region .
The citizens of our common Europe will be more ready to accept and appreciate that Europe if we take more account of their legitimate interests .
Madam President , Mr Jarzembowski 's report is typically thorough and inventive , and I commend him on both of those qualities .
However , the gradual changes to the current heavy goods vehicles taxation and charging rules in the Community proposed in the directive strike the right balance between what is needed and what is feasible .
Because the Commission wishes to make progress rather than stand still , I cannot accept many of the amendments advanced by Mr Jarzembowski .
As the House will know , the Commission attaches great importance to the central issue of external costs , as we made clear in our fair and efficient pricing Green Paper , published in December 1995 .
Whilst I welcome the emphasis the House places on external costs - and I also understand the desire for tabling a comprehensive proposal for all modes in the near future - we have to be pragmatic , make progress and we have to do so when it is possible in a practical manner .
I therefore cannot accept the proposal in this report that even the limited provisions relating to external costs should be deleted pending an all-encompassing measure .
Indeed , despite the decent motivations of the people who have advanced such amendments , that really would be the case of the best being the enemy of the good ; the ideal being the enemy of the possible .
What we have proposed in the directive is the possibility , not the obligation , for Member States to add a modest external-cost element to toll rates if they so desire .
That is an important signal and I consequently reject Amendments Nos 9 and 17 .
Linked to the issue of external costs is , of course , the concept of sensitive routes and the possibilities which it could offer for introducing a differentiated charging system .
The new provisions in the proposed directive relating to sensitive routes are important during the period - and I emphasize that - when the more sophisticated technical charging means are being developed .
The Commission cannot , therefore , accept Amendments Nos 14 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 and 22 .
There is never any danger of Mr Jarzembowski sleeping on the job , but I knew that reference would be sure to bring him to very active life .
Mr Jarzembowski 's gift for innovation is shown by Amendment No 7 , which proposes the establishment of sensitive areas - a matter on which several honourable Members have spoken during the course of this debate .
But , of course , it is the concept of sensitive areas which go significantly beyond what the Commission proposed .
The fact that the idea appears in a report which is otherwise dedicated to completely obliterating sensitive routes , is testimony to the inventiveness of honourable Members .
However , I cannot accept Amendment No 7 , since the notion of sensitive areas is impractical .
The whole world after all is a sensitive area .
I can , however , accept Amendment No 3 , which calls for a reference to the Alpine Convention .
On vehicle taxes , I would like to remind the House that the objective in setting maximum levels for vehicle taxes , whilst allowing Member States to apply vehicle taxes that are lower than the minimum levels if they operate a usercharge system , is to ensure that existing differences in transport-related levies across the Community will not increase any further .
However , I acknowledge that they are not the most fundamental elements of the proposal , so I can accept Amendments Nos 3 , 5 , 11 and 12 .
I can also accept Amendment No 13 , which calls for a regular review of the vehicle taxes .
I cannot , however , accept Amendment No 6 , which would introduce an open-ended derogation from the minimum taxes , rather than a derogation which is time-limited .
On Amendment No 1 , which has been referred to by several speakers , I appreciate the efforts Parliament is making to be consistent with itself .
In Mrs Schmidbauer 's report , as she herself pointed out , the importance of external costs was acknowledged and the Commission was invited to come forward with proposals for all modes of transport .
Amendment No 1 echoes that position , and that , as Mrs Schmidbauer herself pointed out , is entirely consistent and commendable .
Unfortunately , however , that amendment limits the extent to which the principles should be applied for the time being in road transport .
So that makes it an unacceptable amendment .
Apart from that consideration , I cannot in any case accept Amendment No 1 when it suggests that substantial differentiation of charges according to infrastructure damage and exhaust pollution may be undertaken initially only through user charges .
The amendment tabled by Mr Jarzembowski contradicts Amendment No 25 , which was also tabled by Mr Jarzembowski .
It is obvious that Mr Jarzembowski is a devotee of Oscar Wilde , who said , wisely , that ' consistency in argument is the corset of small minds ' .
However , the main point is that differentiation of vehicle taxes , according to infrastructure damage , expressed by reference to total vehicle weight and to air pollution propensity , as expressed in the form of the Euro classification , is not only possible , it is relatively simple and also widely accepted by Member States .
Next , I believe there is no need for simplification of the structure of the minimum vehicle taxes , as proposed in Amendment No 24 , since that structure is the same as in the existing directive and no complaints have been made by Member States on this point .
Turning now to the amendments on user charges , I can accept Amendment No 9 calling for differentiated usercharge rates during rush hours and night-time provided , of course , that they fall within the maximum levels allowed .
That is in line with a desire for differentiation in charges across time .
I can also , subject to some redrafting , accept Amendment No 15 , which proposes a 50 % reduction of user-charge rates for vehicles from peripheral regions .
This again , however , must obviously be limited in time .
With regard to levels of user charges and their structure , I wish to stress that the maximum annual user-charge levels proposed in Amendment No 26 , ranging between ECU 1 , 000 and 2 , 500 , are simply too high .
They would lead to an excessive increase of almost 100 % on current road-charge levels and would not meet the requirement of implementing gradual changes to the system .
That is clearly not acceptable and I do not think the drafters of the amendment will be at all surprised by my view .
The classification of vehicles into three categories according to the damage they cause to the infrastructure , would lead to an alignment of rates with real cost that is better than that which is possible from the current user-charge systems and also better than an alignment which would result from a rate differentiation based on the number of vehicle axles , as proposed in the amendment before the House .
Amendments Nos 16-25 are , therefore , unacceptable .
On the remaining amendments tabled by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , which do not fall as part of a precise theme , I have to say that Amendment No 4 does not lead to any specific legal provision in this directive and must therefore be rejected ; whilst Amendments Nos 8 , 10 and 23 can be accepted .
A series of new amendments has been submitted in addition to those of the Transport Committee .
All of those amendments - Amendments Nos 27-42 - were previously considered by the Transport Committee and rejected .
I have to inform the House that I , too , reject all those amendments .
Having gone through all the proposed amendments in detail - with the exception of Amendments Nos 27-42 , which I addressed in detail on a previous occasion - I wish to reiterate that the Commission 's objective in tabling this proposal is gradually to evolve an improved differentiated road-charging system in the Community by ensuring the charges are closer to real costs and fair to users and non-users alike .
I hope that , on reflection , all Members of the House will be able to share this pragmatic and progressive report .
My regret is that I have taken up so much time of the House but , clearly , the amendments were not only extremely interesting but also numerous .
Mr Kinnock , our rapporteur must have had some idea of the answers that you were going to give because he asked me for the floor even before you expressed yourself .
As you know , however , it is late and we still have another two reports to discuss this evening .
Mr Jarzembowski , you have the opportunity to react to what the Commissioner said but I cannot let everyone speak again or else we shall have to open a second debate and that would not be right for the McIntosh and Berger reports .
You have the floor , Mr Jarzembowski , but please be as brief as you can .
Madam President , I asked for the floor because I wished to respond first of all to Mr Wijsenbeek , whose speech was extremely clever , even though wide of the mark .
We have to discuss this today and vote on it tomorrow , because the fact is that the Council is trying to avoid taking a decision on a European road tax , and one of its excuses is that Parliament has taken no decision .
That is why we must decide what our position is to be , then the Council will no longer be able to avoid the issue .
I should like to make two points to the Commissioner , however . We normally have a very open relationship , Commissioner , but what you have presented us with today was not a genuine debate .
On the one hand , you say - indeed , you complain - that we do not yet wish to apply external costs .
And on the other , when we say that we shall have to include exhaust pollution and road damage when calculating user charges , and that we shall have to raise those charges , you also complain and protest that this was not the kind of European road tax which you envisaged .
That is a dishonest approach !
Secondly , Commissioner , you are here to defend your original proposal , but in the light of what we have heard from the negotiations in the Council , I have to say that your position is a long way behind the position which the House is seeking to adopt today .
Madam President , I should like to make a suggestion that would save a great deal of time in debates of this kind .
I do find it rather beneath Commissioners to have to come here and read out a list of the amendments they can accept and those they cannot .
The debate becomes a sham , it is a pointless exercise and it undermines Parliament 's standing , so I would like to propose that in future , discussions of this kind should take place in writing .
We could have done this with the Commissioner this evening , and I very much regret the fact that we did not .
Madam President , I am very grateful , especially since it gives me an opportunity to make an offer that if honourable Members will turn up for their amendments and put them without notice to the Commission , then they will be able to dispense with any form whatsoever of intelligible , cogent answer that addresses their questions .
This will save the time of the House and it means that I can stay away .
It will not be very good for accountability to the citizens of the European Community , but I am sure it will enable Members to make their point in dramatic fashion .
So , if you do not want to give us notice and you do not want me to appear with a list of responses , just say so and I will accommodate Parliament at a moment 's notice .
Can I also say that when Mr Jarzembowski uses the term ' a slightly phoney debate ' , I say to him as a politician of mature experience , what does he really expect ?
If he cannot make a choice between what is desirable - and I would agree with him about what is desirable - and what is achievable , then we are going to have a phoney debate .
And if Mr Jarzembowski cannot distinguish between gradual progress and stagnant purity , then we are also going to have a rather unreal debate .

And the consequence is that , faced with the dilemmas that the honourable Members here face ( and I sympathize with Mr Castricum and Mr Jarzembowski and all the other Members , I share their dilemma ) the choice has to be made : do we make some headway , do we advance even at a millimetre at a time , or do we celebrate our own consciences , stand still and make no progress ?
These are the alternatives : I ask the honourable Members to chose progress .
Madam President , I am very surprised by the tone adopted by the Commissioner this evening , whereas during the preparatory work there was an excellent atmosphere in our relations , between the Commission and its services and ours .
Both Mr Jarzembowski and Mr Castricum made remarks , of a political and technical nature respectively .
I think that everyone here was taken aback by this enumeration of the amendments that have been refused , often without very detailed explanations .
I go along with my colleagues and think that in future we should take a quite different approach .
I also found the closing remarks made by the Commissioner a little out of order .
Madam President , if I respond in a tone which is candid and forceful , it is because I respect this House and do not treat it like some kind of toy parliament .
So that when directly elected Members of the European Parliament say to me , ' do not turn up with a list of responses , ' I am bound to ask them what they want in terms of accountability from the European Commission .
Now I do not mind being criticized , I do not mind the substance of what I am saying being attacked , but I am not going to be criticized because I have been trying to respond to the detailed arguments and the considerations put by Members of this House , especially when my services spend endless days continually trying to cooperate with and meet the concerns of Members of the Parliament , as do my cabinet , as indeed I do myself .
And when a political point is made , I , as a politician to my bone marrow , respond politically .
After that rather lively debate , which shows the interest that members and the Commissioner all take in this matter , I declare the debate closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Aviation safety improvement
The next item is the report ( A4-0091 / 97 ) , by Miss McIntosh , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Commission 's communication on defining a Community aviation safety improvement strategy ( SEC ( 96 ) 1083 - C4-0423 / 96 ) .
Madam President , I welcome this opportunity to present our views on the Commission communication for a European aviation safety improvement strategy .
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Commissioner and his services on the work so far undertaken , which I know is continuing as we speak .
On 10 December last year the Commission proposed a mandate to negotiate the establishment of a European organization responsible for civil aviation safety .
Indeed the Transport Council of Ministers confirmed the creation of such an authority on 20 June this year .
COREPER , I understand , is now drawing up and defining its terms of reference , the institutional aspects and the form and extent of such European Union participation .
The conclusions are to be reached on those terms of reference by the end of this year .
Our intervention this evening is therefore very timely .
It is the strong desire of this House that such a European aviation authority will have real teeth and should not be over-bureaucratic in nature .
The one conclusion of our hearing was that the present structure of the joint aviation authorities and the present Regulation 3922 of 1991 is simply not working properly .
We believe that such an authority , to be created , should be democratically accountable .
We therefore propose that the European Parliament should be represented in the advisory committee which assists the executive body of the organization and that the executive body produce an annual report of its activities and presents this to the European Parliament .
We wish to express our concern at the ever-increasing demand for air transport , expected to double by the year 2010 , obviously placing an unprecedented pressure on our safety .
The figures in the UK alone are that in 1986 , 86 million passengers used British airports .
Ten years later this figure was 135 million passengers .
Equally , we are concerned at the wide differences in interpretation and implementation of the ICAO safety standards both at European and world level .
Without a liberalized market of aeronautical products , increased costs and additional constraints on the European industry are incurred , reducing its competitiveness .
We cannot afford to be complacent .
We currently enjoy in Europe an extremely high level of safety .
However , this week we have had an air disaster in Cuba and last year , one in the Dominican Republic and another in India .
We need to ensure the maintenance of the highest level of safety , bearing in mind the increased air travel in Europe and worldwide , and the increased competition from third countries , especially the developing countries .
We must aim to prevent accidents from happening instead of just responding to those which have occurred .
In the context of the separate proposed directive for a safety assessment of third country aircraft using European Union airports , we must aim to achieve a system of safety checks similar to port state control in the maritime transport sector .
In this regard , one possible way forward at Europe 's most heavily congested airports would be for carriers to prove their achievement of world-class safety standards plus evidence of home country compliance .
I personally have reservations .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism recommends that the European Union should draw up a blacklist .
Third country carriers used by our passengers anywhere in the world and those third country carriers using a European Union airport which do not have adequate reporting systems and do not meet European Union safety standards would appear on that blacklist with the aim of refusing them permission to land or take off in the European Union .
Any blacklist of carriers bears an inherent risk of retaliatory measures .
In my view , a more conciliatory approach would be to give third country carriers a helping hand , particularly in the use by them of satellite navigation and other modern technology .
Also , guidance on regulation and training in the developing world could be helpful .
The proposed European aviation safety organization should establish binding rules with regard to safety aspects of civil aviation , especially with regard to operation and maintenance of aircraft .
A mandatory incident reporting system and a European confidential system of voluntary incident reporting should be established as well as measures to reduce injuries in the event of accidents .
Perhaps most controversially , we ask the Member States to coordinate all measures required to increase security at airports , including the screening of luggage and the proviso that no unaccompanied luggage be permitted to travel .
While normally considered the preserve of national governments , the Lockerbie disaster has necessarily left a number of security questions unanswered .
We ask the Commission to monitor the US system of disclosure to the public of detailed information on safety and related issues and , if relevant , to introduce similar provisions .
Tour operators should be required to indicate which airlines are providing the flights .
The measures we propose , taken together with an improved air traffic control system should , we believe , improve air safety throughout the European Union .
I have one reservation on the amendment tabled by the European Socialist Group on the admission of personal luggage admitted into aircraft cabins .
In my experience this is an international standard which we women already obey .
It is the gentlemen business travellers who tend to disregard this .
Perhaps we should implement the rules which are currently in existence .
I commend our proposals to the House and look forward to the Commissioner 's reply .
Madam President , I hope you will not think me ungracious in that I cannot commend the rapporteur on her report , because the one she presented to the Committee on Transport and Tourism was indeed very threadbare .
However , I compliment the Transport Committee on the amendments it has tabled which have now made this report one of substance .
Only one amendment was not adopted - that concerned cabin baggage - and it will be resubmitted to Parliament .
We all accept that air safety is of increasing importance : more and more people are flying , not just for business but also for holidays .
By 2010 , flight numbers will have doubled .
This week Boeing has estimated that with this increase in numbers , there will be one major accident per week in 2010 .
So action must be taken to maintain and improve safety standards .
The rapporteur , in her address , and the Commission seem obsessed with liberalization .
Liberalization must not mean a reduction in safety standards .
We must have controlled liberalization .
There is going to be another report on this - I will not go into details .
In my own country British Airways is a prime example of what can happen with uncontrolled liberalization .
It is reducing the costs on cabin staff rather than increasing them .
It is taking no account of the social costs of its action .
It needs more staff who need higher morale , better training and better pay .
However , BA is determined to save £ 1bn in costs irrespective , it seems to us , of the effect of that on safety .
It must affect safety !
British Airways , for instance , reduced the number of emergency doors on its aircraft to put more seats in , and it is now forcing the subsidiaries it has taken over in France to reduce the number of staff .
How can that be done without affecting safety levels ?
I would draw the attention of British Airways , particularly the Chief Executive , and of other airlines , to paragraph 16 of this report , which states that : ' social , occupational health and training aspects are essential for the maintenance of a high level of safety in air transport ' ; not threats , intimidation of staff and bullying , which seems to be the new management approach of British Airways .
We have to spend more money on safety , not less .
I also call on the airlines to adopt the recommendations of paragraph 13 ( c ) as soon as possible , particularly regarding smoke hoods , water mist systems and externally mounted cameras .
This could be done at once .
When the rapporteur came to the Transport Committee she stated that at £ 40 per seat the cost of smoke hoods would be too high .
When it costs £ 100m for a new aircraft , this is nonsense .
We must also note that paragraph 15 states that all luggage must be screened and security tightened .
The latest information on the Lockerbie disaster suggests that the bomb was in fact planted at Heathrow , where security is very good .
There must be no more Lockerbies .
I am also worried that the obsession with reducing costs is forcing pilots to work longer and longer hours .
It is now possible , say on a return flight from Manchester to Luxor , for a pilot to work non-stop for 17 hours .
That is unacceptable .
We need common rules for working hours for aircrew and cabin staff , based not on costs but on safety .
Finally , I agree with the rapporteur that we must eliminate the possibility of air transport following sea transport and using flags of convenience for ships and crews .
No aircraft must be allowed into the European Union unless it meets all the safety requirements , and this must also apply to crew .
We must support this blacklist of unsafe airlines .
With the increase in air travel , now is the time to set standards on safety .
We in this Parliament will not accept Boeing 's prediction of one major accident per week .
Madam President , let me begin by thanking Mrs McIntosh for the excellent work which she has put into this report .
We members of the European Parliament travel a great deal .
More and more people are doing the same .
Modern society demands that we move around a great deal in the course of our work .
As a consequence of this the number of flights is visibly increasing in a dramatic way .
It has been said previously that the number of flights could double by the year 2010 .
In many ways this is a positive development which creates new opportunities for a large number of people .
But we must also be clear in our minds that it creates new risks as well ; risks which we must attempt to minimise .
For many years the number of air crashes fell considerably , not least as a result of technical improvements .
In 1996 this trend was reversed , due primarily to several very large accidents .
The most important thing now is to ensure that an annual increase does not become the new trend .
If Mr Seal 's comments , that , based on current developments , there will be a major air crash every week , do become reality many people will obviously be frightened by this .
Preventing such a trend is a great challenge for the aircraft manufacturers .
It is a challenge which these manufacturers take very seriously , but it is also something which we can influence , in the first instance perhaps by increasing our efforts into work on preventative safety .
There are two things which I would particularly like to emphasise as part of this work .
The first concerns the ever increasing shortage of capacity .
The situation is already serious , and if the number of flights doubles within 12-13 years it will become even worse .
This may be partially relieved by further technical developments but airport capacity must be increased as well if access to slots is to keep pace with demand .
The second point I would like to make is that of including safety as a feature of the competition between airlines .
Current competition is based on price , take-off times and service on board .
In future we must make safety a competitive feature as well .
I have the support of the transport committee for a proposal to make a comparison of safety improvements between the different airlines .
This will include information on pilot training and education , the average age of the airline and on accidents and incidents of different types .
Such comparisons already occur in the USA but so far not in Europe and I think there are good reasons for improving the situation here as well .
Madam President , air transport has become considerably more democratic .
It has entered the era of mass consumption and is now subjected to the law of mass risk , technical incidents , sometimes insufficient services , a hostile environment , pot luck - the consequences of which are awful as they can be measured in loss of human life .
We , therefore , have a moral obligation to work to achieve maximum safety and put the necessary pressure to bring about harmonization upwards .
These pressures should concern technical improvements and technological transfers , since the more backward countries have an alarming rate of incidents and accidents .
Human life has the same value throughout the globe .
This pressure should also concern constant training for crews and other staff members , and working conditions compatible with the best performances .
Relocation - stipulated in certain contracts - especially for qualified jobs , leads to social dumping .
This Community strategy is therefore welcome because a strategy is not just about banging fists on tables or a cry of distress that would be lost in the sands of our daily contingencies .
It is a commitment to well thought out and continuous action setting aims , specifying the means and proceeding to evaluations .
Miss McIntosh 's report heads in the right direction , with pertinent arguments .
The proposal for a Directive on foreign aircraft safety , for which my colleague Mr González Triviño is rapporteur , is a useful companion .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on 7 February last year , 189 people lost their lives when their Birgen Air flight crashed off the coast of the Dominican Republic .
This is not the first time that the European Parliament has debated questions of aviation safety .
We used the occasion of that crash last year to raise the issue , and just a week later my colleague Brian Simpson and I tabled a motion for a resolution in the House , which was discussed the following week by Parliament 's Committee on Transport and Tourism .
I intend to confine my remarks today to considering what has become of that initiative .
I can report that , 18 months on from the initial parliamentary activity , we have made considerable progress , thanks to good cooperation between the Commission , the European Parliament and the Council .
The Council has in fact accepted the most important elements involved , as it made clear at its meeting in Luxembourg on 17 and 18 June this year .
In our motion for a resolution , we called for a black list , and this has already been referred to briefly .
In my view , however , it does not matter what we call the document which cites the wrongdoers and their wrongdoings .
The Council has agreed to seek Parliament 's approval on this issue .
And we shall be able to vote in the autumn on the common position approving such an arrangement .
A list is to be compiled setting out defects which have been identified during ground inspections of suspect aircraft .
I see this as an important step .
And the publication of a black list would certainly have a deterrent effect .
One thing that is clearly missing from the proposal as it stands is the possibility of also inspecting aircraft from Member States of the European Union .
However , the Commission has provided some clarification on this point , referring to the option of further amending Regulation No 3922 / 91 .
I would ask you to tell us , Commissioner , whether any action has yet been taken in this respect , in order to provide for real control over all aircraft - be they from third countries or , in particular , from the European Union - which are identified as being in any way suspect during ground inspections .
We have also added a further point , namely that tour operators should be required to indicate in their brochures which airlines are providing their flights .
I speak both for my colleagues and myself , Commissioner , in saying that we wish to see further progress on this issue too .
In fact , many tour operators are already providing the information voluntarily .
Checks should also be carried out with regard to third countries , and bilateral agreements with third countries should be reviewed , to identify shortcomings in safety .
I know that the Commission is currently responsible for reviewing certain agreements , but this should be extended to cover all bilateral agreements .
Madam President , air travel is known to be a particularly safe form of transport , and European airlines in particular have an excellent record in this respect .
But there is still cause for concern , and therefore good reason to introduce measures .
1996 was the worst year ever for civil aviation , with 1600 fatalities .
Air travel is widely expected to double over the next ten years , and the European aviation industry has said that if we maintain current safety levels , there will be one major accident a week in 20 years ' time .
That is completely unacceptable .
If we are to meet this challenge , we need to have a joint approach from all those involved , and technological developments such as satellite systems must be fully exploited .
The Commission communication gives an excellent start on this , as does the report by Miss McIntosh , and I should like to congratulate them both .
There are three points I should like to focus on in particular .
Firstly , the setting-up of a European organization for air safety .
This seems a good idea , provided that it operates decisively and efficiently in practice , and is not too bureaucratic .
Can the Commissioner tell me whether it will also deal with the safety of military aviation ?
I am thinking here of the tragic accident involving a military aircraft at Eindhoven airport last year , where an investigation indicated that many of those who died could probably have been saved if the emergency services had known how many people were on board .
Secondly , safety near airports .
Airport capacity will have to be increased in order to cope with the expected growth in air transport , and the support of the local residents will be required for this .
Does the Commissioner see this as a job for the Commission ?
In this context , I should also like to know whether he thinks that the extension of existing airports and the selection of new sites should be left entirely to the Member States , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
I ask this because such decisions can have a major impact on neighbouring countries , and it is a topical issue in view of the discussions on the future of Amsterdam airport - Schiphol - for example .
I should like to hear the Commissioner 's views on this , either now or at some later point .
Finally , safety in the airspace of the former Soviet Union , which reports from aviation sources indicate is a matter of serious concern .
I would ask the Commissioner to give this question his closest attention , and can he tell us whether the many discussions he had at the pan-European transport conference in Helsinki indicate any likelihood of improvement in the short term ?
I think that is urgently needed .
Madam President , many sensible things have been said by my colleagues this evening , so I will get straight to the point .
As the August holidays are almost upon us , Commissioner , perhaps I might consider whether I should go to Guatemala , Austria , Russia or China , because the list of airlines with the worst record tells me that they are based in these countries .
Clearly , studies can be subjective , but the fact is that we have a list of bad airlines .
That is one point .
The other is that - and we have heard this from Mr Cornelissen - it was emphasized in the debate in the Committee on Transport and Tourism that there are problems .
So we cannot just let things take their course and say that we just need a certain degree of liberalization etc .
We are discussing near misses and problems with air traffic control at almost every sitting .
But what we have is liberalization that is putting pressure on crews .
In reality - and this is not just some story - pilots have worse working conditions than long-distance drivers on Europe 's roads .
In some cases , as we heard earlier , they work for 17 hours .
A long-distance driver may not do that .
Let me say to Mrs McIntosh that I think liberalization is a good thing , and I welcome it .
But we must take account of a situation such that , whereas in the past , we had one flight from A to B that was perhaps full , we now have three flights on the same route that are half empty .
That represents a cost to both crews and the environment .
We are also seeing more and more old and run-down aircraft taking to the skies .
That is particularly worrying .
The third point I want to raise is perhaps new to some .
It is pollution at airports .
One Danish company spends ECU 25 million a year because of the muck that is sucked up into aircraft engines .
Emergency landings happen because of it , and I would mention airports such as Newark , Heathrow and Milan .
They are below average where cleanliness is concerned .
It costs the airlines between ECU 25 000 and 80 000 per day when aircraft are out of service .
So liberalization means many things .
The rating guide to the world 's airlines that was published recently was perhaps not intended to be a blacklist , or whatever it might be called in the various languages .
Perhaps it was just intended to shock and warn people to be on their guard .
On the other hand , when reputable airlines like Air France and British Midland only get an average rating , we have reason here in Europe too to sound the alarm .
Many good ideas have been put forward today .
I will not repeat them .
I will merely welcome the Commission 's initiative and stress that I support the Commission in this project and , of course , the rapporteur too .
Madam President , I thank the Commission for coming forward with this report .
We should remember that it is one of a whole host of reports that have come forward with regard to aviation safety .
The point needs to be made that we have to look at the whole aviation package and the reports that have come from the Commission when discussing the issue of aviation safety as a whole .
In the short time allocated to me this evening I would like to highlight what is becoming an increasingly severe problem affecting aviation safety , namely , the amount of baggage that is being carried into aircraft cabins .
I congratulate the rapporteur and the Committee on Transport and Tourism on addressing certain issues relating to aviation safety , but I am afraid they have failed to address the problem of cabin baggage , a problem that both airlines and cabin crew admit not only exists , but is now causing concern .
The rapporteur is right : regulations regarding cabin baggage are already in existence .
These regulations stipulate the maximum weight and size allowed and that each passenger is allowed just one piece of cabin baggage in addition to handbags or a camera bag , for example .
The reason for these regulations is that baggage within the aircraft cabin should not obstruct or restrict passengers in the event of an emergency evacuation .
The question that now needs to be asked is : why do airlines and national civil aviation authorities fail time and time again to enforce their own regulations ?
The failure compromises safety and could put lives at risk .
Therefore my amendment does not call for new regulations .
It merely makes a plea for the enforcement of existing ones .
At the moment , you can quite legally take onboard an aircraft everything , including the kitchen sink , and get away with it .
If you are in business class you might even get away with two kitchen sinks , a lap-top computer , a suit bag , dutyfree , a briefcase and a sports bag and succeed in having a whole overhead bin to yourself because you were first on the plane , having barged everybody else out of the way to have that privilege .
Excessive cabin baggage , particularly of business people , men and women , is reaching epidemic proportions , is compromising safety and cannot be tolerated .
The regulations are clear and should be enforced .
The airlines have a duty to ensure that this happens and MEPs , as legislators , have a responsibility to ensure that they themselves do not stand accused of literally taking everything , including the kitchen sink , into aircraft cabins which , sadly , is what many of our own colleagues do .
My amendment merely reminds the airlines and the national civil aviation authorities of their responsibilities .
Madam President , can I first of all , as I am sure you would wish , commiserate with Mr Simpson on his severe temple wound .
I would just like to inform you , as a Frenchwoman , Madam President , that he sustained this wound , as I understand , engaged in the game of cricket , which , as everybody knows , is a dignified and skilful game played mainly by gentlemen and by ladies .
Clearly the honourable Member , Mr Simpson , is an exception to that rule as well .
May I express my appreciation to the House and in particular to the rapporteur , Miss MacIntosh , for the excellent work that has been undertaken , and can I also commend the Transport Committee , not only for a sound report but also for its initiative in organizing a hearing on air safety where all parties were given the opportunity to express their views on this important , indeed this vital subject .
Naturally I am pleased that this report is very supportive of the Commission 's aviation safety improvements strategy , and in addition I welcome the suggestion for further advance in the initiatives that we are proposing as well as in a number of other initiatives also related to air safety which were not in our communication .
As the report notes , work on several of the initiatives described in the Commission communication has already started .
The most obvious example is our new proposal for a directive establishing a safety assessment of thirdcountry aircraft using Community airports .
That proposal was one of the main initiatives for immediate action that we announced , and it is already before this Parliament and the Council .
We are also reflecting the priorities expressed by this House , and referred to for instance by Mr Lüttge , in the course of this debate .
We are therefore working hard to establish a future European air safety authority to set up European incident reporting systems ; to prepare a safety clause to insert in our future aviation agreements with third countries ; and of course we are currently engaged in negotiations with the central and eastern European countries who have applied to be part of the Community .
We are working hard to examine with all relevant parties the controversial issue of duty time , a matter raised by Mr Seal , amongst others , and also to promote actions to ensure consistent and thorough training of cabin crew on all passenger aircraft .
In these and other areas I am confident that the House will continue to give its welcome support and encouragement .
May I say to the House that I share the belief of the honourable Members that consumers are entitled to have access to information which enables them to choose the safest means of transport and the safest operators .
And there is a certainly a need for the dissemination of this type of information to be properly organized .
It is essential , however , that we choose the most effective way to give the European traveller usable information ; and I am not convinced that such a purpose is best served by distributing random , raw information on any minor incidents or by establishing a so-called blacklist of carriers .
As the House might know , there is no blacklist in existence anywhere in the world .
The only list published is in the United States of America and that is one which rates the aviation authorities of countries according to their capability to fulfil their safety monitoring obligations .
Fortunately , aviation accidents are not frequent in terms of journeys or millions of passenger miles , but no-one would dare to guess who will have the next accident and who will have a clean record in the future .
I hope therefore that on reflection honourable Members will agree that the blacklist approach would not have the accuracy , or the detail , needed to provide customers with authentic and relevant information .
Although I acknowledge the decent motives of those who have put a view in support of a blacklist , I hope that they will realize that the practicalities are too strong to permit them to press that approach further .
The report also mentions a number of other safety-related subjects such as measures to improve survivability and to reduce injuries in the case of accidents .
I can confirm to the House that the Commission has actively supported research activities in this area and will continue to do so .
A number of other developments suggested in the report , such as the establishment of a European database of obstacles around airports , the prevention of illegal trade of unapproved spare parts , which is a lethal practice , or the drafting of a technical regulation concerning maximum number of passenger and maximum load to be carried on an aircraft are all currently dealt with by national authorities in the European Union and elsewhere .
Naturally , however , the Commission continues to maintain an interest in these matters and would act if need arose , and of course if the requirements of subsidiarity have been satisfied .
The report also addresses the very important issue of security measures at airports including baggage screening , but as is rightly pointed out , this kind of activity falls under the so-called third pillar of the Maastricht Treaty and has to be seen in the wider context of police cooperation .
The Commission will continue the initiatives already started and will devote its attention to a number of other safety issues in the future .
We will participate in the efforts of all in the aviation industry to try to ensure the safest possible air travel for our citizens and all others , and we will also naturally seek to make our contribution to safeguarding the well-being of people living in the vicinity of airports .
In these activities , as in others , we continue to value greatly the support and the innovative thinking of Members of this House , as evidenced again in the report that we have discussed this evening .
Madam President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for his reply .
I quite understand that he could not respond to all our questions , but can I take it that he will provide written answers for those he has not dealt with here ?
I should be most grateful if he could .
Yes , Madam President , as is my custom .
Thank you , Mr Kinnock .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Freedom of establishment in the transport sector
The next item is the report ( A4-0238 / 97 ) by Mrs Berger , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 96 / 26 / EC on admission to the occupation of road haulage operator and road passenger transport operator and mutual recognition of diplomas , certificates and other evidence of formal qualifications intended to facilitate for these operators the right of freedom of establishment in national and international transport operations ( COM ( 97 ) 0025 - C4-0087 / 97-97 / 0029 ( SYN ) )
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen - those of you who have decided to stay with us - there is no doubt that the transport business today is a truly European business in a way that few others are .
With the end of the restrictions on cabotage on 1 July 1998 , the conditions for the internal market will be complete in this sector , and there will be unrestricted access to the market throughout the Union .
That is the direct reason for this draft directive and the further harmonization which it seeks to bring about .
However , there have been other key changes in the basic conditions for road haulage in recent years , and the proposal for a directive responds to these as well .
Changes in operational and manufacturing processes in industry and the retail trade have led to the introduction of ' just in time ' strategies and thus to increased demand for rapid , flexible and efficient transport services linked to elaborate and sophisticated logistical systems , in which loads have become steadily smaller , but deliveries more frequent .
This has led to a shift away from factory transport towards commercial road haulage and to the continued expansion of those suppliers providing transport and logistical services .
On the other hand , because of their flexibility and cost efficiency , growing numbers of small subsidiaries are emerging and now also undertaking cross-frontier haulage , using smaller goods vehicles .
Meanwhile , public expectations of the transport sector have risen in terms of protection of the environment , technical safety and compliance with industrial relations law .
We also have to recognize the steadily increasing competition faced by EU operators within the European Union from third-country operators , particularly those from Central and Eastern Europe .
For that reason , I would suggest that , beyond this specific directive , we should also consider to what extent steps can be taken , through the existing Europe agreements , to include these countries gradually within the EU provisions governing the sector , even before their accession to the Union .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has explicitly welcomed all the harmonization measures which the Commission has proposed - increased requirements as to financial standing , personal reliability and professional competence - and the extension of the scope of the directives .
In my capacity as rapporteur , I tabled various amendments which were also supported by the Legal Affairs Committee .
The main point here is the inclusion of the rules on transport of live animals among the criteria for assessing a transport operator 's personal reliability .
Although familiarity with the rules on the transport of live animals is listed as a subject in the test of professional competence , infringement of those rules is not mentioned as one of the grounds leading to refusal or withdrawal of recognition of a licence as a transport operator .
This implies that the rules on animal transport are less important than others and , in my opinion , there is no justification for that .
Our committee and the European Parliament Committee of Inquiry also tackled another issue which I regard as very important .
In its report , the Committee of Inquiry made no bones about the fact that hauliers and transport operators are often , wittingly or unwittingly , central figures in fraudulent practices in the Community transit procedure .
Therefore , this directive should ensure that , as part of their competence , transport operators have the best possible information and awareness concerning the relevant legal provisions , and in the event of repeated failures to observe the precautions in the Community transit procedure , their licences should be withdrawn .
I have also submitted some proposals designed to improve the definition of the concepts of ' capital ' and ' reserves ' , as well as a number of other amendments of a technical and legal nature .
As rapporteur , I support Amendments Nos 1 to 14 , tabled by the Legal Affairs Committee , but cannot support Amendments Nos 15 to 17 .
In conclusion , I should like to extend my warmest thanks to the Commission staff and to our secretariat .
This is the first report that I have presented to the European Parliament , and the support which I received was therefore particularly valuable .
Thank you , Mrs Berger . May I congratulate you on your maiden report .
Madam President , this proposal is a consequence of the progress that has been made in the creation of a common market in road transport .
Parliament 's Transport Committee is very preoccupied with these matters .
Equal conditions for the establishment of a road haulage business is of crucial importance to the completion of the internal market and to thousands of lorry drivers in their everyday lives .
Competition is only competition if one competes on an equal footing .
It is fair to say that it is time we had uniform rules .
The proposal brings both good and bad news .
The bad news is that the proposal refers amongst other things to the public authorities and their checks on transport firms .
That is one aspect of the proposal I am not enthusiastic about .
The Commission wants such checks to take place at regular , fixed intervals .
I think there should be a flexible and continuous system of checks .
I think the proposal is superfluous and places restrictions on the authorities in their supervisory functions .
I also think it is wrong to vary the capital requirement in such a way that different levels apply depending on how much the vehicle weighs .
I am also opposed to that .
The good aspects are that we are now getting action on a Community basis , which is vital for distortion of competition , or to turn it round , vital in preventing distortion of competition .
The proposal we are debating today paves the way for increased demands on the economic capacity and professional competence of road haulage operators .
It will thus benefit the environment and traffic safety .
The Commission proposal also places more stringent demands on drivers .
For example , they must be honest .
The honesty requirement is not met if they have committed a serious offence or have been convicted of a serious criminal offence covered by other legal provisions in force or of repeated minor offences , as it is worded .
The fact that offences in the field of environmental protection and professional liability are now to be regarded as transport-related is something new .
I applaud that .
It is time we widened the law to include , not just traditional criminal offences , but also infringements of rules on environmental protection and driving and resting times .
Honesty and high-quality transport go together .
Sections of the road haulage industry have come to appreciate that this year .
The common transit procedure does not work as well as it should .
Another requirement to be met by operators of a road haulage business is that must they be professionally competent .
They must pass a written test .
Under the present proposal the subjects with which an applicant must be familiar are clearly defined and internationalized .
I welcome this section .
So I agree that there is a need for common rules on transport , the environment and working time in the EU .
At the same time the good news in this proposal clearly outweigh the bad .
I can therefore support the report , which I think is good , and I congratulate the rapporteur on this first report .
Madam President , I am very grateful to the House for the work that has been done by Mrs Berger and her colleagues on this initiative to further tighten the standards of access to the road haulage profession to harmonize the application of the three main criteria and to extend the scope of the directive .
I also congratulate Mrs Berger on a very proficient first report , especially since she has only been a Member of this House for nine months .
God knows what she will be capable of in 18 months !
We look forward to further developments .
I am glad , therefore , to be able to accept several of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Firstly , I am happy to accept those amendments which clarify the text and make the proposal more consistent in all its linguistic versions .
Thus Amendments Nos 4 , 8 , 9 , 10 and 11 will be accepted , subject to minor redrafting where appropriate .
Secondly , I am sympathetic to some of the elements contained in Amendments Nos 1 and 3 , given the Commission 's stated intention to introduce blacklists in areas other than agriculture , but not in civil aviation , I have to say .
I am prepared to accept the additional reference to combating fraud in the Community and common transit procedure .
It is important to re-emphasize the Commission 's determination to counter fraud in this sector and its desire through this legislation to remove the cowboys .
I am also prepared to accept the final part of Amendment No 1 and the corresponding part of Amendment No 3 , calling for the number of journeys carried out by the undertaking concerned to be taken into consideration when assessing evidence of repeated minor offences .
However , I cannot accept the reference within Amendments Nos 1-3 to the transport of live animals .
Community rules on the protection of animals during transport already exist and Member States can already take action when implementing the provisions of the relevant directive .
Nor can the Commission agree to adding a reference to administrative courts .
Given the differing judicial systems throughout the Member States where criminal sanctions already vary widely , the inclusion of administrative courts would only accentuate the discrepancies between Member States to the detriment of operators .
The Commission can accept Amendment No 7 , in order to allow flexibility to an undertaking in temporary financial difficulties when assessing the financial standing criterion , although redrafting may be necessary to eliminate doubt on this issue .
There are a few amendments which the Commission cannot accept .
Amendments Nos , 2 , 5 and 14 modify the transitional arrangement period for Austria , Finland and Sweden to take account of their European Economic Area membership .
However , I consider that the transitional period should be consistent with that applied to previous new Member States and should therefore be calculated with reference to their date of accession to the European Union .
Amendment No 6 - which presumes that candidates who have already fulfilled their professional competence requirement , should not be requested to so a second time - arises from a misunderstanding of the Commission proposal .
Our proposal simply requires Member States to check that undertakings are employing a person at managerial level who fulfils the professional competence criterion .
The concern which prompted this amendment can therefore be laid at rest and I hope , as a consequence , that the amendment will be withdrawn .
Amendments Nos 12 and 13 seek to set out in detail one aspect of the knowledge to be acquired during training for the professional competence examinations .
I have to say that these amendments add too much detail and would require candidates to have an unreasonably detailed knowledge of a particular area of specialized customs legislation .
Therefore , for practical reasons and for reasons of fairness , I cannot accept these amendments .
Amendments Nos 15 , 16 and 17 all propose the deletion of references to minor offences so that they should not be taken into account when considering the good repute of an operator .
Quite clearly , this goes against the thrust of this proposal , which aims to tighten the rules on admission and to exclude those operators who systematically breach or abuse the law .
I understand the permissive motives of those who have tabled these amendments but any provision which allowed minor offences to be repeatedly committed obviously weaken this proposal and lead to inconsistencies and injustices across Member States ' jurisdictions .
Therefore , I must reject these amendments .
Mrs Berger 's report is detailed and thorough in its examination of the issues involved in this subject .
It makes a positive constructive contribution to the Commission 's initiative and , indeed , provides refreshing insights into this subject from a parliamentary committee that is not normally involved with transport issues .
We all share the desire to improve the standards of road transport operators within the Union , to reduce the existing disparities between Member States and to develop a consistent set of criteria to ensure that only reputable operators remain in the market to provide high-quality services in the interests of their clients and society at large .
I , therefore , welcome the support of this House in those efforts and I trust that the support will continue .
I should like to thank the House for its attention and the interpreters for their services .
Thank you , Mr Kinnock .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the Berger report will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.35 p.m. )
Welcome
I would like to welcome the high-level delegations from a number of countries which have applied for accession , and who will be joining us today . These delegations , representing their respective governments and parliaments , have taken their seats in the official gallery .
You will today witness with us a historic moment in the life of the European Union , which will give us all the opportunity to expand and further our relations .
Your presence here today is undoubtedly more than timely and I am therefore happy to extend our most cordial greetings to you .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I wish to raise a point of order - which you know is not something I do very often - about lobbying in the House .
Colleagues from a number of other groups have been kind enough to point out to me that a fax which I myself only discovered this morning had been going around for several days from a group called ' Patents for Life ' , relating to an amendment which I and several others tabled and which has now been taken over by my group .
The fax claims that if the amendment is adopted , all data on patients throughout the world which have anything to do with patents and biotechnology will be published and sent to the insurance companies and could cause untold harm .
I would urge you most strongly not to listen to this kind of lunatic lobbying : read the amendment carefully , and you will see that it says just the opposite .
What it says is that before taking a gene from you , your neighbour or whoever , the industry must first seek permission from the legal person concerned or , in the case of a child , for instance , from that person 's representative .
If a patent is subsequently issued , the data will remain completely secret .
This also means that insurance companies and industries will not be able to misuse the information , since they would then face prosecution .
Mrs van Putten , I would be grateful if you would refrain from using the point-of-order procedure for reopening debates on reports .
Mr President , I sympathise with you that sometimes people try to raise points which are not on the Minutes .
But this is a correction to the Minutes .
Item 12 about the Community system on fisheries and aquaculture .
I am recorded as saying : ' Mr Macartney protested at the way the Legal Affairs Committee had dealt with the modification of the legal base proposed by the Committee on Fisheries ' .
I contend that this is a mistake .
It should read : ' The examination of the legal base proposed by the European Commission ' .
There is a big institutional difference between the European Commission in front of us and the Fisheries Committee .
I would not like this House to confuse the two so I move that correction .
Your point is noted and the Minutes will be amended .
Mr. President , may I ask you to note that in the last vote on acts of God , I voted in favour and not against .
I made a mistake with my voting machine .
Your remarks are noted .
( The Minutes were approved )
Agenda
I have received a request from the Committee on Budgets to include on the agenda under the procedure with debate Mr Samland 's report on the interinstitutional agreement on provisions regarding financing of the Common Foreign and Security Policy ( doc . A4-0249 / 97 ) .
In view of the importance of the subject on the one hand and the very full agenda on the other , I would like to make the following proposal to change the agenda pursuant to Rule 96 of the Rules of Procedure :
the Samland report will be incorporated with debate into this sitting 's agenda ; -the debate will take place at 11.45 a.m. ; -the rapporteur will introduce his report and then each political group and the non-attached Members will have two minutes speaking time ; -the vote will take place at voting time this sitting.Is there any objection ?
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , you may now speak .
Mr President , I should like to refer to the Rules in relation to what you have just said and the proposal to amend the agenda .
It is impossible in fifteen minutes to let each political group speak , and the draftsman for the Committee on Budgets , when the voting starts at noon .
That just shows how much all of this is improvised .
I should like a legal reply to my reference to the Rules , based on Rule 129 , instead of being told that the ' majority decides ' .
We are in Europe , in democratic countries , but there is no reason to reject legal objections in a political majority - especially since we are at the first stage of the ratification of the Amsterdam decisions .
I have seven referrals to the Rules of Procedure in respect of what you have just said : I wish to explain each of the seven referrals to different Rules of Procedure : they are 96 ( 2 ) , 143 ( 2 ) , 99 , 96 ( 1 ) , 97 ( 2 ) , 51 ( 1 ) and 124 ( 2 ) .







I should like to begin with the first referral to the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , I have one minute for my first point of order .
According to Rule 96 ( 2 ) , ' if a procedural motion ' ...
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , you are a lawyer .
This is contrary to the rules .
You have one minute in all and not for each point of order .
But of course not - I obviously have one minute for each point of order , Mr President .
That will do , or I shall not let you have the floor .
You have one minute to set out your argument and then we shall vote .
Mr President , we talk a lot about democracy , so at least let me present one point of order or referral to the Rules of Procedure .
I shall present the others later , it does not bother me .
According to Rule 96 ( 2 ) : ' If a procedural motion to amend the agenda is rejected , it may not be tabled again during the same part-session ' .
I proposed a change to the agenda yesterday , referring to the importance of the subject .
I wanted a debate and not a vote without a debate .
I set out arguments that are given in the Minutes , page 5 .
You gave the floor to Mr Samland , chairman of the Committee on Budgets , who asked the Chair not to accept my request and the Chair decided that the item in question could therefore be kept on the agenda for today 's sitting .
It therefore appears as a vote without debate .
You now want a new change to be made to the agenda .
That is against Rule 96 ( 2 ) - regardless of whether the request is made by the Committee on Budgets , yourself or twenty-nine members .
That is my first point of order .
I have six others referring to procedural irregularities .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , under Rule 96 ( 2 ) , that you referred to , a proposal has to have been rejected in order not to be tabled again .
Your motion was not voted on as it was tabled after the relevant deadline .
It was not voted on and therefore not rejected .
We are applying the same Rule 96 ( 2 ) , first paragraph , authorizing the President to propose changes to the agenda .
That settles the matter .
I put to the vote the President 's proposal to change the agenda .
( Parliament approved the change to the agenda proposed by the President )
Topical and urgent debate ( objections )
The next item is the vote on objections to the debate on topical and urgent matters of major importance ( Rule 47 ) .
During the vote on point III ' Human rights ' .
Mr President , I should like to refer to the rules .
We were only entitled to five human rights items but the subject now includes six .
If you add yet another item you will be bending the Rules of Procedure .
Mr Giansily , this is not governed by the Rules of Procedure but is a convention among the Groups .
It is not a rule .
The Groups can choose not to observe this convention if they see fit in exceptional cases .
( Mixed reactions ) It is not a Rule .
There is no Rule preventing us from voting on this item .
I put the objection to the vote .
( Parliament approved the objection )
Mr President , I should like to refer to Rule 47 . Since there are so many colleagues present , I should like to point out how the Deputy Secretary General can mislead you .
He had you reply to Mr Giansily 's excellent question that the number ' five ' cannot be found in the Rules .
Rule 47 ( 2 ) states that the number of items on the agenda cannot exceed 5 .
In the second indent it again states that there cannot be more than 5 subjects , if there is an amendment .
I must pay tribute to Mr Giansily - his arguments were quite relevant - regardless of what you have been told .
Agenda 2000
The next item is the Commission 's presentation of its communication on Agenda 2000 ( development of Union policies , enlargement , future financial framework ) , followed by a debate .
The President of the Commission , Mr Santer , will now speak .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , on 17 January 1995 I appeared before you to tell you how I conceived the terms of reference of this Commission , whose terms of office will come to an end in the first days of the next century .
I pointed out the prospect of enlargement , referring to the internal reforms that would have to be undertaken in order to prepare for a bigger and stronger Europe .
The considerations that we have made over the last two and a half years have , at bottom , never lost sight of these aims : strengthening the European Union and preparing for enlargement .
I am not one of those who think that the European Union can increase the number of its Member States without any risk for its political project .
We know from experience that the mere fact of numbers complicates and slows down our decision-making process but we are also numerous in thinking that the historic gamble of opening up to new democracies undoubtedly wins the day over any other considerations .
The unified Europe whose foundations we laid down in 1952 and that we have been building for more than forty years , this Europe which , I say proudly , has accomplished great things , now sees artificial divisions coming to an end .
It is an historic opportunity which can bring about far-reaching changes .
Today , as the European Council instructed us to do at its meeting in Madrid in December 1995 , the Commission is presenting a coherent project to deal with a set of complex questions and , above all , interdependent ones - may I insist on the latter point .
We cannot conceive the pursuit of agricultural reforms or the reform of structural policies without taking into consideration , at the same time , enlargement or financial constraints .
It is this system of equation that the Commission has been determined to resolve in elaborating its communication ' Agenda 2000 ' .
Deepening and enlargement are sometimes presented as contradictory aims since a broader Union will necessarily be more diverse and more complex , because new solidarities are being added to those which now unite the Member States , since it will take longer and be more difficult to take decisions in an enlarged Union and those constraints , ladies and gentlemen , are real .
They cannot be hushed up , since enlargement for the Commission cannot in any case be allowed to get out of control .
They call for a two-fold response : deepening the Union , by introducing the euro , as planned , on 1 January 1999 , and developing internal policies while reforming our institutions .
As far as institutional reform is concerned , let me be clear : if we want the European Union to remain an unprecedented model of success , if we want , despite the handicap of numbers , to retain the means to act , if we want every citizen of Europe to recognise the Union 's decisions as legitimate ones if , in a nutshell , politicians are still determined to construct Europe , then we must agree to go further in the reform of the institutions and decisionmaking procedures .
The Intergovernmental Conference that has just come to an end in Amsterdam brings the first response .
We already know that it is not enough .
It is the meaning of the protocol on the future of the institutions appended to the Amsterdam Treaty .
To mark out the route , it seems necessary to set the right deadlines right away .
Before any enlargement - and I mean , before any enlargement - we must define the weighting of votes in the Council , to go with the reduction in the number of Commissioners to one per Member State .
It is essential , from the Commission 's view point , to find a political agreement on this reform before the end of the century .
A last-minute atmosphere - as we saw in Ioannina - is not good for the right decisions .
As the institutional protocol foresees , the European Union cannot expand by more than another five Member States without a more far-reaching reform of the provisions of the Treaty on the membership and operations of the institutions .
The Commission feels that a new Intergovernmental Conference should be convened as soon after the year 2000 as possible .
( Applause ) Mr President , the Agenda 2000 communication comprises three main sections : strengthening the Union 's policies , tackling enlargement properly and setting up a financial framework .
I shall begin by referring to the Union 's policies and the reforms that need to be undertaken .
These reforms need to be devised , as a priority , for the citizens of the Union .
They need to be defined with reference to the challenges facing us .
I shall refer to demographic constraints , the advent of new technologies , the information society , restructuring , increased economic interdependence and the need to give Europe a more marked international stature .
I should add that we also need to have an overview of the situation in order to tackle the future of Community actions .
Each major policy cannot be treated as a one-off , our programmes cannot be dealt with as independent instruments , in other words we must let the right hand know what the left hand does - especially since the ordered mobilization of all our resources is more than ever necessary .
We must , finally , decide what is essential and what is less so .
The confidence pact for jobs that I unveiled before the European Parliament a little over a year ago was inspired by the same overall approach .
The decisions taken in Amsterdam on the stability and growth pact back us up on that .
The Commission has selected four main aims for internal Community policies : creating the conditions for sustainable growth , basing growth on knowledge , undertaking a far-reaching modernization of employment systems and promoting a safe society based on solidarity , concerned for the general interest and respectful of the environment .
In order to apply those guidelines , the Commission proposes increasing the relative share of the internal policies in the Community budget , while concentrating on priorities , such as research and development , training and , of course , the major networks .
The Commission should rethink its own role , focusing its action on these main tasks and , as announced at the Intergovernmental Conference , the Commission will proceed to a regrouping and redefinition of its tasks and a matching reorganization of its services and departments .
Mr President , over time , economic and social cohesion has become one of the pillars of European construction .
The public priority of this aim must be very clearly maintained .
The prospect of enlargement to include new countries , with a lower level of development , means that this is all the more necessary .
Reducing regional disparities , supporting the regions in economic mutation and developing human resources throughout the Union , those are three clear priorities that the Commission has picked out and which should be translated into three corresponding objectives .
By reducing its aims from seven to three , the Union will be more efficient and more visible in terms of its structural action .
Alongside this thematic concentration , we also recommend a greater geographical concentration .
At present , more than half the European Union 's population benefits from structural aids , which is too much .
That coverage rate must be lowered to 40 % In this context , the eligibility criteria for Objective 1 , dedicated to the less developed regions , i.e. below 75 % of the Community mean GDP , will be applied strictly with a gradual phasing out and , therefore , transitional periods for those regions losing their eligibility .
This approach combined with the maintenance in GDP terms of the overall cohesion effort achieved by 1999 , will make it possible to meet the real needs for structural aid in the Union while taking into consideration new needs for solidarity arising from enlargement .
In practical terms , that will be translated into 230 billion ECU for the period 2000-2006 for the current fifteen Member States and an additional 45 billion , for the new Member States .
For the Fifteen , that is a 15 % increase over that period , concentrated in the least favoured regions of the current Union .
The Cohesion Fund will remain the instrument par excellence for helping the less prosperous countries to continue their process of economic catch-up and convergence .
The Commission therefore proposes continuing to feed that fund since it encourages projects related to the environment and transport .
This tool will be of great interest for future Member States whose investment needs are particularly great in these fields .
Since it is above all a cohesion instrument , the Commission proposes maintaining the benefit for countries in the euro zone and whose GDP per inhabitant is less than 90 % the Community mean .
The Commission feels that there needs to be a half-term revision of eligibility for the Cohesion Fund .
The Commission will see to the introduction , in a strengthened partnership , of simplified and decentralized management of the structural funds and the creation of appropriate evaluation and control structures .
Mr President , since European integration , the common agricultural policy has been one of the founding policies .
I firmly believe that it will remain central for European construction as it has been , with success , over the last forty years .
In order to be affirmed and to develop , the common agricultural policy has had to be reformed continually .
The long term prospects of markets show that the time has come to consider a fresh reform .
We want to preserve the competitiveness and exporting vocation of our farming while developing rural areas .
This reform must be in keeping with the 1992 version , so much criticized at the time but which has led to the using up of surpluses and significant increases in farming revenues .
The further movement towards world prices proposed by the Commission will make it possible not only to increase the future competitiveness of farming in major sectors like cereals and beef , but will also place the Union in a strong position for future negotiations to take place at the World Trade Organisation .
This adjustment will make the progressive integration of new Member States easier thanks to a two-fold trend towards lower prices in the European Union and higher prices in central and eastern Europe .
This approach will also reduce the risk of uncontrolled increases in the production of future Member States .
I should add that the alarmist forecasts that I have read here and there about the cost of enlargement to the common agricultural policy are totally contradicted by our analyses .
The Commission forecasts a drop in institutional prices and I insist on the term institutional .
Substantial for cereals and beef , lower for milk , subjected to a quota system that common sense tells us should be maintained for the time being , these drops in prices will of course be offset by an increase in income premia .
The consumer will benefit from this new approach whereas public support for farming will slightly increase .
But I should like to emphasize that we cannot allow ourselves to overcompensate the losses of income engendered by price losses .
That is why the Commission is contemplating lower compensation that 100 % , a proposal justified by the fact that , according to our forecasts , market prices will remain higher than the institutional support prices .
That explains our suggestion to set a special ceiling per farm on all direct aids to income financed by the Community .
I spoke earlier of competitiveness but I should also like to refer to rural development , the necessary changes towards a type of farming that is closer to man , closer to the environment and also more concerned with quality production .
It should therefore devise its agricultural structure policy as an element of the social and economic equilibrium of the countryside .
We should also emphasize the environmental dimension of farming .
To those ends , the Commission proposes adapting the rural policy instruments , for example by putting the emphasis very clearly on supervisory structural measures financed by EAGGF-Guarantee .
At the same time , the n wishes increased budgetary amounts to be earmarked for agri-environmental measures .
The Commission will propose that the Council authorize the Member States to introduce conditionality between direct payments and the respect of environmental provisions .
Mr President , the second part of Agenda 2000 is dedicated to the challenge of enlargement. it draws conclusions from the far-reaching analysis of the situation of the different applicant countries in terms of the Copenhagen political and economic criteria .
It is on the basis of these conclusions that the Commission is putting precise recommendation on each act of candidature and the launching of the negotiation process .
I am sure that if you carefully read the documents presented today by the Commission will convince you of the seriousness and objectivity of our work .
I have always said that the Commission would take its responsibilities very seriously indeed , whether it is a question of the democratic prerequisite , economic prospects or the ability to adopt the acquis communautaire .
Democracy , human rights and the respect of human rights and the rule of law are all prerequisites over which we must be intransigent .
The new Amsterdam treaty confirms that approach .
Only democratic States , respecting human rights , fundamental freedoms and the rule of law can belong to the European Union .
In this area , no risks can be taken .
We can extend a statistical curve or evaluate economic statistics but there can be no benefit of the doubt in terms of democracy .
That is why the Commission is obliged to ascertain that Slovakia does not meet the political criterion of Copenhagen , which rules out any opening up of negotiations with that country .
Mr President , the situation is different when it comes to the economy - the fact that a country does not yet have a fully developed market economy able to face up to competitive pressure in the Union is not a decisive factor in itself .
None of the candidates currently meets all the economic criteria but some of them have progressed sufficiently for us to be able reasonable to predict that they will be ready when the time comes .
The assessment of these criteria is therefor prospective .
The same remark goes , even more so , for the ability to apply the acquis .
In this context , I should emphasize that it is not enough to adopt the legislative acts .
Countries must also have the administrative capacity to implement them .
As at previous enlargements , the candidates must , following the negotiations , be in a position to apply the acquis , without needing excessively lengthy transitional periods nor , of course permanent , derogations - or else we shall have a patchwork Europe or an à la carte Europe .
For some countries we have decided that this is not the case at present .
Assessment of the criteria leads us to the conclusion that it is possible to contemplate beginning negotiations for accession with five countries , in addition to Cyprus .
They are , in order of the presentation of their applications to join the European Union , Hungary , Poland , Estonia , the Czech Republic and Slovenia .
I should emphasize that for all these countries major further efforts are needed for their accession to be possible in the mid-term , as emerges from the individual opinions .
I think it is worth pointing out that the closure of each negotiation will depend on the progress to be made by the countries concerned and nothing that the Commission proposes today signifies the rejection of certain candidatures .
On the contrary , they are all invited to become fully-fledged Member States of the European Union .
Our proposals mean that the least prepared countries must be placed decisively in the perspective of future negotiations .
That is the meaning behind the partnerships for accession that the Commission proposes to establish with each of the candidate countries .
This strategy is based on caching up deficiencies observed when working out the opinions .
I shall leave it to my colleague , Hans van den Broek , to go into more detail but I should like to stress that the partnerships for accession have a three-fold aspect for the candidate countries : the progressive adoption of the acquis , familiarization with the programmes and working methods of the Community and , as of 2000 , pre-accession financial aids .
To that end , the Commission proposes important financial sums for all the candidate countries of central and eastern Europe : 1.5 billion ECU for the PHARE programme , 0.5 billion ECU for farming aid and 1 billion ECU for structural aid .
These are yearly figures , of course , representing 21 billion ECU in all for the whole period of financial perspectives .
The Commission will report every year to the European Council on progress made .
For the countries with which negotiations have not yet been opened , this objective assessment will enable the Commission to recommend , at the right time , the opening of the accession process .
The Commission has adopted the idea to convene a conference of all the European States which want to join and which are linked to the Union through an association agreement .
It seems vital that all these countries should come closer together and confer over questions as important for the future of the Union as a common foreign policy or matters of justice and internal safety .
Mr President , the new financial framework , which will apply as of the year 2000 , should cover a sufficiently long period to finance the deepening of our policies and enlargement and ensure a healthy management of public finances .
For the years 2000-2006 , the Commission 's proposals respond to those aims , while retaining margins below the ceiling of resources which it proposes keeping at 1.27 % of GDP .
The Commission feels that it is possible , beneath that ceiling , to pursue the reform of the common agricultural policy , to maintain the effort for cohesion and to develop internal and external policies .
At the same time , the costs of the first enlargement and the creation of a major financial programme to prepare the candidates for accession could be financed .
How can that be , you ask ?
The Commission has taken into consideration a certain number of factors and in particular the margins that can be found in the agricultural guideline and the effect of an increased concentration of structural spending .
Mention should also be made of the fruits of economic growth and the benefits of the budgetary rigour applied in the current period of financial perspectives .
It should be recalled that for 1997 payment credits stood at around 1.17 % compared with the authorized ceiling of 1.23 % of GDP .
Allow me to quota some figures on the financial implications of Agenda 2000 : the subsequent reform of the common agricultural policy will be translated , at the end of the period , into an additional net cost of around 4 billion ECU per annum .
Despite these additional costs , there will remain a margin of 4.7 billion ECU under the agricultural guideline .
This margin is vital to deal with the ups and downs of the agricultural market , to ensure the proper integration of the new Member States and to prepare for future enlargements .
As far as economic and social cohesion is concerned , the total sum available for the period 2000-2006 will come to 275 billion ECU of which we are reserving , as I said , 45 billion ECU for the new Member States .
Out of these 45 billion ECU , 7 billion will however be taken out to financial a pre-accession structural aid for all the candidate countries .
The combined effort of the various pre-accession and integration aids of the new Member States in Community policies will account for a considerable amount , 75 billion ECU over the period .
That is a genuine Marshall plan for the countries of central and eastern Europe .
Those are the figures . I should add that this is all possible without revising the ceiling on own resources or the financing system .
On the latter point , the Agenda 2000 communication advances a certain number of medium and long-term considerations as to the fairness of the system , the possibility of intruding new resources and budgetary corrections .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , from all the documents that I have just presented , I should like to point out two things in particular : coherence and objectivity .
May I reiterate my opening remarks : Agenda 2000 intends to tackle all the questions likely to face the European Union at the beginning of the 21st century .
The deepening of the Union 's policies to meet the needs of a Europe that goes on growing ; enlargement , because this historic duty called for an ambitious response ; and the initial planning of a financial framework compatible with Economic and Monetary Union , the priority project of them all .
We have now laid the stepping-stones .
The European Commission is tackling these deadlines with a desire to succeed .
I do not doubt the will of the Member States nor that of all the candidate countries .
I do not doubt that of the European Parliament since you have spoken out on many occasions in favour of a strong Europe , full of solidarity and open to the new democracies , faithful to the ambitious aspirations attributed by the Treaties .
Our success , ladies and gentlemen , will be Europe 's success !
( Sustained applause )
Mr President , I wish to begin by associating myself fully and obviously with President Santer 's remark that this is indeed an historic occasion , and it is particularly appropriate that we should today be presenting the Agenda 2000 package to the elected representatives of the citizens of Europe .
I understand that Parliament has made the necessary arrangements to give careful scrutiny to the different aspects of this package , and I believe that this will greatly enhance the public debate on issues which have such wide-ranging implications for the peoples of Europe .
Before this meeting I had the opportunity to present the Commission 's Agenda 2000 , including the enlargement documents , to the distinguished Ambassadors of the candidate countries and to give them some more background .
I am very pleased that they are with us on this important day .
Important for them , but also important for us .
President Santer has presented the Commission 's broad approach .
I would particularly underline the assurance which he and Prime Minister Kok , of the then Netherlands presidency , gave to the applicants that the need for further institutional reform within the European Union cannot be denied but should be arranged in a way which will not imply a delay in the enlargement process .
That is why I underscore what President Santer has said , that the Commission has suggested that a new intergovernmental conference should be held as soon as possible after the turn of the century to complete institutional reform before enlargement .
Allow me now to explain in a little more detail the position taken by the Commission in the Agenda 2000 package with respect to the process of enlargement .
The Commission 's opinions on each of the applications for membership take as their starting-point the conditions for membership established in 1993 by the Copenhagen European Council .
These conditions relate to the applicant 's political and economic situation and its capacity to fulfil the other obligations of membership , known as the acquis .
These conditions stipulate that an applicant must have : stable institutions guaranteeing democracy , the rule of law , human rights and respect for and protection of minorities ; a functioning market economy ; the capacity to cope with competitive pressures and market forces within the Union ; and the ability to take on the other obligations of membership which are related to the acquis , including adherence to the aims of political , economic and monetary union .
In assessing the extent to which each applicant satisfies these conditions , the Commission has made an entirely objective analysis .
This analysis was based on information provided by the applicants themselves and also on information from other sources .
While the Commission alone is responsible for the assessment it has made , it has also drawn on evaluations in particular fields made by the Member States and by competent international bodies , including OSCE and the Council of Europe on the political side , and EBRD , the World Bank and IMF on the economic side .
I am , of course , aware that Parliament has indicated a preference for a common start to the negotiations with all the applicants .
The Commission , for its part , continues to stress that enlargement is an overall process involving all applicants .
All will benefit from the reinforced pre-accession strategy , all will be invited to conclude accession partnerships , and all will receive extra support from the Union to overcome problems identified in the opinions .
But the detailed objective analysis made by the Commission leaves no doubt that there is a natural differentiation among the applicants for a variety of historical , political and economic reasons .
The opinions show that there is a clear distinction between those applicants whose progress until now creates the reasonable expectation that they will be able to assume the obligations of membership in the medium term , without excessively long negotiations or transitional periods , and , on the other hand , those for whom such an expectation is not yet justified .
The approach recommended by the Commission is that negotiations should be opened early next year with those countries which not only satisfy the political conditions for membership , but have also made sufficient progress towards satisfying the other conditions to enable them to take on the obligations of membership in the medium term , albeit with additional efforts .
Meanwhile , a reinforced pre-accession strategy has been planned . Under this , we shall conclude accession partnerships with each applicant , whatever its state of preparedness for membership , tailormade to overcome the shortcomings identified by the opinions .
The pre-accession strategy should be backed up , naturally , by additional financial support .
President Santer has referred to that .
The Commission is proposing that from the year 2000 onwards , ECU 1bn per year be made available from the structural funds , ECU 500m in agricultural programmes , in addition to support from PHARE , which is ECU 1.2bn per annum .
The reinforced pre-accession strategy will be accompanied by a commitment from the Union to review the progress made by each country in satisfying the conditions for membership by the end of 1998 at the latest , and thereafter such a report will be drawn up on an annual basis .
On the basis of these reports , the Commission will be able to judge when to recommend to the Council that further accession negotiations be opened .
All the applicants will thus take part in an inclusive enlargement process .
Differentiation in no sense means discrimination .
There will not be ' ins ' and ' outs ' but ' ins ' and ' pre-ins ' , with the possibility for the latter to join the former as soon as the conditions are right .
The political conditions for membership are fundamental .
This has been confirmed and reinforced by Article F of the draft Amsterdam Treaty . If a country has not established stable institutions guaranteeing democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights , including minority rights , there can be no question of opening accession negotiations .
The opinions conclude that although the quality of democracy could be further improved in most countries , only in Slovakia are political problems so severe as to rule out in themselves the opening of negotiations at this point in time .
Our principal concern is precisely the lack of stability in that country of the institutions which ought to provide the necessary political guarantees .
With respect to the other conditions for membership which are related to their economic situation and their capacity to implement the acquis , the Commission has not only analysed the existing situation but made a systematic evaluation of the trends in order to arrive at a judgement concerning each applicant 's capacity to fulfil these conditions in the medium term .
No candidate has , at present , fully satisfied the economic conditions .
But five of the applicants in central and eastern Europe - Hungary , Poland , Estonia , the Czech Republic and Slovenia , taking them in the order of their application for membership - have established functioning market economies , even if some important features such as the financial sector , still need to mature and develop further .
With regard to the ability to cope with competitive pressures and market forces within the European Union , each of the five countries has its strengths and weaknesses , but they all can be expected to satisfy this condition in the medium term if further and sometimes significant efforts are made .
The opinions also assess the extent to which the applicants are able to ' take on the obligations of membership , including adherence to the aims of political , economic and monetary union ' , in other words , the acquis .
The methodology we have employed is set out in chapter 2 of Agenda 2000 .
We are dealing here with a mixture of indicators which point to different strengths and weaknesses within each applicant country .
But it would appear that , on the whole , Hungary , Poland and the Czech Republic could apply the acquis in the medium term if continued efforts are made , while Estonia and Slovenia would be able to do so in the medium term with significant additional efforts .
The Commission has made clear recommendations on the basis of overall objective assessment in the opinions .
They lead to the conclusion that the accession negotiations should be open with the five applicants just mentioned .
These countries not only satisfy the political conditions , but have established their market economies and made sufficient progress in satisfying the other conditions to warrant the opening of these negotiations .
The Commission is impressed by the efforts to prepare for membership which have been taken by the other applicants , especially in recent months .
We shall report regularly on their progress in satisfying the criteria for membership and will recommend that negotiations be opened with them as soon as they are ready .
It is important to recall that there is no necessary link between the number of countries with which the Union begins negotiations and the number of countries that eventually join the Union in a first group or wave .
Each negotiation is separate and pursues its own course at a rhythm which is determined by the complexity of the issues to be resolved .
Thus , if we begin negotiations with six applicants including Cyprus , this does not necessarily imply that all six will become members on the same date .
Allow me a few words on Cyprus .
The Agenda 2000 recalls that the Commission delivered a favourable opinion in 1993 on Cyprus ' application for membership and the European Council has reaffirmed on several occasions that accession negotiations should start six months after the conclusion of the IGC .
The division of the island of course raises problems in the context of enlargement but we hope that the prospect of accession will provide a catalyst to bring about a just and lasting settlement .
Face to face talks began last week in New York under United Nations auspices between President Klerides and Mr Denktash and we hope that this will begin a process leading to a settlement .
There are also encouraging signs of progress between Greece and Turkey to solve their bilateral problems without recourse to force .
A settlement of the Cyprus problem will permit a faster conclusion to accession negotiations and these negotiations will be facilitated if sufficient progress is made towards a settlement to permit also representatives of the Turkish Cypriot community to be involved in the accession process .
The Commission proposes that a European conference be convened to deal not with directly enlargement-related issues but rather with fields like foreign policy and the fight against international crime where we need our partners ' cooperation and the conference should forge closer links with all European associated countries aspiring to EU membership .
In presenting our recommendations to the Council , the Parliament and above all to the applicants themselves , it is particularly important that we place them in the context of the overall enlargement process from which no applicant is excluded and the message is that all the applicants will become members of the European Union when they have satisfied the conditions and the negotiations have been brought to a satisfactory conclusion .
Agenda 2000 also confirms Turkey 's eligibility for EU membership as confirmed at the recent Association Council .
The Commission points out that macro-economic instability in Turkey is a source of concern and that above all major improvements in the political situation , in particular in the protection of human rights still need to be made .
Good neighbourly relations between Greece and Turkey should be established and we are looking to Turkey to contribute actively to a just and lasting settlement in Cyprus .
The Commission was asked by the Council to reflect on ways in which relations with Turkey could be further developed building on the Customs Union .
We approved a communication on this yesterday which is also being sent to Parliament .
The Customs Union as we know is functioning to a considerable extent , there is a huge surplus by the EU of 10 billion dollars a year but in our communication we explore ways in which cooperation linked to the Customs Union can be further developed .
In conclusion , the European Union faces an historic responsibility during the coming months .
It will be up to the European Council of course to take the decision on the opening of accession negotiations .
The Commission has carried out its responsibilities under Article O of the Treaty in presenting clear , unambiguous recommendations .
The reinforced pre-accession strategy , the proposal for additional financial support , the accession partnerships and the commitments to review annually the progress of all applicants , for the first time in December 1998 , all underline our commitment to an inclusive enlargement process involving all applicants and in the months ahead the Commission will pay close attention to the views of Parliament and to the wider public debate in preparing the next stage of the enlargement process .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a good thing that President Santer is presenting Agenda 2000 to the European Parliament first , and I expressly welcome that .
However , I would have welcomed it even more if a spokesman for the Commission had not already presented important elements of Agenda 2000 to the press yesterday evening !
Agenda 2000 shows that the European Union has responsibility for the whole of Europe , but it is more than just a plan for expansion .
It is a self-contained plan for the future of the European Union at the outset of the next millennium .
It is a cohesive , self-contained plan that you have put before us .
The Commissioners have done what it is possible for them to do at this point .
But that will not be enough to meet the challenges of the future .
There are many things that must be and will be the subject of deep discussions during the coming months , in this House , among the public , by the national governments and between the national governments .
That is very right and proper .
But because the President-in-Office is here this morning - which I am glad to see -I should like to appeal through him to the governments of the Member States : please don 't start talking this plan to death or pulling it apart or breaking it down !
The European Union needs a cohesive , integral plan summarizing its objectives and policies .
We must put an end to the politics of the chicken run , where each of the 15 governments pecks up a grain here and a grain there and then calls the result a joint policy !
( Applause ) We desire and look forward to the accession of the eastern European states and Cyprus to the European Union .
We regard it as inevitable and necessary .
It represents our political and moral commitment to those peoples who have won back their freedom .
We , who have already been Members of the Union for many years , for decades in some cases , we believe we might react with some hostility to what constitutes European policy and European union .
The peoples of eastern Europe regard the European Union , European unification , as the great hope of their future , and we must and will make that hope a reality !
I am not talking here just about the distribution of subsidies or the transfer of funds , but about our recognition that this Europe of ours is a self-contained , cultural , moral unit of value in the world , not just a shunting yard for subsidies !
( Applause ) This Parliament and my group will not be found wanting in the determination to meet this great challenge .
Enlargement is not merely a moral obligation .
It is also in our interests - in the very objective interests of the Member states of the European Union and of that Union as a whole .
Of course there will be a cost , there will be political problems , and not just for us but for the eastern European states , too .
The issue there , too , is for them to accept the social , economic and ecological rules that we have arrived at within this European Union .
Most of all , they face the task of creating or supporting political stability .
That is why I say that , for all European Union rules , for the adoption of the acquis communautaire , we can lay down transition periods and deadlines .
But enlargement cannot include any transition period for democracy .
We must , of course , ask ourselves the question : what does accession cost ?
President Santer has made a proposal regarding the financing .
But when we ask what accession costs , we must also go further and ask what the nonaccession of the eastern European states will cost .
Because the issue is clear-cut : either the European Union , through enlargement , exports economic , political , social and ecological stability to the East , or the day will come when we have no option but to import instability from the East .
If you put it like that , the decision we have to take is a very easy one !
( Applause ) As well as asking how many , and which , eastern European states are capable of joining the Union , we must also ask how many , and which , accessions we can afford in future years .
Part of the challenge confronting us is to make eastward enlargement acceptable to the citizens of our Union .
Acceptance of enlargement is greater among politicians in the Member States than among the general public .
We need to be aware of that in what we do .
We want to export stability .
But we ourselves must also be stable , which means that the Union must finally solve its own problems !
It must make its contribution to creating employment in the European Union .
The 18 million unemployed will not accept a situation where the European Union takes on new problems before it has solved the problem of employment .
( Applause ) In this context , the summit in Luxembourg in November must send out a signal : a signal which says that the Union is at last concentrating its policy on employment , on the creation of employment .
A success in Luxembourg would also be a contribution to making enlargement acceptable .
What will the cost of enlargement be ?
It is not for me to go through the accounts here and now , President Santer - the European Parliament and my own group will be doing that in the coming months .
I would prefer not to evaluate the Commission 's proposed reforms now , except to say that they seem plausible at first glance .
Be that as it may , one thing is clear - and was made clear by what President Santer said - there can be no zerorated enlargement , financially , politically or institutionally .
Regarding the financial cost , there are still things to be discussed , but there is one principle that I can state today , Mr President .
The new Financial Forecast must include a revision clause specifying that the Financial Forecast , too , must be revised on the accession of new Member States .
And this is not just a matter of broadening the financial framework beyond 1.27 % of the gross national product - it is a matter of using it up completely and redistributing expenditure within the framework .
It is also a matter of correcting the inpayment mechanism .
This correction should not benefit the so-called wealthier ' net payers ' at the expense of the poorer ' net recipients ' but will be designed to ensure greater fairness in future between the wealthier Member States , the net payers .
( Applause ) If enlargement cannot be zero-rated financially , the same is true politically .
President Santer has announced the continuing reform of the agricultural policy .
Here again , I do not wish to go into details .
We can all see the need for this .
Of course the burden of enlargement cannot be borne by the farmers alone .
But anyone who simply wants to enforce the present system on eastern Europe will make enlargement impossible to pay for .
We are prepared to reform the Structural Funds .
I welcome the basic outline and the plans President Santer has put forward .
It is nonsense - politically , economically and socially - if every second EU citizen lives in an EU development area .
We shall not be able to sustain that in the future , nor should we want to , because it is not a sensible development policy for the European Union .
Regarding the institutional costs , the Amsterdam summit has not made the European Union capable of enlargement .
As it stands , the European Union is incapable of meeting the challenges it will encounter in the new millennium .
As far as institutional reforms are concerned , it will not be enough to tack on a few bits and pieces here - weighting the votes in the Council of Ministers , for example - or do a little pruning there - in the number of Commissioners , for example .
Nor will it be enough to refer to the very obscure additional protocol to the Amsterdam Treaty , the interpretation of which will provide employment for lawyers for generations to come .
Never mind that .
In all seriousness , enlargement - which means the fate of Europe - is not going to depend on whether there are fifteen or sixteen or twenty or twenty-two Commissioners , or on whether country X or country Y has ten or twelve votes in the Council !
That is just absurd , that cannot be the purpose of the European Union .
( Applause ) The capability for enlargement depends on our finally making all this Union 's decisions majority decisions in the Council .
And it depends on whether we can succeed in striking a new balance between the necessary flexibility in a larger Union and the necessary greater solidity in an expanded European Union .
This balance must be found .
We must not become bogged down in trivial arguments about the number of Commissioners or the weighting of votes .
We want and need a fundamental reform .
A fundamental reform , not just an adjustment to this or that institution !
I am really very grateful to President Santer for making this clear .
We need this fundamental reform before the first new Member State joins us , not after one has already joined .
( Applause ) And another point : this cannot be achieved by an Intergovernmental Conference , burning the midnight oil to cobble together a wild , incoherent treaty of bits and pieces .
( Applause ) A treaty of bits and pieces in which no one can actually tell which are the bits and which are the pieces .
( Laughter ) Not all governments have grasped the fact that the coming enlargement - never mind whether there are five or six or eleven new Member States - is going to happen . Not all governments have grasped the fact that this enlargement that confronts us now is not comparable with any past enlargement - not that of 1973 , not that of 1985-86 , not that of 1995 .
This enlargement , one way or another , will fundamentally change the Union .
It will be a different Union after it has absorbed eastern European states .
And not all the governments in the present Union have grasped the connection between enlargement and reform .
To enlarge the Union and carry on as before is not an option .
Without reform , an enlarged Union will very rapidly degenerate into nothing more than a free trade area .
That is not our objective .
Let us be absolutely clear about this : if the price of enlargement is the degeneration of the Union into a mere free trade area , then that price must not be paid .
( Applause ) That price would be too high , not just for the Member States that belong to the European Union already but also for the states of eastern and central Europe .
Because they want to join a Union that works , a Union that is capable of doing the job it has to do , a Union that is capable of granting them aid and solidarity - not a Union that is in the process of disintegration .
There are some governments that are saying yes , a massive yes , to enlargement but no to the reform of the Union .
They want nothing more than for this Union to break down into a free trade area .
And there are other governments that are saying no to reform as a way of preventing enlargement - they exist too .
Let us beware of this trap .
Anyone who rejects enlargement in order to extort reform will prevent enlargement and then get no reform either .
That is the problem that will face us during the next few years .
The Commission proposes that negotiations should begin with 6 states , 5 + 1 .
I would like to emphasize what Commissioner van den Broek said about Cyprus - that this can or must be used as a catalyst to find a solution to the Cyprus problem .
We must be careful , too , that Cyprus does not become the hostage of a reluctant negotiator .
( Applause ) For the remaining four states , and others , special arrangements are to be made by this European conference .
Well and good .
We shall see what it can do .
There is another plan , too : that we begin the negotiations with all the candidates jointly , but of course do not end with all of them jointly .
Be that as it may , we must always be careful to differentiate without marginalizing .
We will need to examine in future months whether the concept of the European conference is a suitable way of guaranteeing this .
This conference must not be a mere discussion forum - it must be able to conclude agreements , at least within the second and third pillars .
( Applause ) Incidentally , perhaps I may be permitted a personal comment : I proposed a similar plan in a strategy report presented to this House as far back as early 1993 .
I said the same thing again at the European summit in Essen .
There was not response at the time .
I am glad that the Commission has now taken it up .
Whether there are six new Member States or more , one thing is clear : for us - and I speak here for the Socialist Group - there is no connection with the enlargement of NATO .
We are not confining ourselves to the NATO three .
No state must be excluded from the negotiations because it is not present in Madrid , nor will any state have to attend our round of negotiations just because it has first been refused NATO membership in Madrid .
Membership of the European Union is not a consolation prize for rejection by NATO - it is a prize in itself , and must be treated as such .
( Applause ) So we start with the six - all right , as I said , we will see whether that is the sensible thing to do .
But if anyone wants something different from what the Council proposes , he must tell us how we can handle it and how we are going to pay for it .
Incidentally , that also applies - anticipating the objection - to the Heads of State and Government in December if they want something different .
They too will have to tell us how we are to handle it and how we are to pay for it .
Whatever happens , it will be a hard road for us all : a hard road for the peoples and states of eastern Europe , because they are now going to have to make massive efforts to achieve what we ask of them , but a hard road for us too .
Because we too , the European Union , have to become capable of enlargement .
You , the Commission , have already made your contribution today .
I congratulate you .
The Member States have not yet made their contribution .
We , the European Parliament , will be making our contribution in the months ahead , between now and the Luxembourg summit , and afterwards .
The issue is nothing less than the future of Europe !
( Loud applause )
Mr Alavanos would like to speak on a point of order .
Mr. President , I ask that the debate on Agenda 2000 should be interrupted pursuant to Rules 102 and 103 of the Rules of Procedure .
A short while ago , like many other Members , I went to collect the documents from the distribution point and found that they were only available in French , English and German .
Rule 103 of the Rules of Procedure on the distribution of documents states that the documents on which Parliament 's debates and decisions are based must be printed and distributed to the Members , and Rule 102 ( 1 ) states that the European Parliament 's documents must be prepared in the official languages .
I think it is a great mistake that the Commission , when talking about the Union 's future , has published them in only three languages .
It would be a great mistake for Parliament to accept that .
I believe that you too , coming from Portugal as you do , will wish to respect the Rules and your own language , and that we should continue the debate only when the documents are available in all the European Union 's languages .
It is not right that Members should only be able to take part in this debate if they have passed their Proficiency or if they know French or German .
Thank you very much .
Mr Alavanos , please read Parliament 's Rules of Procedure - Rule 103 states that all documents have to be distributed to Members and Rule 102 states that all Parliament documents have to be available in all the official languages .
This document is not a Parliament document and therefore there is no reason to adjourn the debate .
Mr President , President Santer , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin with a word of acknowledgement and congratulation to the Commission , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , for preparing and presenting to us today its Agenda 2000 for a stronger and larger Union .
This is an encouraging signal - encouraging , too , for co-operation between the European Commission and the European Parliament .
But , President Santer , we expect you to ensure that important debates in the future are not released in advance by press spokesmen ; important political issues should always first be presented in the European Parliament , representing as it does 370 million citizens .
If anyone , ten years ago , had been bold enough to predict that the European Commission , in the person of its president Jacques Santer , would propose to the European Parliament on 16 July 1997 that negotiations on European Union membership should begin with Estonia , Poland , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Slovenia and Cyprus , he would have been dismissed as a fantasist .
But our generation has witnessed a dramatic transformation of this continent in the years 1989-90 and since , a transformation probably unmatched in any previous period of history .
Let us never forget that it was the people of the central and eastern European states who made that transformation possible .
( Applause ) It was the people of central and eastern Europe upon whom communist dictatorship was enforced after 1945 .
It was the people of central and eastern Europe who always held fast to the idea of freedom and human rights , and to the desire to shape their own lives and their own social order .
For that , we in the west of Europe owe great respect , profound recognition and sincere thanks to the people of central and eastern Europe .
Those people now have the right to safeguard the free and democratic way of life they have won by their peaceful revolution .
They do not want to be deceived and abused as they were before .
We in the European Union have a duty now to help the people of central and eastern Europe to safeguard their own freedom .
The European Union is linked by European agreements to Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania and Poland , to the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Hungary , Slovenia , Bulgaria and Romania .
Although these states are not yet Members of the European Union , they are all members of the European family .
We have a political and moral obligation to enable these countries to join the European Union , offering them a structured procedure and a predictable time frame ; and an obligation to offer them a European Union with democratic institutions , a European Union which will be the sheet anchor of the European continent in the 21st century , a European Union which can regulate its internal and external affairs on a unified , effective , resolute and convincing basis .
In the preparations for access to the European Union - as President Santer and Commissioner van den Broek have both said - no country must be discriminated against .
When the Commission proposes that accession negotiations should begin with the six states - five plus one , in other words - it must be made clear that the other five states that are willing to join are not being excluded .
There must be no clear-cut dividing line between ins and outs .
That was what the Commission said , and we were glad to hear it .
But we need to make it clear that , within the framework of the accession strategy and on the basis of the annual reports to be drawn up by the Commission , any country with which the European Union has concluded a European agreement can , by a flexible process , move forward to become a country with which accession negotiations can take place .
Only if we express that view clearly and repeatedly will we encourage the populations of all the central and eastern European states with which we have concluded agreements to continue their resolute efforts to complete the laborious but necessary process of reform .
As yet , we do not have answers to all the questions arising from the enlargement of the European Union .
But there are a few answers we can give .
In regional policy - I say this for the benefit of Mrs Wulf-Mathies - we must concentrate the financial resources on the areas that need them most .
Commissioner Fischler has repeatedly stressed that the agricultural policy is in need of further reform .
The President of the Commission has referred to enormous sums : DM 275 billion .
If we are to use that money , which we in the Group of the European People 's Party support , then we must also make sure that it is spent sensibly and that the expenditure is subject to sensible monitoring .
Frequent reference has been made to the Marshall Plan .
The success of the Marshall Plan was based on the fact that it was a low-interest loan that stimulated the initiative of those receiving it .
It is true that the European Union 's programmes are being opened up to the accession candidates , to enable them to prepare for accession .
Would it not also be sensible to link those candidates to the European Union before their accession by involving them in the work of the European Union - for example , as observers in the European Parliament ?
The Commission proposes that most of the issues relating to accession should be discussed bilaterally with the applicant countries .
On the other hand , a European conference is planned for the Common Foreign and Security Policy , and for policy on internal affairs and justice , involving a meeting of heads of State and Government once a year .
We cannot help wondering whether it might not be more sensible for this European conference to be extended to include other matters , at ministerial level .
I emphatically support what Mr Hänsch said about this : that those countries with which accession negotiations are not yet taking place should also have a seat at the table within a multilateral framework , because we know that this is of great political and psychological importance for the states of central and eastern Europe .
What part will Turkey be playing ?
We do need answers here !
Above all , we must move forward to European monetary union punctually on 1 January 1999 , because this will bring the European Union new prospects , hope and strength for the future .
As we approach the year 2000 , Europe is faced by important challenges .
We , the Group of the European People 's Party , have always been on the side of those who want to reform the European Union .
So we welcome the Commission 's undertaking to the Member States to convene an Intergovernmental Conference immediately after the year 2000 , whose primary purpose will be to contribute to the establishment of majority voting as the basic decision tool in the Council of the European Union .
We , the Group of the European People 's Party , stand for a united , peaceful and democratic Europe in the 21st century .
We shall achieve that aim if we work with courage and resolution , but also with patience and commitment , for the future of this ancient but constantly self-renewing continent of Europe .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to issue an official protest about the way that this debate is being held .
Whereas Agenda 2000 is the European Union 's action programme whose aim is none other than achieving the success of Europe 's great ambition in the next ten years , i.e. its political unification , we are spending barely half a day on it , i.e. as long as for the so-called emergency debate , more than half of whose items only indirectly concern Europe .
This morning we wasted half an hour protesting about that emergency debate which cut down the time we had left for this debate .
We are being asked to react on the hoof to a document that weighs several kilos and of which we have only had an oral summary .
I demand , on behalf of my Group , that we spend an exceptional session of at least two days , before the end of this year , if we can find room in our calendar , on this important debate , once the political groups and competent committees have examined in detail the Commission 's proposals .
At the same time , we should carry out all the necessary hearings , especially of the farming organisations , which are the groups most concerned by the CAP reform .
I shall limit my contribution today to reacting to an eminently political question , on which the European Parliament will have to give its opinion by the end of the year , i.e. the choice of applicant countries with which negotiations are due to be opened with a view to their future accession .
It had been explicitly accepted that negotiations would be started at the same time with all the candidate countries , which obviously did not prejudge the final closure date or the outcome of those negotiations .
The Commission is now proposing starting negotiations initially with only six out of the eleven candidates .
For my part , I consider that this choice is arbitrary , clumsy and provocative .
It is arbitrary because it judges a priori the efforts likely to be made by the candidate countries only on an assessment of their current performances , over which opinions differ any way .
A dangerous choice because it risks destabilizing governments of countries that have been rejected , subject to a catch-up session of indeterminate duration .
Imagine the situation of the Slovak Government , whatever it is , squeezed between the Czech Republic and Hungary , which have been accepted for the first round .
Imagine the situation of the Romanian Government which has already undergone the humiliation of being refused immediate entry into NATO , and the Bulgarian Government , again pushed aside , whereas recent elections have given both these governments an undeniable democratic legitimacy .
If we wanted to give the impression that the European Union is a club for the rich , inaccessible to the poor , then we have gone the right way about it .
Have we learned the lessons of the failure of Amsterdam , in terms of institutional reform , by arbitrarily limiting to twenty - in the secret hope that one of the six selected will give up along the way - the number of future members of the Union so that we can continue to function without having to reform the institutions ?
A dangerous and provocative choice , in terms of Russia , that of rejecting Slovakia 's candidacy while continuing to enjoy good relations with that country while accepting Estonia 's , with the huge problem that that poses to the existence in that country of a considerable Russian-speaking minority which is not integrated and deprived of any civil rights .
Agenda 2000 is a remarkable work of compiling statistical data and accounts , but it lacks any political dimension .
All of my colleagues in the UPE Group , like myself , will never resign ourselves to abandoning our friends in Slovakia , Romania , Bulgaria , Lithuania and Latvia .
Mr President , Agenda 2000 is being presented just a few weeks after the disappointing outcome of the Amsterdam European Council , which was extremely timid in its reform of the Maastricht Treaty and was reluctant to debate the employment issue .
This is not the best introduction to tackling issues of such significance for the Union 's future , such as its enlargement towards Eastern Europe and Cyprus or the forthcoming financial developments .
It would appear that we are addressing such issues in somewhat of a vacuum .
What is important is not the fact that , in Amsterdam , there was no final decision on the composition of one institution or another ; if relevant , this is the least of our concerns .
What is really a cause for anxiety is that the virtual absence of progress in terms of political union in Amsterdam might actually lead to enlargement transforming the Community into nothing more than a free-trade zone although - let 's not forget - one with a brand-new single currency and 20 million unemployed .
Perhaps this is what some governments would like , but not the majority in this House nor the majority of citizens .
It would quite simply be unacceptable .
It is , therefore , precisely in order to prevent this happening that we continue to stress the strengthening of relations in step with enlargement .
Consequently , we are calling for the convening of another Intergovernmental Conference , prior to the accession of new members , with a view to substantial progress in terms of political union ; an Intergovernmental Conference which is new and different both in form and in substance .
We are also calling for active employment policies to prevent enlargement and unemployment becoming convergent and explosive phenomena in the course of time and in our ' enlarged space ' .
We accept enlargement in political terms , via a process based on negotiation and one which makes steady progress , which guarantees the maintenance and development of policies and instruments such as the CAP and the Structural and Cohesion Funds ; a process which does not give rise to unacceptable social and productive costs for current and future members , with whom individual negotiations should be held , promoting the development of democratic and social-solidarity systems and without the order in which discussions begin automatically signifying preferential treatment in terms of the early accession of either individual countries or groups of countries .
Any response to the historic challenge of enlargement of the European Union towards Eastern Europe and Cyprus requires the Union to look closely at and to increase its own capacity to respond to citizens ' everyday problems .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after Amsterdam the most common criticism was that the Union had failed to carry out the reforms that were needed in order to be able to handle enlargement responsibly .
The full implications of this fundamental flaw are now obvious , and can no longer be brushed under the carpet .
The real question now , politically speaking , is of course whether the countries of Eastern Europe and Cyprus are the ones who are going to have to pay for the inability of the Fifteen to reform in time .
I think the answer is no .
As work continues on enlargement , the political momentum exists to carry out the necessary institutional reforms , but these will not happen automatically , they are something else that will have to be worked on .
I should have liked to hear more from the Commission on this than simply a declaration of faith : I wish to know what specific political steps are being taken to ensure that the institutions will be able to handle the challenge that is facing us .
We in the Green Group wish to give ourselves time to study in detail the impressive document that we have been given , and there are already a number of vital questions we would like to ask .
First of all , there is the fact that only a few countries have been selected to start negotiations .
We know that the Commission for a long time considered the option of involving them all at the start , and I would like to know what the reasons were for deciding against this , since it is clear that there are political disadvantages involved here , such as the fact that the new borders already being established within the existing Europe will have a NATO border , an EU border , and perhaps even a Schengen border superimposed on them .
The effect of this is hardly likely to be positive .
Secondly , there is the feeling of some countries that they are second-class citizens and will not be allowed to take part , in Turkey 's case because it is an Islamic country .
All this indicates , in our opinion , that the Commission has not been careful enough in what it has been saying about enlargement and about the terms that are being applied .
Are there not certain questions we should ask ourselves here ?
I am pleased to hear that there will be serious reforms to the agricultural policy , but everything will depend on whether they are applied consistently , because simply imposing our present agricultural policy in the new Member States would mean the destruction of their agricultural structures , mass unemployment , and so on .
The same applies to our environmental policy , which has some positive aspects , but the Eastern European countries have certain ideas that we too could exploit , so the reforms could become an opportunity to make basic changes which will benefit us as well .
So it is not a one-way process in which they have to adapt to us : we must also take advantage of their strong points in order to make progress together .
Finally , there is the question of financing .
In considering enlargement , we must also be prepared to provide adequate funding to pay for it .
In my view , the figure announced is too low , and we must certainly not allow ourselves to create a situation where we simply redistribute poverty by taking money from the south and giving it to the east .
We must ensure that our main aims at least are achieved , because it has happened all too often that we have set ourselves major objectives , only to come unstuck on fairly minor issues .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , today 's debate refers to various questions .
I shall concentrate on that of enlargement which is our outlook and also for us a political obligation .
I should like to react at once to two points .
The first concerns the list of eligible countries .
Applying the criteria already defined in Copenhagen in 1993 , the Commission has selected five candidates , plus Cyprus , out of eleven countries that had applied .
At first sight , the Commission has done the technical work asked of it but in doing so , its analyses , its choices and its presentation of them run the risk of making a serious , political error .
We have reneged on a vital promise , to put all the candidates at the same starting line .
Today a selection has been made , between the good countries and the others .
How many countries are likely to be frustrated and bewildered , without mentioning the risks of destabilization coming after the disappointments linked to the enlargement of NATO !
This is not only regrettable but this approach also risks being dangerous unless the marshall Plan for the countries of central and eastern Europe , as you called it , Mr Santer , for all candidates without distinction , does not soothe the differences resulting from the unwise choice to select only six countries .
We do not have to be meek and mild with these countries and conceal the difficulties that they need to overcome and that we also need to overcome .
But there is a difference between being clear and giving the impression of unfairness .
I am happy to agree over the second point .
Supporting the idea of another IGC to carry out the reforms needed for any enlargement , in particular with regard to majority voting on the Council means that the Commission is taking up an idea that we mooted in the wake of the Amsterdam Summit .
I hope that that idea will soon be confirmed .
I shall leave it to my colleagues in my Group to develop our comments on the conditions and budgetary consequences of enlargement .
There is a lot to be said about that .
Mr President , the accession of the countries of central and eastern Europe to the European Union is not the benefit that Brussels circles claim , in the name of their ideology , without taking into consideration the true interest of the peoples concerned .
Integration , for the countries of central Europe , should be assessed from the geopolitical and economic viewpoints alike .
Does this integration offer the chance of greater security or does it open the way to disappearance in a whole controlled by others and over which these countries would exert very little influence ?
Why is there such a hurry to open negotiations with these countries ?
Is not the hidden aim to cover up the failure of the Amsterdam Conference and to hold another IGC , under the cover of enlargement ?
After all , everyone knows about the traditional directions of German expansionism .
Everyone knows how stubbornly determined Chancellor Kohl , the statesman , is to prepare the future .
Integration into the European Union would mean that those States could no longer stand in the way of the buy-up of local firms by companies operating from other European Union States .
Can the fragile , fledgling economies of the countries of central Europe withstand the shock of opened borders , when their competitive edge would be eroded ?
It is a pipedream to think that a few structural funds could keep down unemployment or immigration .
What are the figures mentioned earlier compared with the huge needs , when we know the huge amounts spent by Germany to help former east Germany ?
Integration into the Maastricht Europe really means that the countries of central Europe are marching towards social regression and protectorate .
All of the political forces present in this House seem to be agreed that Europe should not just develop into a purely commercial entity . However , not all of the political forces agree that the European Union ought not to be turned into a vast free trade zone by enlarging to bring in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
We are among those who fear this happening : if it does , then even the acquis communautaire will gradually be eroded , and the Union would then lose all real political significance .
That is why we have for some years been calling for enlargement to be preceded by the proper definition of political Union .
We are therefore calling for there to be negotiations with the applicant countries only after we have established how the enlarged Union will operate at an institutional level .
Indeed , we want at last to be informed of how the Europe of the Fifteen is operating , since it has yet to establish both the second and the third pillar and is not therefore really a political Union .
We want to know when we are going to get serious discussions about the institutional base , and whether the idea of a federal European State has been finally shelved , leaving Europe is destined to be merely a colony of the wealthier nations .
The Alleanza Nazionale wants to know how there can be any question , after the loss of Malta , following hard negotiations , of now enlarging in a very short time to bring in , for example , Poland , the Czech Republic and Hungary , while the statements of the French president are casting doubts on actually achieving Monetary Union within the pre-set deadlines .
That same Monetary Union that - let us be clear - has to coincide with the achievement of political union . We want to know what is going to be done for the 20 million unemployed and the more than 20 million poor people currently living in the Union , before we start worrying about the unemployment and poverty in new countries which ought to share our common European destiny .
We absolutely reject the practice that has become established in this House whereby bulky documents are debated that are not available in our national languages ; we are elected Members whose prime responsibility is to the citizens of the European Union rather than the European interests of some State or multinational .
Enlargement would increase the population of the EU by more than a third , bringing it to 500 m as compared with the current 370 m .
GDP , in contrast , would rise by only some 5 % , so that we would see a worsening of the gap between the rich and the poor countries , the big and the small countries , the countries of the North and the countries of the South .
Nor should we forget the Mediterranean aspect of the Union , the investment in the fruit and vegetable sector which will have to compete with the substantial need for economic aid of large countries dependent on agriculture .
Spending on the common agricultural policy , which accounts for more than half of the EU budget , would therefore increase dramatically as the applicant countries would become net beneficiaries .
We reject enlargement before political Union has been established among the Fifteen .
We are suggesting association agreements which would , within a reasonable time-frame , bring us all together to the kind of enlargement that we can live with and create a Europe that does not lack credibility .
Mr President , I absolutely agree with what my co-chairman , Mr Pasty , said a few moments ago , and I want to be just as firm in what I have to say about the future reform of the Structural Funds and the proposals today put forward by the Commission .
Given the future challenges the Union will have to meet , there is no doubt that the Structural Funds will have to be reformed after 1999 ; the challenges we have set ourselves will be many and demanding in political , economic and social terms .
Against a background of continuing change , of the kind Europe is experiencing as it prepares for future enlargement , the principle of economic and social cohesion becomes still more important and a matter of moment .
Having established that the principle of cohesion remains one of the fundamental principles underlying the construction of Europe , I certainly welcome the proposals from the Commission designed to simplify administrative , financial and supervisory procedures , because they will certainly facilitate access to funding , speed up the procedural element and , I hope , provide a further incentive to those countries that are still lagging behind .
I am similarly receptive to the proposals on geographical concentration and limiting subject-areas .
But , as a member of the Committee on Regional Policy and a Member of Parliament for an Objective 1 region , I have to reiterate my concerns and warn both the Commission and honourable Members of the risks involved in projects that are at once very ambitious and costly for the Union .
Because of the financial restrictions , the percentage of funding allocated to the Funds cannot be increased and will therefore remain equal to 0.46 % of the Union 's GNP , in line with the decisions taken at Edinburgh .
Given future enlargement , that funding will in fact be lower in percentage terms for every Member State , while the principle of concentration , although it does have procedural benefits , leaves me rather confused in relation to the geographical aspect and the limiting of subject-areas .
Indeed , cutting the number of objectives from six to three , with only two of those being regional , and completely reducing the number of zones currently eligible , seems to me to be difficult in practice , as it is not clear to me how this is to be done .
I actually believe this will inevitably result in excessive simplification where there are real territorial , developmental , economic and social differences that require specific measures .
Let me end by asking the Commission to put to the House more specific proposals for reform , broken down as necessary .
I meantime undertake to study during the holidays all the material that has been provided and reserve the right to return to this issue with a wealth of detail .
Mr President , it is problematical to classify countries in advance depending on whether they are in or soon will be in .
It is a bad pedagogical approach and it is bad politics , if it means that we must now apply more resources to certain countries and fewer resources to others , which perhaps have the greatest need and perhaps mean a great deal to peace and security in the Europe of the future .
It is immensely important that Estonia has been included , but in a few years Latvia could also be in the same favourable situation .
Thus is Latvia relegated in advance to the next round , or will it be possible under certain conditions for Latvia to be included in the first round ?
I would very much like to have an answer to that from the Commissioner .
And I would ask him to confirm to Parliament and the applicant countries that this grouping is only a forecast which does not exclude changes , if some countries develop rapidly , and that the final aim is that all the countries should be helped on their way in and that we should avoid new divisions .
Mr President , you only need to take a cursory glance at the budgetary developments in recent years , the restrictive tendencies resulting therefrom and certain rules that have been imposed , to be able to predict what has now been formally announced by the Member States in terms of finances .
The central question for us is that the ceiling on own-resources decided in Edinburgh will be maintained beyond 1999 and will have to meet the aims set not only for the fifteen present Member States but also for the preaccession and first years of an enlarged Union , and it is certain that those costs will be high .
We have no special objections in principle to enlargement .
Obviously , we cannot accept it in these conditions .
Inevitably it would mean substantial cuts in objectives and priorities and put at risk current imperatives .
One example is that of Cohesion , inscribed in the Treaty as a fundamental pillar of the Union but now put on the back burner , along with proposals now made for the Structural and Cohesion Funds .
As for the latter , the current beneficiaries will see their access considerably reduced .
It is certain that the average annual budgetary amounts for the new period , for the fifteen Member States , will be cut back .
That is the reality .
It seems that the current ' cohesion countries ' will not only cease to be beneficiaries , but they will even be condemned to pay for the accession as a result of their virtual success .
Who can seriously agree with that ? !
My parting question is : ' What has happened to the means for our ambitions ? ' .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , while the candidates for accession are being given more and more homework to do , the European Union has not yet succeeded in finishing its own .
The urgent need for ecologically and socially sustainable development has been disregarded .
The reforms , especially the reforms of the agricultural and economic policies , do not go far enough .
Confrontation in Europe has been eliminated , because we have conducted a tireless struggle in the east to ensure that democracy and codetermination become a reality throughout Europe .
It is a historic challenge , too , that now calls upon us to develop a democratic Europe , a Europe with no dividing lines .
Which is why I once again ask the Commission why it has shelved the option of involving all candidates in the accession talks .
Is this not a form of reclassification , separating those that are in from those that are out ?
Are these the reasons why Parliament 's call for the abolition of compulsory visas between Bulgaria and Romania has still not been heeded ?
Especially where co-operation between the Baltic States is concerned , the singling out of one country would have disastrous consequences , because that co-operation combines very close economic ties with a zone of freedom of movement .
Possibly , any such strategy may even create new problems for these young governments when they attempt to justify to their peoples the heavy burden imposed on social equilibrium by the process of harmonization .
So what we need for enlargement is an efficient , institutional and unified framework structure for all candidates , and not just for foreign , internal and legal policy .
None of the associated states must have the impression of being excluded .
The economic co-operation between the EU and the accession candidates is still lacking in economic integration based on equal rights .
The EU still denies access to a good many products .
A crucial aspect of balanced development is participation in the wide range of measures to support the structural policy .
Integration in the EU must not be restricted to a political elite - great importance must be attached to the full involvement of every citizen .
From this angle , we are gravely concerned by the new statement of priorities in the PHARE programme .
Now we have the new , undemocratic model of immigration policy , which violates human rights , and the Schengen protocol being incorporated into the Treaty and then imposed on the candidates for accession .
They will thus serve as a buffer for the European heartland .
The Greens regard it as irresponsible for the EU to export its present internal and legal policies to the countries of central and eastern Europe , too .
The democratic rights of control held by Parliament and the Court of Justice should be the first basis of the Treaty .
For these young democracies , their experience of independent justice and a democratically accountable police force has been relatively short , yet they attach great importance to it .
Mr President of the Commission , you mentioned this morning the speech you made on 17 January , on the occasion of your investiture , and I too venture to recall that day because we told you that we expected from you the vision of a better Europe , a Europe for the millennium .
It seems to me that that vision was somewhat lacking in Agenda 2000 .
Admittedly , the Commission has a difficult task : it is being asked to undertake enlargement and reform and to move towards the year 2000 maintaining the same level of resources as fixed at Edinburgh , which may not exceed 1.27 % of gross national product .
It is certainly no easy matter and very questionable to bring in countries such as Slovenia which , in my view , did not deserve to be included , while leaving out others .
The Agenda we shall be discussing has just one merit : that of proposing the Intergovernmental Conference by 2000 .
The House will support you on that because it is the only serious request we can now put to the Council .
Mr President , I listened this morning with great interest to President Santer and to Mr Van Den Broek when they talked about giving ourselves a road map for the future .
I have to say to you that the road you outlined to us this morning is very badly constructed , has too many sharp bends and shows no ultimate destination .
We must have a long period of negotiation so we can extend the reforms required within the present fifteen Member States to meet the challenge of enlargement .
The proposals for the reform of the common agricultural policy and structural funds are far-reaching and will be extremely painful to many regions of the present European Union .
We must be careful during the enlargement process not to isolate regions presently in the Union .
I would caution careful negotiation , always being mindful of the delicate balance which presently exists and which we must maintain .
I understand why we must move towards enlargement .
I also understand very well indeed why these countries want to join the European Union .
But I also understand the disappointment this morning in those other countries which have not been named .
I urge the President of the Commission and the other negotiators to take on board this tremendous challenge and I wish them well .
I caution them to move forward in a sure and careful way .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , fellow Members , we have just heard the Commmission 's presentation of the so-called Agenda 2000 which , it is claimed , together with the assessment of each application for membership of the Union , is a response to the petitions formulated by the Madrid European Council .
This package cannot be assessed in a simplistic manner - the diverse elements it comprises must be analysed separately .
We can unreservedly support the proposals which refer to guaranteeing the effectiveness of reasonable enlargement of the Union , organized over the briefest possible of time periods .
I , as a Spaniard - and one with a good memory who represents a country which for many years was knocking at the door of the Community - can perfectly understand the legitimate aspirations of each and every one of the candidate countries .
However , Mr President , we are concerned at the fact that , when such a politically ambitious and justified enlargement package is presented , sufficient and balanced financial provisions for funding it are not established .
When earlier Commissions presented the so-called ' Delors I and II packages ' , in parallel with the ambitious objectives which were outlined , the Community was given the necessary resources to realize its legitimate ambitions .
As the Commission acknowledges in its communication , we are now facing the most significant enlargement process in the Community 's history - from any viewpoint , be this geostrategic , political , economic or social .
What we have here are more than 105 million inhabitants , over 1 million square kilometres in area , countries which do not achieve even a third of the average income in terms of Community per capita GDP and countries whose dependence on agriculture for employment is 26 % as compared with an average 5 % in the Union .
And an attempt will be made to take up this important challenge , at the same time as continuing the economic and social cohesion policy and launching the new employment policy outlined in Amsterdam and guaranteeing continuity of the remaining Community policies without any increase in the Community budget and without modifying its income structure .
They would have us believe that all this can be financed without increasing the Community budget ceiling above 1.27 % - which applies currently - and , in addition , by establishing payment appropriations which are reduced , even for 1999 , down from the 1.25 % provided for in the table we have been given to the 1.22 % provided for in 2006 .
Enlargement is going ahead and payment appropriations are being reduced .
If this approach is adopted , Mr President , some Community policies , within the Europe of the Fifteen , will undoubtedly have to be cut back in relative terms .
So what is this policy ?
None other than the cohesion policy .
In actual fact , according to the proposal presented , the pre-accession strategy will be financed with ecu 500 million under heading 1 and ecu 1000 million under heading 2 , amounts which will be raised to ecu 45 , 000 million under heading 2 when the initial wave of accessions takes place from 2002 up to 2006 .
Incidentally , nowhere in the communication are we told how this magic figure of ecu 45 , 000 million to cover enlargement has been calculated .
Why 45 , 000 and not 90 , 000 or 35 , 000 ?
Particularly given that enlargement will take place in stages and not all countries will become members at the same time .
In addition , a ceiling of 0.46 % of the Community GDP continues to be set on the total amount channelled towards regional policy , which , in relative terms , means a freeze on growth under this heading at 1999 levels .
This will have retrogressive consequences because a ceiling is being set on the growth of resources available for that policy which has the closest connection with the objective of economic and social cohesion - given that the number of applicant countries and regions competing for total funds whose growth has been frozen is on the increase - and because the greater part of aid under the pre-accession financing strategy is covered by heading 2 of the financial forecasts .
And this retrogressive step is being concealed under a cloak of progressiveness -indeed , we are told that Objective No 1 is setting aside approximately two thirds of total resources and also that geographical concentration will be greater .
However , it should be remembered that , even under current forecasts , Objective 1 even now accounts for two thirds of total funds and the meaning of the word ' approximately ' would have to be clarified because in no way should the percentage of Objective 1 be less than it is now .
We should also consider the fact that the most prosperous regions will not be making a greater contribution to the enlargement effort owing to the freezing of the Community budget , in terms of income , and owing to the provision for reducing payment appropriations from 1.25 % to 1.22 % throughout the new financial forecasts .
It is my feeling that the Commission 's position is in conflict with Article 3 F of the Treaty on European Union , which confirms the principle of sufficiency of means and , in addition , with the political positions which this House upheld at the time of the Oostlander , Bourlanges-Martin and Christodoulou reports of 30 November 1994 , 17 May 1995 and 12 December 1996 , respectively , all of which stated that enlargement should not compromise the solidarity of the Fifteen and that , as appropriate , the Community resources available to finance it should be increased .
It will be difficult to explain to many national parliaments , particularly in the cohesion countries , how this enlargement process is going to be financed .
However , despite these general criticisms , the Commission 's proposals affecting economic and social cohesion policy do contain some very positive elements and the Commission is therefore to be congratulated , particularly the responsible Commissioner , Mrs Wulf-Mathies , who has always been at the disposal of Parliament 's Committee on Regional Policy throughout this reform process . I would like to offer her my very special thanks for this .
These positive elements are the maintenance , in its current form , of the Cohesion Fund , which , we feel , enables the less privileged Member States to implement a development policy throughout their national territory ; the intelligent way in which the objectives of the Structural Funds have been simplified - although transparent , simple and absolutely objective criteria governing eligibility of the zones will be required - and the simplification of management procedures which was widely requested by both social agents and by regional authorities .
I would like to end by thanking the Commission for its endeavours and for the work which the drafting of this proposal has undoubtedly required , and I trust that this House will , in the months to come , be capable of improving those aspects of this proposal to which we cannot give our full support , because the challenge we are facing is of unprecedented political significance and will require the best efforts of everyone here .
Mr President , the burden of funding the enlargement of the Union to the east should be shared by the existing Member States in a just and equitable manner .
The proposal to effectively freeze the size of the European Union budget to 1.27 % of the European GDP means that there will have to be a cut in real terms in the size of the structural funds package available to encourage economic growth in the less developed regions of the present 15 Member States .
This would be a retrograde step which risks undermining the positive results now being achieved by the present programme of structural fund aid in some parts of the Union , such as Ireland , for example .
The structural funds should be maintained at their present size for the 15 Member States until the objective of creating a level playing field throughout the Union has been achieved .
However , there is a need to review the criteria for qualifying for this aid .
At present , the arbitrary cut-off point of 75 % of GDP does not take account of important factors such as unemployment and peripherality .
Unemployment levels should be used to determine eligibility for structural fund aid .
Equally important , transport and communications costs can play a huge part in determining whether or not an industry is competitive .
Some account needs to be taken of peripherality in order to ensure that industry will continue to create jobs in peripheral regions once the single currency zone has been created .
The Union must continue to take structural measures to encourage balanced development around the Union and to avoid a drift to the centre by mobile investment .
Before proposing any changes in the regions which qualify for the different rates of structural assistance , the Commission should also undertake an assessment of levels of economic growth within the region .
It would surely be wrong if an area which still meets the 75 % threshold failed to qualify for aid just because it is grouped together by the Commission with the most prosperous neighbouring area .
For example , the strong economic growth in the east coast region of my country is not necessarily reflected throughout all parts of the country , and the existence of uneven growth rates within a country and a region should be taken into account by the Commission .
Agriculture is a vitally important sector of the Irish economy and the protection of income levels of Ireland 's family farmers is central to our rural development aspirations .
While the agricultural sector needs to be competitive and must change to take account of varying circumstances such as EU enlargement and world trading conditions , it is important to adequately compensate farmers for the price reductions this will entail .
The Commission 's proposals regarding direct payments to farmers are an essential element of the overall package .
Farmers must have guarantees of direct income supports at adequate levels over the medium to long term if they are to be in a position to plan for the future .
Increased production should only be contemplated in those sectors where a ready market can be found for the produce , and in this regard agriculture must prepare itself to meet the challenges of the world marketplace .
The best method of preparing the sector is to put in place a stable , long-term support system for our family farms .
Finally , I strongly support the call by Mr Pasty for a decent and fair amount of time to discuss these extremely important proposals that have been put forward by President Santer on behalf of the Commission .
To run through this as if all hell will fall on us unless we finish by 12 noon does not do justice to the statement that has been made by President Santer .
It is crazy , and he deserves far better .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposal concerning enlargement of the Union is , in my opinion , a success .
It can be implemented without altering the institutions .
Estonia and Poland are included , whose membership would strengthen the Union 's northern dimension .
A number of adjustments need to be made to the reform of agricultural and regional policy .
Objective 6 , which is vital to the northernmost regions of the Union , should be retained and the level of support provided under it should be the same as that under Objective 1 .
Agricultural producers ' prices can be reduced only on condition that equitable compensation is provided and that producer prices always exceed variable production costs .
In this CAP reform , the special national agricultural support which the Union adopted because of Finland 's special northern conditions , but which Finland currently has to pay for by itself contrary to the general principles of the CAP system , must be incorporated in Community funding .
Mr. President , this debate is worrying me .
First , I am worried about the language issue , as I said earlier .
In the context of such a major opening of the European Union , such an initiative by the Commission , there was not even enough interest shown to ensure that all Members and citizens should be equally well informed .
There are some who are more equal than others : Germans , English and French .
Secondly , I am also worried by the fact that just a few weeks after Amsterdam , the Commission and its President have come here to tell us that we must proceed with a new review of the Treaties , in order to solve institutional issues .
And I ask : what faith can Europe 's citizens have , when they see their government calling for a review of the constitution even before the review just completed has been formally ratified ?
If that had been done by the government of a Member State , think what a political upheaval it would have caused !
Thirdly , it worries me that there is a great deal of uncertainty regarding the Cohesion Fund and the structural expenditure .
Fourthly , I would wish for a more open approach with broader perspectives for Bulgaria and Romania as far as enlargement is concerned .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , today sees us beginning to mark out and trace the path we will be following in the early years of the next millennium .
A significant change for the future of the Union .
This is the first discussion of a topic which all of us , without exception , were anticipating and I trust that , as stated here , we will have many more opportunities to debate the conditions , pacts and modifications of enlargement and of the financial package , although we should keep in mind a premise backed by the Commission itself at the most recent meeting of the Committee on Regional Policy : that the South should not and cannot fund the East .
We cannot lose sight of certain facts which have been proved by analysing and studying the most recent period of enlargement of the Structural and Cohesion Funds .
The ten richest regions continue to differ from the ten poorest in much the same way .
And , as far as unemployment is concerned - an issue crucial to the future of the Union - the Funds have not brought about any reduction in Europe . The 25 poorest regions , therefore , have experienced greater unemployment than the 25 richest .
Finally , Mr President , we believe that it is risky to rely on agriculture to finance this enlargement because , as you and all of us will be aware , agriculture is an extremely risky business .
In conclusion , I would support what has been said about the need to convene another Intergovernmental Conference to examine the necessary reform of European institutions .
Mr President , Agenda 2000 is an impressive global vision , requiring all the political forces of Europe to be involved in the work that lies ahead - including those forces whose concept of a healthy , peaceful future for Europe differs , indeed differs very strongly , from the Commission 's notion .
The key to success will indeed be the courage to set priorities in every sector and to abandon the ' equal shares for all ' principle .
I welcome the emphasis on the environmental aspects of rural development and agricultural policy .
In dealing with all these issues it will be necessary to break down taboos and stop burying our heads in the sand .
President Santer has said that the euro must be introduced as planned on 1 January 1999 .
The question may be whether the euro can be introduced on 1 January 1999 , against the will of many citizens , if the high aims of Agenda 2000 , especially enlargement , are to be achieved .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to say that your services should have had the time to write a shorter paper .
It is difficult to write little and well .
In any case , your speech gave no indication as to whether we shall continue to maintain Community preference , a unified market , financial solidarity .
Forty years ago that made sense and it still does today !
On the other hand , in respect of the Common Agricultural Policy , it seems to me that its reforms should be linked to the natural handicaps of the different countries , to unemployment , to the land .
I think that that would make sense and I do not know , since I have not yet had the time to read this enormous document , whether that is going to be possible .
I should like to ask you about the Community 's resources , the budget that so many people say will not suffice for enlargement , and how it was possible for you not to say a word about institutional approaches to combating fraud throughout the Community , fraud that amounts to billions of ECU and which would help to finance enlargement and our own internal economic policy instead ?
How is it possible for our economic ayatollahs to try and cut fair spending in fair activities and yet continue to overlook the billions of ECU robbed from the Community in VAT - something that not only cheats the Community and the interests of its Member States , but also harms real competitiveness and fair competition , and firms ' ability to survive ?
I should like you to give that some thought , Mr President of the Commission .
Mr. President , all the questions asked by previous speakers have a single explanation : the Commission , and whatever is around and behind it , wants to hide the fact that what is involved is essentially an opening of vital territory for the robber-baron , profiteering activities of major Community speculative and other capital .
This enlargement will cost , and the Commission wants to hide that , namely the fact that the cost will be borne by the smallest and weakest countries and by working people .
That is why there is never a mention of resources for unemployment , but on the contrary , there are clear references to restriction , reduction of CAP and Structural Fund expenditure , and again the burden of cost will fall on countries that derived some relief from those provisions .
Furthermore , Mr. President , the Commission is illegitimately introducing certain issues , such as support for Turkey and an assertion and confirmation of the hostage status of Cyprus , by saying that accession will supposedly be achieved by negotiations but will always depend on the will of Denktash , Turkey and the Americans .
That is what you are doing , Mr Santer , and this Agenda does not strive towards a great and powerful Europe , but a Europe that is wretched for its peoples and a Europe profiteering on behalf of major capital .
Mr. President , a great deal has already been said .
I would like to add that the Press has hastened to describe Agenda 2000 as a document which will be for the coming 50 years what the Yalta agreement was for the years past .
Since we have not read the document , let us hope that is how things will be , and that it will have positive effects and not open wounds as Yalta did .
Because the exclusion of many European countries from the first stage of enlargement will generate bitterness and doubts and objections , and that is not at all consonant with some of the extravagant promises we heard early on .
The President of the Commission spoke of a new Marshall Plan .
The differentiation taking place is only acceptable on the assumption that programmes on behalf of the countries excluded , especially Romania and Bulgaria which have serious problems , will be strengthened .
Historically , the first country scheduled for accession is Cyprus .
It was Cyprus that was discussed first , and Cyprus towards which the European Union made express commitments , which the President of the Commission himself mentioned .
Besides , Cyprus - and this should be stressed - is the only candidate for accession that satisfies all the requisite economic criteria .
On that point , we should stress the good faith and attitude with which the Cyprus Government came to the recent talks on the Cyprus problem despite the continuing intransigence of the Turkish side , and that is a reason why Cyprus cannot remain hostage to those attitudes and why a solution cannot be a prerequisite for its accession .
Mr. President , questions arise about the Union 's institutional reform in the future , which may prove necessary but cannot be such as to weaken its cohesion and threaten the equality of its partners .
Just as it is impossible not to take account of the criterion of unemployment in the Union 's progress towards 2000 , nor for the Structural Funds to bear the cost of enlargement .
Finally Mr President , so far as the CAP is concerned , I would like to stress that as we all know , for a very long time efforts have been made to annihilate the agricultural economy of the South .
Mr President , it is a common phenomenon that unsuccessful projects are concealed by constantly starting new ones .
The European Union has failed in practically everything : unemployment , economic policy , agricultural policy , environmental policy and control of fraud .
Would it not then be better if the Union sorted out its own problems first before dragging other countries into them ?
This project has been ill prepared .
There are no reliable calculations on the costs or the social impact .
Ultimately , there must be some reaction to the way the Union is dictating the applicant countries ' domestic policy and that they must subject themselves to the Union 's destructive economic dogmatism , just as if these other countries have no values of their own to bring with them but must be treated instead like colonies , whose assets are to be bought and whose people dominated .
Going back to the Europe of the 1930s in this way is not , Mr President , a good starting point for a project .
Mr President , it has not often happened in the course of this century that we have been able to shape the destiny of Europe from a situation of peace .
It is indeed a historic opportunity .
The Commission has put forward a coherent proposal involving a great deal of money , but we must not allow it to become like a game of Monopoly with subsidies being pushed here and there , upsetting still further the already tenuous balance between north and south in the Union .
Much will depend on whether people can be persuaded to reform the common agricultural policy , and here we cannot sidestep the agreements that exist with the Mediterranean countries , which also involve agricultural issues .
Mrs Aelvoet has already mentioned an example of where things are not working .
Spain is causing problems in the association agreement with Jordan over a few tons of tomatoes .
This is a bad sign , not least for the Eastern European countries .
We are all working together in an expanding market , and we are gradually going to have to convince people that Schengen , NATO and the Union are all linked in some way and will eventually lead to a new political association that will rise above the market .
One thing still concerns me , and that is the lack of funding for PHARE and the Structural Funds .
This is something we cannot explain to the public , and we must move swiftly to put it right , otherwise we shall lose their support .
Agenda 2000 finally puts the Second World War behind us .
Germany has been integrated once and for all , and that is something for which we all jointly bear the responsibility and the burden .
Agenda 2000 is a challenge , but it also demonstrates Europe 's internal strength .
It is an initiative that we MEPs should endorse to our voters , and one which , when we have studied it , deserves more than this brief hour on a Wednesday morning .
Mr President , the Commission 's conditions for the enlargement of the European Union are based , mostly , on competition between economies and peoples .
That is particularly the case in the farming sector , where the Commission hardly shows any imagination since its proposals are largely based on the American model : i.e. lowering production prices , partially offset by direct income aids .
These proposals are in keeping with the WTO rules , which is now becoming the United States ' own private tool , as we saw in the verdicts on bananas and hormone meat .
Established in the name of sacrosanct competitiveness , these guidelines accentuate the drop in farm prices and will lead to further reductions in the number of farmers .
They run the risk of leading to lower farm spending which would be harmful .
The possibility of modulating income aids might be an interesting approach , provided it means rebalancing aids to benefit small and medium-sized farmers and less well-off farms .
The mad cow crisis should break this current trend towards an ultra-liberal and production-oriented trend , which is against the interests of farmers and consumers alike .
The CAP must be made fairer by ensuring that farm work is properly paid , that resources are redistributed to help the less well-off regions , introducing a renewed Community preference , modulating and capping farming aid , in order to fight over-intensive farming and desertification , both of which harm the environment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to speak again , very briefly , in the knowledge that you have a packed agenda today , to thank everyone who has spoken in this debate .
I know that the Commission has placed you in an awkward situation by distributing a 1350 page package on the morning of the debate - a document that lays the very foundations of Europe 's architecture for the 21st century .
It has been presented very quickly but I should also like to pay tribute to all those who wanted to respond to the Commission 's paper so quickly .
I am quite certain that , under the Luxembourg Presidency , it will be one of the central planks of the various Councils of Ministers .
You will have an opportunity , I am sure , to discuss it at length with the competent Commissioners , i.e. Mrs Wulf-Mathies , for the structural funds - raised on several occasions and sometimes erroneously in a context that is not always that which we have set - and Commissioner Fischler , for the CAP .
Both will clarify the aims that the Commission has set in the framework of its Agenda 2000 .
Agenda 2000 is designed to created the necessary conditions in a changing world where Europe must , of course , also change .
Of course , enlargement must be integrated into it but we must also adapt to the international environment and play our rightful role in the international arena .
You now tell me that we have tried to square the circle .
Yes , to some extent , because we have taken into account the fact of enlargement , and the implications of enlargement for certain policies , especially the structural funds and the CAP , but others too .
We have worked out a new financial framework for all internal policies that we have refocussed in order to meet the concerns of our citizens and to meet the challenges of 21st century Europe .
This Commission document covers a whole range of issues .
We have borne our responsibilities , in any case , and the Commission has shown that it is a political body , a Community political institution .
I would tell Mr Vanhecke that the Commission is not ' an Areopagus of apathetic technocrats ' , as has been said , nor is it comprised solely of senior officials .
On the contrary .
I was elected in June 1994 to the European Parliament .
I was elected as Prime Minister in my country .
I and others have stood for both national and European sovereignty .
We play our role , in the Commission , as a political institution , in this European political Union and we have accepted our own responsibilities as such .
I should like to refute two general remarks that have been repeatedly made .
As for the costs , I would like to point out that those costs are not going to be borne by the CAP .
Nor will they be borne by the structural funds .
It is thanks to the reforms undertaken in the financial framework that we have centred , regrouped , reorganized the structural funds to make them more efficient .
If you analyse the figures , you will see that through the structural funds the Member States will be receiving 15 % more in grants than at present .
So to tell me that enlargement is going to be financed by a reduction in the structural funds is quite simply wrong .
It is not the reality and does not tally with the figures contained in the documents that I would invite you to examine .
I should also like to put right those who have it in for the Commission , some of whom spoke of Yalta and setting up a new dividing line across Europe .
That is wrong !
The Commission has said so and Mr Van den Broek and I have been well understood - a whole negotiating process has been started and all the applicant States , without exception , are called on to become full members of the European Union .
That is why we have also set up certain structures to establish a genuine partnership for accession .
That is how we have presented things .
That is why we have called for a European conference to which all countries wishing to join the European Union are invited .
It is only in that spirit , on the basis of objective criteria and analyses carried out by our services , in conjunction with international experts , as Mr Van den Broek has said - we did not take part for political reasons - that we have announced which applicant countries can begin negotiations to be completed in the medium term .
That is the perspective that has been established .
As far as human rights are concerned , a distinction cannot be made between Member States , as they are indivisible , and we have taken a very firm stance over this aspect , in keeping with the concerns of the European Parliament .
As far as the economy is concerned , however , and the fulfilment of certain criteria , while counting on the evolution of the various applicant countries in the future , in accordance with the findings of our own analyses , we have come to the conclusion that it is already possible , although none of the applicant countries fulfils the economic criteria at present , to open negotiations with some of them .
Of course , it is the European Council that has the last word , but we have taken our own responsibilities in the framework of the evolution of the international environment which concerns us .
I agree that enlargement is a unique opportunity .
For the first time for more than five hundred years we have the historic opportunity to reconcile our continent with itself , in peace and freedom .
This opportunity has to be seized .
Enlargement must then succeed .
It is my only ambition , the ambition of the Commission that it is my honour to Preside .
Let us leave aside the political aspects , strategies and stratagems , which are sometimes hypocritical , it has to be said , in certain political settings , because the important thing is to make enlargement a success .
That is the feeling and duty of the Commission .
It is in this spirit that we are presenting you with our Agenda 2000 .
Mr President , I put a very simple question .
I asked whether Latvia can still be included in the first round , if it meets all the criteria in two years .
Mr President , I think that Mr Van den Broek answered that question very clearly .
If you had listened to him , you would have heard him state very clearly that this process is under way in that the European Council , to which we report every year , considers that a country meets a certain number of criteria .
Then we can recommend to the European Parliament Council to undertake negotiations with the country concerned , provided that it meets the criteria on the basis of our own analyses too .
I think that answers your question , in the affirmative .
Financing of the CFSP
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0249 / 97 ) by Mr Samland , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the Interinstitutional Agreement between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission on provisions regarding financing of the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this document that we are debating today has already been hailed as a success by this House .
At the second June session , Parliament , during its second plenary session when the results of Amsterdam were discussed , adopted by a huge majority a resolution to the effect that the agreement reached by the European Council on the budgetary aspects of the CFSP was to be welcomed as a success and a step forward .
In adopting that resolution , we made it clear which direction we were taking .
As the rapporteur , I do not want to discuss the details of those provisions at this stage , but there are two points I would like to make .
First , the Interinstitutional Agreement was drawn up in order to take away the second pillar from those who , at the Intergovernmental Conference , wanted to make it compulsory expenditure and leave it where it was , among the non-compulsory expenditure .
This represents a negotiating success by all those - and I expressly include the President of the European Parliament , and also the then Dutch presidency - who thus safeguarded and protected the rights of the European Parliament .
A second aim was achieved , and Mr Spencer , the Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , has expressly authorized me to say so on his behalf also .
What was achieved , in fact , was an institutionalized communication on the second pillar , an institutionalized communication between the makers of our foreign policy and the activities of the Council in that second pillar , which had not previously been agreed or laid down .
To this extent , I believe , the agreement before us today represents a step forward , and I would therefore ask the House to adopt it when we come to vote on it shortly .
Mr President , I think we should finally sign this agreement .
But we should not be under any illusion that it is a victory for the Parliament , because we were put under tremendous pressure .
If Parliament had not agreed , the Council would have made this an item of compulsory , rather than non-compulsory , expenditure .
We have avoided the worst , and I think that we can congratulate ourselves on that .
At the same time it is very true that everything now depends on the way that the two institutions - the Council and the Commission - implement this : the Council by implementing this agreement in good faith and giving the necessary information , the Commission by really cooperating with Parliament to ensure transparency and democratic control .
In the circumstances there is no other alternative , but we should definitely work in the future to avoid such incidents whereby the Council cynically attempts to take away powers which Parliament has usefully used in the past .
Mr President , my group has expressly committed itself to ensuring that expenditure on the Foreign and Security Policy should not be treated as compulsory and the rights of Parliament with regard to the budget should not be restricted .
So we have no alternative but to vote in favour of the compromise which is now on the table , because by doing so we shall prevent the worst from happening .
I do see a problem , though , and I shall be grateful if the Commission would give me an answer on this , even if not today .
With regard to the foreign and security policy , we have always found that the critical weakness is not any budgetary problem but always the question of who we should make responsible and how we are to control the expenditure side .
We have always said that there is a procedural loophole in Article J.11.
In my view , this interinstitutional agreement has not closed that loophole .
I should be grateful if the Commission would once again let the Committee on Budgets have its opinion on this .
Mr President , my group will be voting for this interinstitutional agreement because it has a sense of responsibility but it will do so with little enthusiasm .
We do not in fact believe that just those two little pages of the whole of the Amsterdam Treaty should be voted on so rapidly while the remainder of the treaty is so confused that the members of the European Council have themselves still to subscribe to it and will be doing so in October .
But we realize that this may be the lesser evil for Parliament , given that it has managed , broadly at least , to keep CFSP classified as non-compulsory expenditure .
But the adoption of this agreement should not let us forget that we have lost in relation to the major challenge facing the Council , namely that of establishing a new form of classification for all expenditure under the budget , and that remains for us a central point in the discussion of the Amsterdam Treaty that we shall be holding in November .
Mr President , before this debate , pursuant to Rule 128 , I asked to move the inadmissibility of the matter .
You did not give me the floor .
I have every respect for you , but you did not apply the rules : I am entitled to move the inadmissibility of a matter and you should have given me the floor .
Our Group is opposed to the inter-institutional agreement .
We shall vote against it .
It is a compromise adopted by the Member States in Amsterdam , whereas some of them were rightly opposed to CFSP expenditure being noncompulsory .
By adopting it , the European Parliament is dropping its trousers .
Everywhere in the world , foreign policy is dictated by executives , not by assemblies .
The European Parliament cannot be involved in foreign policy as it is a branch of the budgetary authority .
Please , Mr President , could you chair this debate and ask the members to be quiet ? As I was trying to say , this is part of the Amsterdam agreements and those agreements have yet to be ratified !
What contempt for democracy !
We adopt a text , in this uproar , a text that adds to Community law and was adopted in under 48 hours , by the skin of its teeth , by refusing virtually any discussion .
The two main groups in the European Parliament refused to express their opinion on this text even though they had two minutes each to do so .
That goes to show that since Maastricht , nothing has changed .
The famous democratic deficit that was rightly denounced in every European country has not even been dented .
You refuse any protests and any real debate - you refuse to give the floor to the Member States ' parliaments and to the citizens of the countries of Europe !
( Applause from the I-EDN Group )
Mr President , the UPE Group will vote for Mr Samland 's proposal .
We did have some debates in committee but we should not make this report into something more important than it is .
It enables the European Parliament to give its opinion in the coming weeks on anything to do with common security policy and Mr Samland , the rapporteur , has just brought our rules into line with the text , which is an important one .
I think that we should not lend more importance to these matters than they really deserve .
At bottom , this report is a fair one and that is why we shall vote for it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place immediately .
VOTES
Following Mrs Pery 's election to the French parliament and her resignation from the European Parliament , we shall now elect a Vice-President .
I have received one nomination , that of Mr Jean-Pierre Cot .
Mr Cot , you are going to be applauded again since I must now turn to the European Parliament to consult it formally and find out whether it agrees to elect you by acclamation , since I have received no other nominations .
( Parliament elected Mr Cot by acclamation ) I congratulate you , Mr Cot .
Thank you , Madam President , for giving me the floor , pursuant to Rule 129 , to move that the report be referred back to committee .
I take this opportunity to congratulate Mr Cot on his election as Vice-President .

I am moving referral on three counts : first of all , because the debate in the Committee on Budgets was guillotined and amendments were not tabled to the motion for a resolution even though it is quite separate from the interinstitutional agreement .
Secondly , the Committee on Foreign Affairs has not been consulted .
Yet it obviously has competence , in application of Annex VI , I-1 , of the Rules , for questions relating to the European Union 's CFSP .
Thirdly - and the most serious reason , Madam President - the institutional committee was not consulted .
It should have issued its opinion at its meeting of 1 and 2 July , but the item was not even on the agenda .
No text was distributed at that meeting and no vote was held .
I have witnesses who are members of that committee .
Those are the reasons for my request .
Madam President , I should like to speak against this request by Mr FabreAubrespy .
All three of his arguments are inaccurate !
First , the Committee on Budgets spent two hours discussing the content of the motion at a special meeting yesterday evening .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy attended that meeting , so it is quite outrageous for him to create the impression here that no debate has taken place .
Secondly , the charge that the Committee on Foreign Affairs is the co-ordinating committee is incorrect .
The Committee on Budgets was delegated to comment on this report , and that was notified to the House by an unopposed decision of the President .
Thirdly , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , the Committee on Institutional Affairs informed the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , in a letter dated 4 July 1997 and signed by its Chairman , that the Committee on Institutional Affairs approved this agreement .
In other words all three of your arguments are wrong , and I would therefore ask that the vote be taken now .
Madam President , I should like to second Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's motion for the interinstitutional agreement to be referred back to committee .
I should like to add a further reason to the one he gave : as vice-chairman of the institutional committee , I should like to insist on this fourth reason . I do not remember whether there was a vote on the opinion relating to this agreement nor have I ever seen the letter from the chairman .
I should like to know when the document on which we are supposed to have voted was distributed to the committee since if the Amsterdam Treaty was mentioned , I should like to stress the fact that the inter-institutional agreement contained in the draft Treaty is not the same as the one on which we are called to vote today .
The second line of each refers to different articles , for example : Article J17 and Article J18 .
To refresh your memory , perhaps you would like to read Mr de Giovanni 's letter of 3 July last , after the sitting .
( Parliament rejected the request )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Congratulations to Mr Rothley and everyone else who has contributed to this outcome .
Madam President , the inter-institutional agreement on financing the CFSP , just precipitately approved by the European Parliament , seems totally irregular to us in terms of parliamentary procedure and in essence .
From the procedural point of view , we have decided in one morning to inscribe the item on the agenda , hold a guillotined debate and vote on it , without being able to table amendments , even on the motion for a legislative resolution .
That alone should have sufficed to reject this text if the European Parliament had a little dignity .
In essence , this agreement is designed to shift operational expenditure on the CFSP , without exception , towards non-compulsory Community spending , i.e. that part of the budget on which the European Parliament has the final word .
It is totally incoherent since the CFSP is an inter-governmental policy , as confirmed at the Amsterdam European Council , which left it third-pillar status in the Treaty on European Union .
In any case , the proposed change , in that it anticipates a ratification that has not yet been completed , is tantamount to revision of the Treaty , which is obviously not possible in terms of an inter-institutional agreement .
All of this has been so improvised that the agreement voted for refers to Article J18 of the Treaty , which does not exist as it has not yet been ratified .
The provisional text is still under discussion among the permanent representatives .
It is so much the case that Article J18 , that I have just mentioned , was called Article J17 in the only text of the Treaty in our possession , the one that emerged from the Amsterdam Council .
All of these irregularities mean that the Member States are being forced to agree to the provisional Amsterdam text which is incoherent because it was finalised in confusion , if at all !
Madam President , if only for the Minutes ' sake , i should like to have certain irregularities recorded .
I shall not speak of the essence , which my colleague Georges Berthu dealt with brilliantly just now .
The procedure adopted was a simplified one .
Proper time limits were not kept to .
We changed and decided to hold a debate , but nobody said really why we did .
It was rightly feared that twenty-nine members of the European Parliament , led by us , perhaps , would oppose the guillotine vote without a debate .
Then we decided to have a vote with debate .
Fifteen minutes were allowed and two minutes per Group , without realizing that that would not be enough .
The main Groups refused to speak .
I therefore move inadmissibility and ask a question , both of which reach the Bureau five minutes before the debate .
I am prevented from speaking .
Madam President , it should have been possible to table an amendment .
It was wrong of the Chair to decide otherwise .
Look at the draft report - it even allows for amendments to be tabled .
Those are the irregularities .
This is all proof that we are not doing things seriously , especially concerning important matters .
I wanted that to be emphasized .
Our institutions which so much like teaching lessons , Urbi et Orbi , about respecting laws , would do well to set a good example and being as strict with themselves as they demand of others .
The conditions in which the debate on the financing of the CFSP has just been held show , once again , how little respect most members of the European Parliament have for legal rules .
When they are mentioned , as my colleagues Mr Fabre-Aubrespy and Mr Berthu in particular have just done , the invariable reply from the Chair is : ' You cannot be legally right as you are in a political minority ... ' .
What were the fears of those who staged this hurried and improvised method of having a text that had not even been submitted to the Committee on Foreign Affairs submitted to the full assembly ?
We were surprised to note the committee 's silence even though it should have been consulted on the essence of the text , since the interinstitutional agreement refers not only to financial aspects but to the whole of the implementation of the CFSP .
We also noticed that the Samland report won a favourable opinion in the Institutional Committee even though that item never figured on its agenda .
We also noticed the precipitate guillotine debate , organized very hurriedly by the Committee on Budgets , yesterday afternoon .
We also noticed the astonishing refusal by the two main parties in the European Parliament to express their views , this morning , on the Samland report .
Why so much haste ?
Why so many anomalies ?
Out of fear that some of the negotiators might have repented at the last minute , once they became more aware of the challenges at stake , just as they were negotiating some vital articles ( including that on which the inter-institutional agreement submitted for our approval relies ) of a Treaty adopted at the Amsterdam Summit , despite the reputation of that text ?
This inter-institutional agreement presents , may I remind you , like its predecessors , all the features of a ' legal monster ' .
Not only the conditions in which these agreements must be concluded are not made explicit , but also these agreements , which are not ratified by national parliaments , interpret nonetheless those treaties submitted for ratification .
Strange legal objects , then , these inter-institutional agreements , by means of which the European institutions grant themselves the right to interpret the treaties !
Moreover , the European Parliament has just issued its opinion on an agreement which is utterly groundless in legal terms since it mentions an Article J18 which is not even completed - and which obviously has yet to be ratified !
In terms of the essence , there is a lot to be said about the process of emasculating an inter-governmental policy whose inter-governmentality has just been officially confirmed at the Amsterdam Summit by means of the Communitarization of its financing .
This is a genuine transfer of powers , de facto , since classifying financing of the CFSP as non-compulsory expenditure gives the European Parliament the last word and therefore in practice withdraws from the executives the genuine control over the European Union 's CFSP .
This procedure is neither democratic , nor transparent , no realistic , since it is unheard of for parliamentary assemblies to decide foreign policies .
The European Parliament has been able to keep its right of amendment on foreign policy expenditure only by promising to be good and obedient from now on .
That is what this Interinstitutional Agreement says in effect , and it just goes to show that democracy in Europe is still languishing in the 19th century .
The President of the European Parliament was forced , with a knife at his throat , to go cap in hand to the governments of the Member States .
A number of them thought that Parliament was causing too many problems over the CFSP budget , and wanted the Amsterdam Treaty to eliminate the only possibility we have to exercise democratic control over the CFSP .
The humiliation that Parliament is having to face in order to keep its right of amendment could at least have been spelt out in the explanatory statement of the Samland report which has been rushed through the Committee on Budgets and the plenary this week .
But no , this extremely brief statement on the Interinstitutional Agreement glosses over how badly the European Parliament has fared in this : we can now only reduce foreign policy expenditure with the Council 's agreement , and we cannot put anything in the reserve .
What budget rights do we have left ?
In his attempts to salvage at least some degree of democratic control , the President of Parliament forgot that we still need to show some self-respect .
The Council is obviously not going to volunteer respect for normal democratic procedures , we shall have to fight for it .
Instead of just expressing our outrage later when we came face to face with the Amsterdam Treaty , we should simply not have put up with this blackmail from the Treaty negotiators in the first place .
Finally , it remains to be seen whether the Council fulfils its obligation to provide information , as it is required to do under this Interinstitutional Agreement .
If not , then I hope that Parliament will show more courage than it has today , and will denounce the Agreement and start exercising its budgetary rights to the full once again .
Rothley report ( A4-0222 / 97 )
Madam President , because the points in the Rothley report that were important for agriculture all failed to secure a majority , I should like the Minutes to show that I intended to abstain in the final vote , including the modified vote on the report .
Unfortunately I pressed the plus key by mistake .
Madam President , I would simply like to say that I voted against this Commission document today , and I tried to amend it as much as I possibly could to ensure that it was acceptable to me .
I am disappointed with the outcome .
I believe that Parliament has allowed itself to be browbeaten by the big pharmaceutical companies and by the Commission , and that we have taken a massive step backwards .
Today we have effectively given the big companies a licence to print money .
Even as amended - remember that Parliament had to reject up to one-third of the original text in order to get it through - I believe that we have taken a massive step backwards , and I suspect that at later stages in the legislative process we are going to come unstuck , and we are going to rue the day when we voted for this Commission document .
Madam President , despite grave misgivings which I share with Mrs Schierhuber and Mrs Seillier , I voted in favour of the Rothley report because it contains important amendments regarding the protection of human life and , especially , human embryos .
I refer in particular to Amendments Nos 55 ba and 55 bb .
I would however like to give a very clear warning to the Council not to remove these key elements of the compromise , because many of us would then no longer feel able to vote in favour of this Directive , because these matters are really important .
Incidentally , we can congratulate ourselves on having rejected the wretched first draft , more than a year ago , and on having refused to be intimidated by the threat ' if you reject it your rights will be reduced ' .
We have more rights today than we have ever had .
At that time , an attempt was made to put pressure on us with the argument ' if you reject it , there won 't be a new draft in a hurry ' .
Well , today we have already had the new draft .
So perhaps we can be spared this phoney pressure in the future !
I call upon the Council not to remove the human life amendments from this compromise .
After serious consideration we have decided to vote against the directive while certain proposals of fundamental importance do not have the support of the majority .
We think that there is a need for a clearer written text which emphasises the fact that patents on human genes are not acceptable under any circumstances .
We also oppose all methods which involve the use of human embryos .
The Alleanza Nazionale is in favour of the directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions .
We in fact believe that it is now necessary to publish patents on biotechnological inventions without delay so that the public is able to monitor and control the continuing development of biotechnology .
We believe that not only does the protection of inventions by patenting act as a check on research , it also makes it possible to make plain the results of research and avoid scientific monopolies .
We would stress that the proposal for a directive is designed to eliminate the current legal uncertainty and prevent the risk of fragmentation resulting from the possibility of the national courts taking different decisions on issues of fundamental importance , on the basis of differing national legislation .
The 1973 European Patent Convention is not in fact able to dispel the legal uncertainty in the national legislation on patents and contains no clause that legally compels the Member States to harmonize the provisions of national law on patents .
This directive will bring into line the Convention and patent law in the biotechnology sector for 15 of the 18 signatory States .
We also agree with the Commission 's ethics committee when it says that the human body and elements thereof , as variously constituted and developed , do not constitute an invention able to be patented , as well as its further statement that , where inventions derived from the knowledge of a human gene are concerned , a patent may be issued only where the identification of the function of that gene offers new opportunities and the proposed use of the patent is sufficiently specific and clear .
We also consider it vital that an ethical committee should be set up to assess all aspects relating to biotechnology and its use , and that it is at the same time necessary that , every five years as of the entry into force of the directive , scheduled for 1 January 1999 , the Commission should publish a report illustrating all of the problems encountered in the implementation of the directive in relation to the international agreements on the protection of human rights to which the Member States have acceded .
I will vote for the biotechnology patent directive .
This is an extremely complex and important issue .
Patent law is very technical and difficult , and issues such as this have far-reaching ramifications .
I am satisfied that the benefits for people , jobs and research are enormous .
For Ireland , which has targeted biotechnology as an industry with enormous potential , it is particularly important .
In Ireland we have a very high incidence of inherited diseases such as cystic fibrosis and spina bifida .
We also have a high incidence of other conditions such as diabetes where advances in insulin production , as a direct result of biotechnological research , have been of enormous benefit .
What we are voting on here today is a set of rules to give the industry a chance to develop .
Similar rules already exist in the US and Japan and no one is suggesting that these countries have sunk into a moral decline or are ethically blind as a result of their existence .
There are fears and we must respond to them , but there are also great hopes riding on new developments .
I have been contacted by many groups of patients supporting this directive .
For many , their only hope both for themselves and for future generations lies in research and development of these new technologies .
On the previous occasion when this Parliament rejected the original proposals before us , we had ethical concerns as regards patenting parts of the human body and the practical concern that farmers might be prevented from using seed produced on their own farms .
Our concerns have , I believe , been fully met in the draft legislation now before us .
These rules are not written in stone , they are always open to amendments and should there be any evidence of misuse or danger , we will of course respond , and respond quickly , to address any problems arising .
Today we are discussing a vital subject which has come before our Assembly on several occasions without reaching a conclusion : should we , at European level , harmonize legal protection for biotechnological inventions , i.e. inventions acting on genes of a vegetable , animal or human being ?
Having studied - very carefully - the European Parliament 's Rothley report and the Mattei report of the French Parliament on this subject , I must confess that I have a deep impression of discomfort , stemming from the confused nature of the proposed directive : there is an attempt to resolve technical problems - i.e. whether certain inventions should be patented - without having first of all clearly established the fundamental ethical principles .
There is also an attempt to regulate in a single directive totally different questions , some linked to medicine and the others to agriculture .
The first point : the proposal for a directive , in its arrangements , contains nothing on the fundamental principles we wish to respect : the obligation to protect the human being in its dignity and identity ; guarantees for the respect of human beings ' genetic integrity ; the refusal to grant any patrimonial right liable to refer to the human body , its elements or its products ; the free donation of elements of human bodies and its voluntary nature .
If these principles are not included in the directive , it is because it is limited to economic reforms linked to completion of the single market ; in this framework , it is aimed at harmonizing the legal aspects of patent law but not to establish moral principles for which the European Union 's institutions have no powers .
On this score , we have referred to national legislation such as the French Act of 29 July 1994 establishing proper principles , including that of the ' nonpatrimoniality ' of the human body .
But not all European countries adopt exactly the same approach .
Here we are attaining the limits of a purely technical harmonization .
The second point is even more serious in my view : the text which we have been presented with cheerfully mixes medical and agricultural issues , so that many members of the European Parliament have the feeling that they are being forced into things .
The questions under consideration are quite different : on one hand , in the medical area , it is a question of finding treatments to fight serious diseases , which at present are incurable , by acting on patients ' genes but excluding the ' germinal genome therapy ' , i.e. action that can alter the genetic heritage of descendance ; on the other hand , in the agricultural field , there is a question of modifying the genes of fauna or flora in order to adapt them to imperatives of profitability in the manufacture of foodstuffs .
In the first case , the target population seems to be strictly limited ; their needs are enormous ; any negative consequences will be limited to the subject being treated .
In the second case , the population being targeted is very large - all consumers - so that the dissemination of any negative consequences runs the risk of not being dominated .
Authorizing the patentability of biotechnological inventions in one case or the other will not , therefore , by any means have the same effects ; on one hand , we are trying to cure the sick and , on the other , on the contrary , we are opening the door to a dissemination on the market of genetically altered organisms , the final impact of which on the population as a whole is very poorly evaluated .
In the former case , that of medicine , I think that it might be useful to head cautiously towards the patentability of biotechnological inventions , provided that fundamental ethical principles are respected .
The Commission proposal does head in the right direction in this respect , specifying that the human body and its elements , in their natural state , cannot be patented .
The European Parliament has rightly achieved slightly more progress on this , by specifying that elements of the human body include the total or partial sequence of a gene .
I regret that we have not gone even further , as the Europe of Nations Group proposes , by also declaring other interventions on the genome non-patentable .
In the second case , that of agriculture , the most serious problems are not so much of an ethical order as that of public health .
We do not see how we could today authorize the patentability of genetically altered maize , for example , whereas the European Parliament itself recently demanded that this product be banned from growing , import or marketing .
We are told that the two acts are legally distinct and that in theory it is quite possible to contemplate patenting a product whose manufacture is banned .
But those are sophisms .
Politically the two are linked even if they are not legally linked .
By refusing foodstuffs manufactured by means of genetically altered plants or animals we are also refusing patents to protect those productions .
Consequently , we reject this proposal for a directive which seeks to win our votes out of confusion .
We want two different texts to be put before the European Parliament with separate votes on the biotechnological inventions , one concerning the medical field and the other concerning agriculture .
I recognize that the vote on the directive for the legal protection of biotechnological inventions has been one of the most important that this Parliament has taken in many years .
The reason I voted in favour of the Rothley report was that after nearly a decade of drift on this important issue , I believed , along with the majority in this Parliament , that a stable legal framework for the patenting of biotechnological inventions is now necessary .
In economic terms a legal base for dealing with the process of patenting will improve investment and incentive in research .
It will assist patients and small research companies as well as the larger enterprises and will be beneficial to jobs in the sector .
In ethical terms , which is the overriding issue in our deliberations , I have strongly backed the amendment by Ian White which establishes an ethics committee before the establishment of the legal base .
I have also backed amendments calling for stronger animal welfare protection .

We have voted against Mr Rothley 's report as it represents a fundamental position which we do not share .
For us human health and biological diversity is the central issue .
This issue is not one of technological or industrial invention .
The discovery of the function of a gene should be just that , a fantastic discovery which should be available to serve the interests of the global public and not private economic interests .
I voted for the Rothley report because I think that biotechnology is a science of the future with enormous potential for medicine , food and the environment and Europe must give this science a legal framework in terms of invention patents .
The issue of patents currently operates nationally .
Especially in the USA , where biotechnology is developing at break-neck speed .
Give this fact , the Rothley report is a pioneering initiative , making amendments to the directive that cover most of the moral and legal concerns of ordinary people .
We should not underestimate the problems of biotechnology for the future of mankind .
We should not underestimate the fears and emotions of those committed to defending our societies and our values against profit at any price and science without conscience .
We therefore had to strike a balance between rules to protect the economic exploitation of biotechnological inventions and ethical concerns that have rightly arisen .
This balance has been struck by this committee report , even if there could have been more precision over certain points .
But that could be the subject of the follow-up given by the European Parliament and the Commission .
Given the process of European integration and , particularly , within the context of the increasingly technology-based global society in which we move , the need for a Directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions is obvious .
It is needed , firstly , to prevent legal fragmentation in a sphere as complex as this and in which Member States ' patent law does not offer a precise response .
Secondly , it is needed because the legal security offered by a Directive will genuinely promote research , thereby guaranteeing that the European Union does not lose current impetus in this field of science and will ensure that we play a full part in the field in the XXI century .
Yet , however important it might be to make progress in the field of biotechnological inventions , it is more important still to ensure that such inventions at no time and in no way seriously affect the dignity and integrity of human beings at any stage of their constitution or development .
It should therefore not be possible to patent any human body-part . Most particularly , the cloning of humans , modification of their germinal genetic identity and the use of human embryos should not be patentable .
In addition to offering the necessary legal security for the European Union to take up its position in the field of biotechnology , one which corresponds to it on account of its political and policy decisions , the Rothley report on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions guarantees that such research will be done with full respect for the supreme dignity of human beings , which constitutes more than sufficient grounds for voting in its favour .
I will be voting for the amended Rothley report on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions .
It has not been an easy decision .
I have received more lobbying over this report than over any other in my thirteen years in the European Parliament : from industry and trade unions , patient groups , church groups and environmental organizations .
It is a matter that has profound employment and ethical implications , subjects not easy to balance .
When we discussed this matter two years ago I did not support the proposals - the balance was wrong .
Now we have seen a number of significant amendments with support for an oversight ethics committee , and modifications to prevent the patenting of life .

I did support Amendment No 72 by Mrs Gebhardt and others , stating that ' This directive is without prejudice to the exclusion of plant and animal varieties from patentability . ' I was disappointed it failed to get a majority .
I intend to continue to monitor progress on this issue .
My support , when it returns to Parliament next year , will be dependent on these positive amendments being adopted by Council and a balance maintained .
The result of the vote on the Gene Patent Directive is a defeat for democracy , a disgrace to the European Parliament and a huge victory for the lobbyists from the biotechnological industry .
The Patent Directive is not only a threat to human dignity , the protection of animals , biological diversity and farming economies in developing countries but also to freedom of research and , as a result , to the chances of very sick people being helped by new drugs and methods of treatment .
It is certainly not their concern for the sick that has made the industrial giants invest huge amounts of money to persuade undecided Members of Parliament to change their mind but , as is openly acknowledged in a letter from the European Biotechnological industry 's professional body EuropaBio , the concern to ' produce a supportive environment for a competitive biotechnological industry in Europe . '
Or , as it says in a letter from MSF , another lobby organisation in favour of patenting : The aim of the Patent Directive is to promote ' the continued growth of the biotechnological industry ' .
There is no mention of the care of seriously ill patients !
The European Alliance of Genetic Support Groups maintains that unless human cells , animals and plants can be patented , big companies will keep their research results secret which would block the development of new drugs .
This reveals that this so called patients ' organisation has completely swallowed the industrial giants ' view of the development of knowledge which is wholly commercial and hostile to research .
Since time immemorial , it has been accepted within the scientific community that research results have been freely available for all researchers through publication at conferences and in scientific journals .
The Patent Directive will allow certain companies to gain a monopoly not only on a saleable biotechnological invention , but also on the discovery and knowledge of genetic cells and the relationships between them , including human cells , animals and plants .
It is both alarming and revealing that Parliament did not even approve the amendment proposal which intended to introduce the exemption known as the doctor 's exemption , which is already present in Article 52.4 of the European Patent Convention and which establishes that ' methods of treatment for human or animal bodies via surgery or therapy and diagnostic methods ' are exempt from patenting .
The aim of the directive is not to improve existing patent regulations , but to introduce totally new principles for patenting which , deep down , have only one aim which is to serve the profit interests of the EU based biotechnological industry .
Everyone else will be the losers - not least very sick people who will see their hopes of a cure crushed when the free development of new experience and methods are suffocated by the monopoly on knowledge and the demand for licence fees which will come in the wake of the patent directive .
On 1 March 1995 , after difficult and serious negotiations , we rejected a Directive on the patenting of biotechnological inventions .
By a clear majority !
Today , the European Parliament has adopted a resolution which is precisely what we were trying to prevent at that time : a resolution whereby discovered parts of the human body can be redefined as inventions .
In other words , that parts of the human body can be patented .
The results of this may be that research is obstructed , that monopoly situations in the pharmaceutical industry become more acute and that costs within the health service are increased by the obstruction of competition .
I cannot share in this political decision , and therefore I had to vote against it .
I welcome the almost unanimous support in this Parliament for the Directive on the patenting of biotechnological inventions .
Our ethical and other considerations have been met in full by the Commission proposals and strengthened by amendments , acceptable to the vast majority of Members , tabled by my Group - the EPP Group .
I particularly welcome the provisions made in respect of ' farmers ' privilege ' which will clearly allow farmers to freely use seed produced on their own farms .
On the previous occasion when this Parliament rejected the original proposals before us we had ethical concerns as regards patenting parts of the human body and the practical concern that farmers might be prevented from using seed produced on their own farms .
Our concerns have , I believe , been fully met in the draft legislation now before us .
Now is the time to legislate in this important area vital to European , including Irish , research and economic development .
We owe it to patients suffering from inherited diseases to try to find solutions to their problems and the problems of their descendants .
I know there are lobby groups and others who are genuinely concerned that the application of this Directive will not be able to control and monitor research and industry in this area .
I believe these fears unfounded , especially as a special committee is to be set up to assess all ethical questions .
Finally , we can return to this question and change the rules if , for any reason , this proves necessary .
. ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats decided to vote for the proposal on first reading .
We think it important that clear rules be drawn up on a EU-wide basis governing what can and what cannot be patented and that definitions be given of what constitutes an invention and what constitutes a discovery that cannot be patented .
Currently patents are awarded for biotechnology against entirely traditional criteria , or they are also awarded in the USA , but biotechnology raises ethical questions that we want included in the EU rules .
An EU without a special basis for the patenting of biotechnological inventions is not an EU without biotechnology or without patents !
We therefore support the amendment calling for the setting up of an ethical committee on an EU basis .
That may strengthen the ethical basis for the proposed directive which has a better starting point than that we rejected two years ago , since the original proposal was a more traditional patent proposal without reference to sensitive aspects .
Patenting means that inventions are published , and the inherent protection of the inventor 's economic interests may increase the probability that biotechnology is used for research that can help to conquer serious diseases .
The directive allows farmers to sow their own crops without having to pay a licence fee to the patent-holder .
The so-called ' farmers ' privilege ' is of crucial importance to farmers in developing countries .
It is also important that the directive refer to biodiversity , since this will help to prevent the innovations , knowledge and practice of indigenous peoples from being expropriated .
We would have liked the Directive to make it absolutely clear that it is not possible to take out a patent on human body cells and that it is not possible to patent animals .
We have therefore supported the amendments that seek to reword the Directive on those lines but otherwise note that , with the wording of the Directive as it stands , it is not possible to take out a patent on life .
. ( DA ) The Danish People 's Movement against Membership of the European Union cannot vote for the report , since it is a blatant attempt by the EU to edge its way in between national legislation and international agreements and conventions .
That will not solve the problems of Europe as a whole with the patenting of biotechnology , because it merely introduces another actor into the process , which cannot be in anyone 's interest .
Harmonization should also not be an option , since experience clearly shows that it will not be possible to take account of national differences , traditions and attitudes .
Instead of creating EU legislation , the process of patent legislation should be strengthened through existing institutions , as laid down for example in the European patent convention .
I have voted for the Rothley report on patents for biological inventions .
It has , however , been necessary to consider the various options open to Parliament , and I have supported several amendments on the basis that , during first reading , we should include safeguards which could then be included in the second reading .
I have voted for the report because it is necessary to put in place a clear legal framework for the protection of intellectual property rights in the biotechnology field at European level .
However , I have also supported a number of important amendments which address the concerns raised by the medical profession , animal welfare groups , environmentalists and developing countries .
So , the European Parliament has demonstrated once and for all that it is lobby groups which determine the outcome of important decisions .
Industry and the patients ' lobby have triumphed !
For the benefit of short term gain we have agreed to take both evolution and future research out of the equation .
A Parliament which does industry 's bidding will soon lose credibility and the trust of the people .
When that same Parliament says no to a ban on the patenting of ' all use of genetic knowledge leading to the production of weapons intended for use on the anatomical , physiological or psychological system of individuals or specific population groups ' ( amendment proposal 93 , the Green Group ) , then one becomes really afraid for the world and the future which the peoples of the EU will face - if the European Parliament is allowed to have their way .
I have voted against the report for the following reasons .
The report proposes that patents may be granted for human genes which have been isolated and for which there is potential industrial use .
As far as animal or plant genes are concerned there is not even this vague connection with possible use .
This means that it will be possible to protect genes , or to put in another way , life itself , with a patent without even knowing if there is potential industrial use .
This may block or monopolise the development of new brands and products and increase the strength of the large multi-national companies at the expense of small companies , the environment and consumers .
Nor is there any motivation for introducing a patent on life and its components .
The existing patent laws are adequate .
Drugs are already covered by a satisfactory system through the product patent and agricultural products are covered by the plant breeding laws .
Patents on human cells , genes , organs and body parts as well as on plant types and breeds of animal must be banned .
The items which it is proposed will be protected by patent in the report are not even inventions but discoveries concerning human life which has existed for thousands of years . This is not something which should be patentable .
The fact that patents and monopolies are a prerequisite for continued research in the field of drugs , etc. does not hold as an argument either .
The current protection regulations are perfectly adequate .
I wish to put on record my decision to vote in favour of the Rothley report on the legal protection of biotechnology inventions .
It has taken nine years for the EU to bring forward this directive and it would be foolish , at this stage , to reject it .
The biotechnology industry is generating substantial added value in economic terms and is providing innovative breakthrough therapies for diseases that were untreatable up to now .
In the UK , we have developed a clear lead in industrial biotechnology with biotechnology SMEs employing more than 10 , 000 people .
But the EU is lagging behind and harmonization of patenting laws will help Europe build a cutting edge .
Parliament has never been lobbied so remorselessly as it has been over months and years on this directive , and from all interested parties : the medical profession and societies , patient groups , environmental organizations , and animal welfare organizations .
Patenting of life is not a black-and-white issue .
There are many grey areas .
There is also , in my view , a very grave concern which has been expressed to me by the National Hereditary Breast Cancer Helpline , which is based in my constituency .
The patenting of the breast cancer gene BRAC1 has attracted controversy .
The US company which patented it said that it would charge only for tests for the gene , and not for research .
It is my view that the need for an EU patenting framework should not result in high treatment costs , nor in channelling research away from unprofitable areas which have a public benefit .
For that reason , I have voted for amendments in the first reading for safeguards which can be further considered in the second reading .
These concerns related to affordable medical research and treatment , animal welfare and the concerns for developing countries .
I am in favour of the setting-up of a bio-ethics committee to look at some of the grey areas while , at the same time , establishing through my positive vote for the directive , a clear framework for intellectual property rights in the biotechnology field .
I will continue to monitor the progress on some of the more controversial areas .
Our GUE / NGL Group is not satisfied with the contents of the Rothley report because the modifications made to the original report were very minor , and therefore the most worrying aspects which led a majority of Members in this House to reject it are still there .
The reasons for our concern derive firstly from ethical considerations regarding the significance given to human dignity .
Despite the ambiguous wording , we feel that there is still potential for an impact on the embryo line and also a possibility of the cloning of human beings and the patenting of aspects or elements of human life , these being passed off as belonging to the category of gene therapy or the like .
There are other reasons , also , connected with economic - specifically commercial - areas , together with ethical aspects .
The possibility of patenting the constituent natural elements of cooking practice , stock breeding , agriculture , therapy or the like seems to us a risky business , since , in addition to depriving peoples , societies or cultures of a customary right , it subjects them to subsequent unfair and intolerable - I might say immoral - economic demands .
Lastly , mention should be made of global biological considerations , given that there is a potential risk to the genetic biodiversity which is so essential for life on earth .
Other considerations relate to the actual activity of research into and discovery of the way in which biological processes operate and the fact that these might be patentable .
Biotechnology patenting raises a number of questions .
The central question is whether it is ethical .
Unlike many other issues with an ethical dimension where the questions are either black or white , the issue of biotechnology has a large grey area .
It is not easy to say to sufferers of genetic diseases , many of whom perceive benefit to be derived from the proposed patenting , that their hope is based in bad ethics .
It is far easier to say such things to multinationals .
However , it must be recognized that many small and medium-sized businesses as well as charitable institutions have invested heavily in scientific research with the aim of assisting in the battle against genetic diseases .
It is therefore regrettable that the controversy over patenting has narrowed the argument to the point where it is suggested that rejection of the patenting proposals will undermine such research in the future .
A laudable effort has clearly been made to improve on the original proposals .
Nevertheless , I believe biotechnology patenting to be unethical , particularly where there might be the potential for an undesirable impact on human life itself .
Genes exist , they belong to no-one , except perhaps all of us .
Political , economic and environmental questions should be addressed in that context .
When we discuss the principle of patenting biotechnologies , we are given plenty of examples to show us the interest of doing so .
These examples are mostly drawn from the human health sector ( insulin production , gene therapy , etc ) .
In economic terms , it is important to recall that forecasts for the biotechnological industry show that most biotechnologies will involve the agricultural and agri-food sectors .
Two years ago , our Group , along with a slim majority of members of the European Parliament , opposed the Commission 's first proposal for a directive on patenting biotechnological inventions .
We know the consequences for this promising sector .
We have now analyzed the improvements in the new Commission proposal with satisfaction .
The Rothley report , as voted for in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , means that the veil can be lifted from some of our questions .
Concerning agriculture in particular , we must not only protect but also develop the principle of the ' farmer 's privilege ' .
I should point out that it is not a real privilege but a legitimate and ancestral right enabling farmers to use some of their crops for seeding purposes .
This right must be extended to the whole animal production sector and not only cattle , as the Commission proposed .
Why should this be applied only to beef producers and not to poultry farmers ?
Our group will therefore support the amendments tabled by the Legal Affairs Committee and other colleagues to strengthen that right .
Our Group on the whole can only support scientific progress enabling human health to be improved .
But certain conditions are necessary so as not to privatize the world heritage that is genetic wealth .
Science must be helped to develop for everyone 's good. we shall therefore refuse to vote for nay principle of patenting a given human gene and , of course any part of the human body .
Our group can only support the creation of an ethics committee , a genuine committee of wise men , to be independent of any economic or political pressures .
In the recent past , with the mad cow crisis , we have seen how difficult but necessary it is to demand that the principle of independence be applied .
We were unable to support Amendment No 74 because it is worded in such a way as to exclude patent protection for , among other things , human proteins .
Sadly , Mr Rothley 's report , today approved by the House , on the patentability of biotechnological products , including plants , animals and human genes , corresponds to what the House rejected a little more than two years ago .
The truth about this vote is that Europe is approving a provision on patenting in the field of biotechnology because the United States and Japan have similar legislation .
Today 's decision is not only demeaning , forcing us into decisions already taken in other countries , it also involves huge risks for biodiversity , for environmental balances , for the freedom of medical research and the protection of the sick , and it heralds events unacceptable to human integrity such as , for example , exchanges of genes , the formation of cellular hybrids made up of man and animals and the creation of genetic weapons .
This is a black day for Europe 's environmentalists and for all of those sections of contemporary society that are concerned about the integrity and sanctity of nature .
. ( DA ) For far too long Europe has been powerless to act as regards legislation to regulate the production of medicines based on biotechnological inventions .
There is a pressing need for provisions in an EU context that will increase motivation to do research on genetically determined diseases .
The report of the European Parliament 's Legal Affairs Committee covers the necessary powers .
It represents significant progress for the European pharmaceutical industry .
Intensive research and the associated production of biotechnological preparations has for too long been concentrated on the United States and Japan , to the detriment of European patients and the European industry , which has had difficulty in developing a commercial sector in this field .
It has also damaged employment in Europe in this knowledge-intensive area .
It is not of course possible to take out a patent on life or on parts of the human body , but it is possible by way of patent legislation to offer the pharmaceutical industry protection which makes it economically acceptable to tackle research challenges whose outcome cannot be predicted .
There are a number of very rare diseases of which an unfortunate common feature is that they are often fatal .
Because of inadequate legislation , the EU has for too long been prevented from establishing the necessary protection of biotechnological inventions .
The necessary ethical factors have now been taken into account ; the important thing now is for the EU to show vigour and resolution and do whatever it can to catch up on lost opportunities .
The many patients suffering from diseases attributable to genetic defects have waited for long enough .
Once again the ' all-round men ' of the European Parliament are facing a very important problem for the future of the European Community and the well-being of its people and animals .
I am not a scientist but am obliged to vote for or against a directive that , as the debate has shown , is highly controversial .
Is it over the legality or the ethics , that there is disagreement ?
The protection of biotechnological inventions is primarily a technical issue , with legal implications , even if yesterday 's passionate debate mostly focused on the ethical and moral side .
Like many of us , I think that we should prevent any wrongful uses or deviations that might call into question the ethnical and social foundations of our society but we cannot stop the progress of research .
So what is the conclusion ?
That the major differences in terms of regulation are leading many European research companies to relocate some of their R & D activities in the USA , Japan and other countries , mainly to enjoy a more favourable scientific , economic and regulatory environment .
We must acknowledge that research developments in biotechnology are taking place faster and faster aborad without our being able to take direct action , in a field where biotechnological progress should be used to the benefit of present and future generations .
We also know that for Europeans , the respect of humans as individuals is a priority , that we must guarantee human dignity and , why not , animal dignity too , by avoiding however possible any attacks on the dignity of living beings by means of a failure to control biotechnological inventions .
We must therefore regulate and that is why I shall be voting in favour of the Rothley report .
It is a compromise report and has been discussed for many years . That should satisfy most people .
I followed Mr Rothley 's efforts in the Committee on legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and I would like to congratulate him on the work he has submitted to us .
It is honourable work for a parliamentarian to have produced .
Two years ago , the European Parliament rejected a Commission proposal on patenting biotechnological inventions .
The new proposal before us now show that we were right to reject the previous one , because a certain number of improvements have been made .
However , as the large number of tabled amendments shows , a good deal of uncertainty remained .
In terms of vegetal matter , we favour the use of biotechnology to genetically improve seeds but we oppose removal or reduction of the ' farmer 's privilege ' .
World farming should not be dependent on a few multinational seed producers .
As far as application of biotechnology in the human health field is concerned , we are in favour in principle , but of course we can only oppose , for ethnical reasons , issuing patents for a given human gene .
The genetic wealth of mankind 's heritage cannot be privatized by any means .
We perfectly understand the usefulness of the principle of patenting , enabling companies to expect a return on their investment in terms of research .
But while we can accept that principle , we must also have sufficient guarantees .
In no case can patenting enable companies to market systematically genetically modified products .
The main amendments designed to define serious guarantees were not adopted and the text emerging from all the votes in plenary session is an incoherent one . That is why we were unable to vote for it .
I voted against the Rothley report with some reluctance as I accept the need for a European legal framework for patents - all patents - and respect the extremely hard work put into the report by Mr Rothley and others .
However , I believe that it was important , on this first reading , for Parliament to signal more clearly its ethical and political concerns about the potential consequences of a large-scale expansion of biotechnology .
In particular , I am concerned that in agriculture and expansion of biotechnology will simply result in a new stage of the sort of industrial farming that has already proved so harmful to our environment and our food .
We need to take more care to preserve the planet 's biological diversity and thus its food security .
The ' enclosure of knowledge ' by corporations in the developing world will increase global inequality and may result in the privatisation of the developing world 's genetic resources .
If and when the directive is finally passed , Parliament must closely scrutinize the behaviour of the EU 's representation in the WTO and ensure that the developing world is not exploited and that the Convention on Biological Diversity is respected .
The future lies in biological farming , not biotechnology .
To explain our vote against the Rothley report and the related Commission proposal for a directive , I would like to say the following :
The potential of modern biotechnology surpasses every scientific precedent and promises numerous possibilities for the prevention and treatment of disease , and for the solution of agricultural , environmental and other problems .
It is true that to suppress what the human mind has thought of , is dangerous .
Our aim is to support science , new discoveries and new technologies .
However , there can be no compromise with our demand that any developments must not go against nature and life , but be compatible with , respect , and protect them .
The whitewashing of dangers does not mean that they are non-existent , much less that they have been averted .
We fear that unthinking and uncontrolled intervention in complex systems that nature took hundreds of millions of year to perfect , and interference with the genetic codes potentially of all living organisms , including man , in the name of scientific progress and the fight against disease , may create huge risks of disturbing , degrading or upsetting the ecosystem , with unforeseeable consequences for life on our planet .
The transformation of mankind from a single and undivided entity into partially disparate sub-species created by multinational companies , which reproduce and can be transmuted for any use , and which are indeed covered by patents , is an abuse and degradation of the human race and an essential negation of science itself and of human ingenuity .
There is a risk that genetically mutated organisms will constitute the pollution of the future , a pollution that is irreversible , with the power to reproduce , mutate , multiply , and compete with natural species which will not have the time or ability to develop defence mechanisms .
Nobody can foresee and provide guarantees about the numbers and types of diseases that might arise from genetic interventions and from the unforeseen results of laboratory teratogenesis .
The consequences cannot be estimated and will not be immediately apparent , but will emerge only from their outcomes which , when they become perceptible , may prove to be destructive and irreversible .
It worries us in particular that these procedures for safeguarding and developing biotechnological discoveries are being carried out in the name of competition and to ensure the free operation of the internal market .
For us , it is unthinkable and unacceptable to interfere with the chain of life for the sake of increasing the economic activity of major multinational enterprises and to create a market and competitive investment , while allowing dangerous and in this context criminal margins of divergence from control mechanisms , safety procedures and guarantees of respect for ethical imperatives , with the aim of creating a new and superior neogenetic order .
We are facing an enormous challenge to the future of life itself and the dangers inherent in that leave no room for omissions , negligence and compromise .
All the more , it is unacceptable to leave the process in the hands of multinationals , because the interests they represent are not the best guarantee of respect for the integrity of human life .
Of that , we have had numerous and sombre examples already .
We therefore call for a radical review of the directive , with the cooperation of pan-European interdisciplinary scientific bodies which , after careful , well informed and thorough study , will estimate the limits and appropriateness of biotechnological applications , once they have been able to obtain and provide clear information about the risks and benefits of such endeavours and to define clear and strict regulations , fields of application and the most stringent possible safety conditions .
Under present conditions , biotechnological inventions and their application resemble the dropping of a new and perhaps incalculably more dangerous atomic bomb , and it will then be immaterial who holds the ' patent ' for the responsibility and consequences of that .
First and foremost , it must be confirmed that this proposal concerning the legal protection of biotechnological inventions signifies Europe 's clear-cut commitment to scientific progress and that it preserves the legal security and dignity of human beings .
It is now almost 10 years since the publication of the Commission 's first proposal .
At that time , Parliament vigorously protested , regarding the ethical dimension as having been ignored in the text .
Technical aspects were clearly favoured over ethical aspects in that initial proposal , and that was why Parliament decided , at the time , to reject the Commission 's proposal .
Today we have a new Commission text which , in general terms , draws together our earlier concerns .
These ethical aspects have been given greater weight and further examination in the report of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Indeed , the report by that Committee assures us that the ethical dimension is now an integral part of the text .
The text therefore includes a ban on the cloning of human beings and calls upon the Executive Committee to set up a Committee on Ethics to address biotechnological matters .
No one will be able to say that this Directive has not been sufficiently discussed in the European Parliament .
We have to pay tribute to Professor Monti who , as responsible Commissioner , has done excellent work and has understood the reasoning and concerns of this House , accepting over fifty amendments .
This is an example of fruitful work between the Commission and Parliament .
However , for certain political groups , the question is clearly not one of arriving at a consensus and producing a reasonable text , but one of systematically boycotting the Directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions .
Their strategy is clear : facile , emotive arguments which the general public accepts without any information as to the correct legal basis .
Patent law is not a new concept either in Europe or worldwide .
It forms part of the law of competence and has been implemented for many years .
We should not be misled : what we are dealing with here is harmonization of the laws of the different Member States .
Emphasis should be given to the importance of this sector to the future of medicinal products .
Medicinal products which originate from biotechnology are now a reality .
Of the 50 new medicinal products which come onto the market annually , between 10 and 15 are the fruits of biotechnological research .
Diseases such as cancer , Alzheimer 's , diabetes and cystic fibrosis , amongst others , are already being treated with such products .
And we should not forget the hepatitis B and C vaccines which , thanks to biotechnology , have eliminated former potential risks of viral contamination .
I could go on . We should all acknowledge that there are products which have been used in treatment and which , although they have not actually cured certain diseases , have indeed improved the quality of life of patients .
The European biotechnology industry is a long way behind the sector in the US and Japan .
We , as European parliamentarians , should help Europe develop stable and consensus-based legislation and it is my belief that , after all these years of discussing the topic , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has produced a balanced text which takes into account not only the future development of the biotechnology industry in Europe but also the ethical dimension deriving from it .
A directive which does not offer a certain legislative framework in line with current international agreements will lead the European biotechnology industry to a dead end in development terms .
What is worse , we will become mere consumers of American and Japanese products .
Europe cannot fall behind in a sector which is in the full throes of development and which the Commission has acknowledged , in various texts , as being the major sector of the future .
I shall not be voting for the Rothley report , because it does not examine in sufficient detail and fails to take adequately into account the fundamental principles which apply to the human body .
My premise is that the human body is not patentable at any stage of its formation or development , and nor are any elements or products of it , or the knowledge of its genetic structure .
Absolute priority is being given to the opportunities for scientific research , whereas the social consequences are not adequately assessed .
This is not a true reflection of society 's own priorities .
Patent law will also allow pharmaceutical concerns to obtain monopolies , yet human life must never be subject to any kind of monopoly .
The fact is that patent law gives absolute privileges to the firm which makes the highest bid , without taking proper account of the social consequences of this .
I voted against the Rothley report , but not because I am against a statutory regulation on the patenting of biotechnological inventions .
I voted against because this report , like the Commission communication , has simply disregarded Parliament 's very serious ethical misgivings which resulted in its rejection on 1 March 1995 .
In order to comply with the interests of the gene industry , the Directive turns basic principles of patent law upside down .
The discovery of individual genes is to be reinterpreted as a patentable invention , so that licences can be granted for their economic exploitation and economic monopolies can be set up to cash in on them .
The supporters of this patent law are , with this Directive , dismantling fundamental ethical limitations to the human profit motive and are granting individual economic interests virtually totalitarian claim on the fundamental elements of all life .
Contrary to the assertions of the industry , this Directive will also impose massive limitations on freedom of research .
According to this legislation , all that would remain free from the licence requirement would be the testing of the invention , but not scientific experiments based on the patented results .
This restriction on scientific freedom has been rejected by the German Medical Association and by the Committee of Inquiry of the Austrian and German parliaments .
Ultimately , therefore , this creation of a monopoly will also result in a massive increase in the cost of medical treatment and drugs .
Contrary to the international Convention on Biodiversity , the intention here is also to allow access to the genetic resources of the Third World without any form of material compensation .
As a result , the northern industrialized countries will acquire monopolies over genetic potential which will greatly exacerbate the North-South conflict .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.50 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Congratulations .
I have to say that most of you here are Luxemburgers .
You are not alone , there are members from other States , but the Luxembourg presence is impressive .
Programme of the Luxembourg presidency
The next item is the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the Luxembourg presidency programme .
Mr President , given the members present I did wonder whether I should not give my speech in Luxemburgish .
But as I hope that many other members of the European Parliament will be joining us , I shall speak in one of the European Union 's official languages .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Luxembourg is now called upon to take over the Presidency of the Council for the tenth time .
Over the decades , it has transpired that the rotation of presidencies has been a powerful means of raising public awareness of European questions and rallying national administrations to our common cause .
Above all , I should emphasize that Europe is seen by our peoples as a collective undertaking , in whose management everyone takes part .
The fact that the national identity of the smallest Member State has not been called into question by over forty years of integration is seen by the citizens of the candidate countries as a reassuring element and , therefore , is important for the internal debates about accession .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following the conclusion of the intergovernmental conference , for which I must once again congratulate our Dutch friends in the warmest way , it is now a priority for the new Presidency to give a final form to the texts which have been agreed upon , to verify for one last time that they match up in the eleven languages and submit them for signature by the plenipotentiaries , in Amsterdam , on 2 October 1997 .
In accordance with the conclusions of the European Council , we shall take the appropriate measures to ensure the proper functioning of the Treaty in the fields indicated when it was signed .
The Presidency will have another priority , that of preparing the decisions that the Union will have to take next December on the subject of opening new negotiations with a view to enlargement of the Union .
The European Parliament was consulted this morning in respect of the Commission 's opinion on the accession requests and presented with a detailed communication , called Agenda 2000 , on the future of common policies , horizontal questions linked to enlargement and the future financial framework .
Agenda 2000 and its appendices come to over a thousand pages and it is undoubtedly the most substantial communication made by the Commission to the Council since the Community began .
This communication is extremely dense and well presented .
The Presidency pays tribute to the Commission and its services for their impressive work .
It also welcomes the fact that the Commission has clearly shouldered its responsibilities and is submitting to us a project characterized by exemplary farsightedness .
It is now for the Council , in particular , but also for the European Parliament , to examine the text attentively , as well as its implications and the recommendations contained in it .
For its part , the Luxembourg Presidency is determined to work upon this communication and its various related opinions without prejudging it , in all objectivity and in full transparency .
We note that the Commission has chosen the approach of differentiation in opening accession negotiations with the applicant countries .
The European Council in Luxembourg will have to take a decision on that choice .
That said , in any case and regardless of the final decision taken in Luxembourg in December , the strategy of enlarging the European Union must be a process of inclusion and not exclusion .
In this respect , the Council should pay very special attention to the definition of a strengthened pre-accession strategy , whose long-term objective would be the accession of all the countries that have asked to join and which have been considered in the Commission opinion .
We shall see to it that these countries ' desire to join will be fairly and squarely dealt with and that the discussions will only concern exactly when that desire can be satisfied .
It is the Presidency 's intention to do all it can to succeed , at the Luxembourg European Council , in making a clear decision to launch the enlargement process .
The Commission 's communication is quite pertinent in reminding us that the enlargement process is part of a broader approach which demands that all the Member States dedicate themselves fully to it .
The Commission has offered us a number of guidelines for the future of the Union 's policies , in particular the structural policy , the common agricultural policy , and the future financial framework of the Union .
The Commission has made a full list of the reforming decisions that the Union will be forced to take in the coming years .
As you know , the Amsterdam European Council called on the Council to draft a report on these questions in time for the Luxembourg European Council on 12 and 13 December .
The Presidency will take on that task in order to enable the European Council to take decisions relating to enlargement in full knowledge of the facts .
The ' General Affairs ' Council has been asked by the European Council to lead the negotiations .
It will be coordinating and standardizing the work .
In our mind , this report should reflect all the sensitivities of the Member States , particularly those relating to the maintenance of Community solidarity and budgetary rigour .
It should also stake out some priorities for the future of the Union 's policies .
While we want , of course , to contribute to the clarification of some of the fundamental guidelines , in particular those concerning the future financial framework of the Union , the common agricultural policy and the structural policies , the deadlines for decisions in this area are more remote .
To conclude that point , I should like to repeat that the Luxembourg Presidency will do all it can for the enlargement decision to be objective and inclusive .
The European Parliament can have its point of view heard throughout the process .
The citizens of Europe will , through you , have the right of expression in respect of this huge project and great ambition , that is the enlargement of our Union .
At the Amsterdam European Council , the Luxembourg Presidency received a mandate to convene an extraordinary meeting of the European Council .
This meeting will be concerned mainly with the examination of initiatives aimed at creating jobs in small firms , the new consultative group on competitiveness , the study of good practices in relation to Member States ' employment policies and initiatives taken by the EIB to create jobs .
The Commission and the Council , in conjunction with the European Bank , should draft a report on the state of work in view of the special session of the European Council on jobs .
The Luxembourg Presidency has already started work on this project .
It thinks that it is vital for the heads of State and Governments to invest personally in the preparation of the ' Employment ' Summit , so that it can meet the expectations of ordinary people in the European Union and lead to practical results .
To enrich the analytical work , we have called on a certain number of experts .
They will be working in close conjunction with the Presidency to explore new avenues for the fight against unemployment and for maintaining existing jobs .
It is unthinkable that Europe should resign itself to the prospect of marginalizing millions of its citizens , excluding them from society and economic activity .
Unemployment plunges the social categories affected into material and moral distress .
Young people are often its prime victims .
Employment will therefore be at the heart of our concerns .
The only way to approach full employment in the medium term is to ensure strong growth in the coming years , growth that is sustainable and job-creative .
It is possible since the conditions are now favourable .
We must now elaborate and executive tailored macro-economic and structural policies in close cooperation with one another .
The Presidency has invited the Member States , the institutions and the social partners to take an active part in the discussions to pave the way for the Summit .
The Member States have been asked , for example , to advance the presentation of the updating of the multiannual programmes on employment to the end of July .
On this basis , the Commission and the Council will draft the joint report , as provided for in the new Title on employment in the Amsterdam Treaty , one part of the treaty which will be anticipated .
This approach is in keeping with the relevant provisions taken up in the resolution on growth and employment adopted in Amsterdam .
Alongside employment , the other aspects of European social policy , in the broad sense of the term , also deserve all our attention .
Europe has developed a social model that grants workers a certain number of rights .
They are now part of our culture .
Our model should not be called into question , as it is based on solidarity , in terms of a policy of social deregulation .
We shall take care to give a fresh boost to one of the issues on which the Council has not made progress for some time .
In view of recent , painful news concerning the restructuring of firms , we shall make every effort necessary to make sure that discussions over workers rights in terms of information , consultation and participation are set on new , more promising bases .
At the same time , the Presidency will ensure that the Council offers a binding legal framework for the agreement reached a few weeks ago between the European social partners on part-time work .
Of all the subjects that we shall be giving priority to over the coming six months , one is the social acquis in the context of enlargement .
Initially it means , in the framework of the structured dialogue , planned for 7 October next , forging very close contacts between the political leaders of the Member States and their counterparts in the countries of central and eastern Europe which wish to join the Union .
Economic and Monetary Union is the most important and most ambitious economic and political project that Europe has implemented since the beginning of the integration process .
The Amsterdam European Council made some substantial , real progress with a view to completing EMU on 1 January 1999 , the date set by the Treaty and which will be kept to .
The adoption of the stability and growth pact and the resolution on growth and employment guarantees the pursuit of healthy macro-economic and budgetary policies and the development of employment .
Thanks to this progress , most of the technical preparations for introducing EMU have now been completed .
The euro 's legal framework is now in place .
Now everyone involved , including the governments , must speed up their practical efforts to prepare for introduction of the euro .
In accordance with the conclusions of the Amsterdam European Council , the Presidency is committed to a study of the effective application of Article 109 .
This means setting general guidelines on an exchange policy that will be compatible with the statutes of the future European Central Bank .
The Luxembourg European Council will also be given a report on the ways of improving the coordination of economic policies .
This work will be carried out actively .
The European economic operators , for the most part , would like the single currency to be introduced on target .
It will create a climate of confidence which the European economy greatly needs .
It will favour a recovery in investment and will significantly contribute to job creation .
The efforts to make economies more healthy have been considerable .
Never before have European economies known such a high level of convergence .
For that reason , it is counterproductive to perpetuate through any kind of declaration or speculation the uncertainties that are now holding up expansion in Europe .
EMU is technically on track .
It is one of our main aims since the very credibility of the European project very much depends on it .
We must now complete the work so that decisions can be taken next year in serenity and in the interests of the economic future of the whole of our Union .
The citizens are also very concerned at the growth in all kinds of crime .
That is why work in the area of justice and internal affairs will be focused on implementing the action programme on organized crime , as enshrined by the European Council in Amsterdam .
The drugs problem calls for urgent action .
Its costs in human terms are huge .
That is why the Dublin European Council confirmed , as a priority , effective and coordinated action in the fight against drugs and their dependency .
The Presidency intends to pursue this action with determination , especially the multiannual programme aimed at exchanges of knowledge between the Member States on methods of research , information and measures targeting specific groups of the population .
Still on drugs , an evaluation report will be presented to the Luxembourg European Council on implementing the joint action on the harmonization of legislation and practices of judicial authorities and police and customs services .
The implementation of the joint action on synthetic drugs is high on our agenda .
In this context , we shall be launching a new initiative .
The Presidency will be holding a joint meeting of Ministers of Health , Justice and Internal Affairs in order to hold a debate on the various aspects of the drugs problem .
The Presidency intends to bring face to face those in charge of prevention and politicians in charge of repression .
The Luxembourg Presidency will also endeavour to give a boost to regional cooperation , in particular with South America , the Caribbean and Russia , and a structured dialogue with the associated countries and trans-Atlantic dialogue in the drugs area .
As for asylum and immigration , we propose the examination of the Commission project on the temporary protection of displaced persons and on implementation of the Dublin Convention .
In the field of fighting corruption , a concrete follow-up will be given to the Commission 's communication on an anti-corruption policy .
More generally speaking , the Luxembourg Presidency will prepare the field for the entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty , involving incorporation of the Schengen acquis .
The need to strengthen the dynamics of the single market was precisely and firmly highlighted in the recent action plan on the internal market presented by the Commission at the initiative of Commissioner Monti .
The Amsterdam European Council took on board the general aim of this plan by confirming the importance that it attached to the proper functioning of the internal market as a vital element of a global strategy aimed at promoting competitiveness , economic growth and employment throughout the European Union .
From that viewpoint , the Presidency will work with determination to launch the implementation of the four strategic objectives of the action plan .
That implementation should be phased in , in an overall perspective that will involve all of the three coming Presidencies .
It will be aimed at achieving , with the European Parliament 's support , I hope , significant progress in terms of the main priority subjects pinpointed in the action plan .
I should like to repeat once again that the Luxembourg Presidency thinks that there is no question of taking a purely economic view of the internal market .
We are convinced that the internal market can only flourish and produce its effects to the full , to the benefit of the citizens , if it is complemented with courageous policies in terms of environmental protection and consumer health .
As far as taxation is concerned , the Presidency will endeavour to achieve progress on the plans currently being worked out , on indirect and direct taxes .
In the latter field , apart from an expected proposal on the common tax system to be applied to the payment of interest and payments between companies and their subsidiaries in different Member States , special attention will be paid to the findings of the taxation policy group chaired by Commissioner Monti .
The Presidency expects a first list of areas subjected to harmonization and a code of good conduct to be drafted .
As I have just pointed out , safeguarding a high level of consumer protection and therefore the health and safety of European citizens in their daily lives is a vital dimension of the construction of a credible and efficient internal market .
I know that the European Parliament shares that approach .
It has shown its conviction and commitment to that on several occasions .
Changes to Articles 129 and 129A in the Amsterdam Treaty are considerable steps forward .
The bases of a new departure in terms of consumer protection and public health have been laid down .
There is obviously a link with the particular worries that gripped European public opinions in 1996 about what people now insist on calling the ' mad cow crisis ' .
Thanks to the action of your ad hoc committee of inquiry , now taken up by your ad hoc committee responsible for monitoring recommendations on BSE , the elements for taking a new approach to food safety throughout the production and consumption chain have been identified .
For its part , the Commission has launched various measures and taken firm decisions designed to restore consumer confidence - and we are all consumers and citizens .
This effort now needs to be extended wherever necessary .
The Luxembourg Presidency intends to contribute fully to setting up this new food policy strategy .
For that purpose , it is going to propose that a wide-ranging political debate be started in the various areas of the Council concerned .
Apart from the practical decisions expected of it , the Council should have its voice heard in the context of this important discussion , which involves all the Union 's institutions , as well as representatives of civil society and the interested economic sectors , farmers and processing industries .
It is only by tckling those issues head on and in full transparency that we can recover and increase that confidence which is at the basis of a harmonious functioning of the internal market .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately I cannot , in this speech , go into all the other areas of activity concerning the internal development of the European Union to which my colleagues in the Luxembourg Government are going to be dedicating all their energy .
In the written programme of the Luxembourg Presidency , which is available to you , you will find a very detailed presentation of the aims that we have set in these sectors .
It now remains for me to explain to you the spirit in which the Presidency intends to deal with the main problems posed internationally at present .
In terms of multilateral trade relations , I shall focus on just two priorities .
Following the agreements on basic telecommunications and information technologies reached over the last six months , we shall have to consolidate the liberalization of these services within the WTO by means of an agreement on financial services by the end of the year .
On the other hand , the European Union should confirm its traditional action in favour of the less advanced countries .
We shall be paying particular attention to the preparation of a high-level meeting dedicated to the less-advanced countries in October and implementing the Council 's conclusions on market access for these countries .
The Presidency will strive for the harmonious development of trans-Atlantic relations to which we attach particular importance .
We shall rapidly put into practice the conclusions of the The Hague summit .
In economic terms , special attention will be paid to continuing work on a joint study and the promotion of the trans-Atlantic market place .
For that purpose , the entry into force and possible extension of the mutual recognition agreements should be ensured in the best possible conditions .
The Presidency will actively pursue , with our American partners , the search for a settlement of the problems relating to the Helms-Burton and d 'Amato Acts .
That will , of course , be compatible with the legal principles to which we are firmly attached .
The Presidency will cooperate with its trans-Atlantic partners in searching for a solution to the conflicts in former Yugoslavia , the Middle East , Cyprus , central Africa and elsewhere .
In the field of justice and internal affairs , now of special importance in our trans-Atlantic relations , the Presidency will set up cooperation in the field of fighting terrorism , organized crime and international drugs trafficking .
The Presidency will attach great importance to the implementation of the conclusions of the Denver Summit between the European Union and Canada , in accordance with the declaration of a common policy and an action plan between the European Union and Canada .
I now come to the numerous crises where Europe is involved .
The situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina remains very worrying .
Progress achieved to consolidate Bosnia as a single State is far too slow .
Do the parties sincerely want to implement the commitments that they made at Dayton or do they want to rush into a new disaster ?
The Council has clearly recalled the approach to follow and has set the conditions for European aid .
The institutions of Bosnia-Herzegovina must now be set up in full and their functioning must not be blocked .
Refugees must be allowed to return and war criminals must be handed over to the international criminal court .
September 's municipal elections must be free and honest .
Together with the OSCE and the High Representative , the European Union will be observing them closely and will draw the necessary conclusions .
The international community is still awaiting the full implementation of the González report on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
The Belgrade authorities must ensure the respect of human rights in Kosovo and open dialogue on the definition of greater autonomy .


The completion of the new steps in the transition process in Eastern Slavonia is also necessary .
In Croatia , human and minority rights must be respected throughout the country .
The repatriation of displaced persons and refugees should finally be carried out .
In Albania , the European Union is making a vital contribution to the international effort to restore and rehabilitate the country .
The Presidency will continue that action .
The follow-up of the legislative elections at the end of June is an important step in the process of restoring Albania to a proper state .
The Presidency will act in conjunction with the OSCE , in particular , whose coordination efforts its supports , WEU and the Council of Europe .
A conference on economic assistance for Albania will be held shortly .
I must pay particular tribute to Italy and the other European countries which have sent their soldiers to help to stabilize the situation .
In the Middle East , the peace process is in a worrying stalemate .
There is no alternative to that process .
The appeal made in Amsterdam by the European Union in favour of peace in the Middle East should pave the way for establishing a fair , lasting and global peace in the region . The Presidency will endeavour , by means of the efforts of the European Union 's special envoy , to encourage the Israeli and Palestinian leaderships to resume negotiations to make progress in applying the agreements already concluded and to relaunch talks on the final status .
Each part must abstain from taking unilateral measures that are likely to prejudice the outcome of the negotiations on the final status .
In order to fight terrorism , lasting and effective security cooperation must be established .
Promoting human rights , democracy and a civil society is another priority , as well as the recovery of the economic and social situation of Palestinians .

In the context of the work on enlarging the European Union , the Presidency will also be preparing the opening of accession negotiations with Cyprus .
It attaches special interest to a political settlement of the Cyprus question . We shall be actively supporting direct negotiations between the leadership of the two Cypriot communities that have just been restarted under the aegis of the United Nations .


The association Council of 29 April last was a major step in relations between the European Union and Turkey .



We shall support the dynamism set in motion at that Council by encouraging further progress in questions likely to improve our relations with that country , in particular in the human rights field .
The development of political and economic links between the European Union and the Russian Federation is of primordial importance . New prospects are presenting themselves following the developments of recent months , including the conclusion of a NATO-Russia agreement .
The second half of 1997 will probably see the entry into force of the partnership and cooperation agreements signed on 24 June 1994 . The Presidency will actively pursue the preparation of this important date for holding the first cooperation council with Russia .
A European Union-Russia Summit will be held this autumn .
A first summit this autumn in Kyiv between the European Union and Ukraine should also restate the importance of our relations with that country . These should be intensified following the entry into force of the partnership and cooperation agreement .
The holding of a first partnership and cooperation Council at ministerial level is planned . The Union will not relax its efforts and will pursue all actions in favour of nuclear safety in Ukraine , as in other countries of eastern and central Europe , in respect in particular of conclusions reached in that context at the G8 Summit in Denver .
The continuous strengthening of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership is of particular importance for the Union 's external policy .
We therefore wish to see new Euro-Mediterranean association agreements signed with Egypt , Lebanon , Jordan and Algeria in the near future .
The organisation of the second Conference of Industry Ministers in Marrakesh and a Conference of Environment Ministers in Helsinki should give that a fresh boost .
The Presidency will make its own contribution to the development of the social , cultural and human partnership by organizing in Luxembourg a conference on education , with the theme of the perception of others .
In Africa , the Presidency will support the stabilization , reconciliation and democratization process in the Great Lakes region , especially in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
It will act through the mission of the European Union 's special envoy . Constructive relations with the new authorities in the Republic should be established and developed in accordance with the progress made in the process .
The commitments made by President Kabila on holding elections , protecting refugees and holding inquiries into human rights violations should be honoured .
In respect of the renewal of the Lomé Convention , the Presidency will organize two debates at Council-level , one involving Foreign Affairs Ministers and the other Ministers responsible for Development .
The Commission has committed itself to providing the Council by the end of October with a communication of a mainly political nature on adaptations to be made to the partnership that links the European Union to 70 partner States .
The Commission will then put before the Council a draft negotiation mandate with a view to renewing the privileged and exemplary framework of the Lomé Convention .
Europe attaches special attention to its relations with Asia . The Presidency will work to deepen the Union 's relations with the ASEAN countries , in accordance with the conclusions of the ministerial meeting held in Singapore in February and will start work on preparing for the ASEM Summit to be held in London in 1998 .
The Presidency will also closely follow the process under way in Hong Kong , especially the respect of agreements and human rights and freedoms of the population .
The negotiation of new agreements and the implementation of bilateral and inter-regional agreements , signed in recent years , and the development and consolidation of already established political dialogues , are definite priorities in terms of the European Union 's relations with Latin American countries .
In this context , the negotiation of a new agreement with Mexico and preparation to implement the second stage of our agreements with Mercosur and Chile will retain much of our attention .
Initial thoughts will be developed in preparation for a summit of heads of State and Governments due in the first half of 1998 .
As for the relations with the European Parliament , the six-month Luxembourg Presidency will be particularly rich in major debates on the future of the European Union .
The Amsterdam Treaty made the institutional changes needed to make the decision-making process in the Union more efficient , more democratic and more transparent . The legislative role of the European Parliament , now shared on an equal footing with the Council , has been clearly strengthened by the simplification and extension of the codecision process .
It should also be pointed out that the number of procedures has been cut to three , i.e. opinion , codecision and consultation . The European Parliament 's role to fight and prevent crime has been strengthened : the Council will consult the European Parliament before adopting outline decisions , decisions or conventions on this matter and the European Parliament is entitled to make proposals for the procedure governing its own election to be based on common principles for all the Member States .
We shall listen to the European Parliament on the subject of enlargement and reforms of the internal policies .
The European Parliament shall be informed regularly of the progress made and will be consulted on the major foreign policy issues that we shall have to deal with over the coming six months .
The Presidency wants to establish close relations with your Assembly , based on exchange and dialogue .
Just as it is committed to the European Parliament , the Luxembourg Presidency will honour its obligations to the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the last intergovernmental conference is barely over but the Union will once again have to meet vital challenges in the coming months .
This Presidency will endeavour to ensure that this difficult debate will be held in a climate of solidarity that must underlie all relations between the Member States which share the same European ideal .
The Presidency will serve that ideal with commitment and devotion .
Mr President , it is my pleasure to welcome the Luxembourg Presidency on behalf of the Socialist Group .
The programme was presented to an ever so attentive audience - after all , Mr President , Luxemburgers are used to replacing quantity with quality .
Mr President , your Presidency begins in the wake of the Amsterdam Summit .
One of the decisions taken at that summit was to hold a new summit , on employment .
Given the rate of unemployment that refuses to budge , the Council has finally given a strong signal .
Perhaps just now it is only a signal , but the Socialist Group welcomes it and intends to use the coming weeks and months to contribute to a new employment dynamic in Europe .
We wish to use in the most effective , most aggressive and most constructive way possible the opportunity of the next four months to act in favour of jobs .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Employment , as you know , is busy drafting a report on , this issue .
The Socialist group has set up a task-force to tackle its own consultations .
Our leader , Mrs Pauline Green , has just sent the heads of State and Governments a letter indicating six avenues down which our efforts and proposals should head : improving the coordination of national economic policies ; reducing labour costs ; ending youth and long-term unemployment ; looking for new approaches to working hours ; developing social and environmental jobs ; encouraging public and private investment .
Beyond those avenues , if we want this joint effort to succeed , we must reach a definite agreement - and I am pleased that you made a specific reference to this point , Mr President - to set up at European Union level a social and economic model to refer to .
For us socialists we think that the social model should be modernized along with labour legislation but that that should be done without systematically making jobs more precarious or dismantling the public service .
In more practical terms , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the Luxembourg Council must tell us what it intends to do for the decisions taken at the Luxembourg Summit on 20-22 November to be taken into account in the 1998 budget , whose first reading before the European Parliament is due on 21 November .
Mr President , the Luxembourg Presidency claims that it wants to prepare carefully and circumspectly the December European Council on enlargement .
I seized on the fact that you feel that the strategy should be a process of inclusion rather than exclusion vis-à-vis the candidate countries .
The Socialist Group thinks that we should keep two conditions in mind throughout the process .
We want the European Union to remain a coherent political whole .
We do not want the European Union diluted into a mere free trade area at the end of the process .
Secondly , and following on from the first condition , before any enlargement , we must reach an agreement on qualified majority voting if the European Union is to continue to take decisions in all fields .
Mr President , these high ambitions should not prevent us form putting our own house into order .
The mad cow crisis is still creating scandals .
The Council has a major role to play if the healthy Europe that Mr Santer promised us is to become a reality .
The Council should , for example , grant the necessary funding for research into BSE .
The Member States should also take their monitoring role seriously when it comes to a properly run meat market .
What is the use of extending the internal market and removing national regulations and bring down borders if the market is riddled with fraud ?
The European Union is in risk of having an institutional crisis in the Autumn unless the Council and Commission take consumer health protection seriously .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the Socialist Group wants to be a critical and constructive partner of the Luxembourg Presidency .
We hope above all - and the last fortnight has given us some encouraging signs - that the Presidency will make plenty of contacts with the European Parliament and take our proposals seriously .
We wish you good luck in this difficult but exciting task .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , your first great challenge is the special summit on employment in November .
I think we must all be afraid of the risk that our citizens will be disillusioned once again .
We shall also be assuming our responsibilities , and we are holding a PPE congress in Toulouse at the start of November .
I hope that I can bring together government leaders from our political family there .
In any event , preparations will be made for this summit by a special working party , in which our group will also be involved .
I think we must not give the impression that a gathering of the most senior political leaders of the Union will be enough to solve a problem which has been dogging us for years .
In contrast to other continents , unemployment is a continuing scourge in Europe , which may ultimately come to jeopardize the legitimacy of our societies and the process of European integration .
In my view , the success of the fight against unemployment depends on the combined efforts of the economies of the Member States .
Stabilizing public finances is a prime condition for restoring sound and lasting growth , and an absolute necessity for creating new jobs .
At the same time , each Member State must introduce greater flexibility to the labour market by lowering the cost of unskilled work and by reducing the social security burden and contributions .
However , the PPE Group wishes to emphasize once again its attachment to the European model of society , based on the social market economy .
This social market economy means that the campaign against rigidity must not degenerate into wild deregulation which has the effect of increasing inequality and of putting at risk the least fortunate among our fellow citizens .
We therefore say yes to greater competitiveness and yes to solutions that provide renewal , with initiative and the spirit of enterprise being allowed to flourish , but without the rigidity and bureaucratic obstacles that are a feature of planned economies .
We also wish to see these reforms of our economic policy decided in an open social dialogue and by seeking the broadest possible consensus .
How can we convince our fellow citizens that the European Union offers added value ?
After Amsterdam , we need to complete and deepen the internal market more than ever .
EMU is meant to eliminate high transaction costs , currency risks and competitive devaluations .
That is why achieving the objectives of the monetary union and respecting the timetable for it are so closely bound up with an active employment policy in the Member States .
We therefore wish to see a reopening of the debate on the trans-European networks in transport , energy and telecommunications .
These will promote intra-Community trade and improve the economic structure of Europe .
The other great challenge for your presidency , Mr President-in-Office , is the enlargement of the Union .
And I would warn your presidency of the disastrous consequences for the unity of our continent of any sense of frustration on the part of those peoples which are not included in the first wave of enlargement .
We must never forget that the opening of the Union to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , the Baltic States and Cyprus is , above all , a political process .
If we confine ourselves to economic criteria , the European project will decline into nothing more than a free trade zone .
What we wish to see , however , is a political Union inspired by a democratic ideal and backed by a project of civilization , for essential geopolitical reasons .
We should not under any circumstances engage in a procedure which would create a feeling of exclusion on the part of tens of millions of Europeans .
We have to keep the prospect of accession open for all candidates , set up a permanent conference and reinforce the pre-accession strategy - in other words , adopt an approach which was referred to by the Commission this morning as ' ins ' and ' pre-ins ' .
Agenda 2000 , the Santer package - some call it ' Jacques III ' - means a real reworking of the Union 's structural policy , and indeed of such crucial areas of common policy as agriculture and regional policy .
This is essential for enlargement , and to remain within 1.27 % of GNP .
However , these restrictions also entail a risk of horse-trading which could lead to acquired rights and selfish national concerns taking centre stage .
It is your responsibility and that of the Commission to avoid a serious crisis in the coming discussions which would have a damaging effect on the population .
Let us try instead to move things more in a Community direction , so that the common interest takes precedence over the mere totting-up of national interests .
You must harness the driving force which Luxembourg has always been , Mr President-in-Office and Mr President of the Commission , and it must do all it can to ensure that the Union emerges strengthened from the difficult negotiations which lie ahead .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office , in the programme that you have set for your Presidency , you pick out three main events : the extraordinary Summit on Jobs , the enlargement process and pursuit of monetary preparations .
On behalf of my Group I shall focus on the first two .
If you want a more efficient and tightly-knit Europe and to act primarily for the citizens of Europe , then you will have to tackle the unemployment problem firmly in order to satisfy their expectations .
We cannot hide from you the fact that we continue to hope for a genuine evolution of behaviour that will facilitate the creation jobs , especially in SMEs .
This is directly linked to the work on transposing and implementing Community law and reducing administrative costs which weigh upon SMEs at present .
The extraordinary meeting of the European Council will probably be a test for your Presidency .
Either it will just produce a text of conclusions to be filed away in the catalogue of good intentions or it will make truly practical proposals and there will be a perceptible will among the Member States to adopt them .
We approve of your suggestion to the Member States to make known their national measures with an impact on jobs .
There is no shame involved in using effective recipes , even if we have not invented them ourselves .
As for enlargement , if the Commission has presented us this morning with a statistical proposal on the applications , the Council would honour itself if it offered a political vision of enlargement .
Countries like Romania which , according to the Commission , now has democratic institutions whose stability for now seems to be guaranteed , but also Slovakia , which is at least as democratic as the others , need the political recognition of an examination of their applications .
I do not really think that limiting the candidates to ' five plus one ' is a courageous approach to the problem of reforming the institutions , which was evaded at the Amsterdam Summit .
Mr President , enlargement of the European Union to take in the countries of central and eastern Europe is an historic prospect which will give us the opportunity to eliminate the final sequels of Yalta .
The historic nature of this task calls on us , I think , to refrain from taking a grocer-shop approach to the cost of that enlargement .
The budgetary resources needed , the reshaping of the institutional system which is now inevitable , the set of efforts that have to be made in order to bring about that enlargement , are of an exceptional scope , it is true .
Nevertheless , it seems judicious to me to qualify our contribution to the price of responsibility .
In 1947 , the price of responsibility was the price paid by the United States and its Marshall Plan , aimed to bring about the recovery of western Europe , not unsuccessfully , from the ruins of the second World War .
In 1997 , the price of responsibility is the one demanded of us , if we want to offer the countries of central and eastern Europe the legitimate right to take part in the construction of a new political and economic order , one of peace , justice and security in Europe .
Mr President , there are hardly any alternatives to the price of responsibility , apart from the price of indifference - should be ever - and this is most unlikely , I hope - decide instead to shirk our responsibilities towards those who not so long ago were unable even to dialogue properly with the European Union .
It is the responsibility of the Luxembourg Presidency to conduct the Council 's affairs in the coming six months .
In doing so , the Presidency can bank on the European Parliament 's support , and the Liberal Group 's in particular , which is well aware of the fact that the quality of a Presidency has nothing to do with the size of the Member State called upon to exercise it .
Mr President-in-Office , you are exercising the Presidency on behalf of a Member State which , in the last century , understood that it was too small to meet alone every economic , political and security challenge .
The obligation to succeed has become a recurring theme in your country 's history , Mr Poos , and so all it remains for me to do is to wish you the imagination , courage and clairvoyance that you will need to perform your historic task .
Mr President , I would like to convey to Mr Poos , President-in-Office of the Council , a wish and two causes for concern .
The wish is that preparation for enlargement be successful at the December Council meeting .
We had a long debate about this subject this morning , the Commission 's criteria have been presented to us , and all this is a good basis for the Council , with the Luxembourg presidency , to be able to make significant progress regarding this essential enlargement .
However , in addition , I would like to present the following two concerns : the first of them , as all my colleagues have been mentioning , is the European Council on employment on 21 and 22 November in Luxembourg .
The Luxembourg presidency has taken on a huge responsibility .
And there are early signs of a certain level of unease on the part of European public opinion and political parties , because much is expected of it . It cannot be allowed to become merely a propaganda operation to cover over the shortcomings of the Amsterdam European Council or of the mechanisms available to the European Union to arrive at an employment policy .
My Group has a special vocation to support an employment policy - we are called the European United Left , which just about says it all .
We believe that , with this subordination to the criteria of the Stability Pact , it is very difficult to create jobs if there is no change in macro-economic policies .
At any rate , we are urging the Luxembourg presidency to set clear objectives and to establish mechanisms in this respect .
It will also receive a visit from our Group in Luxembourg so that we can submit our own proposals .
The second concern - which will take just a few moments - is the Community budget .
The Commission 's initial proposal is very restrictive and we are also very concerned that governments are tending towards a zero budget .
We trust that the Luxembourg presidency will not allow this .
We wish you , Mr Poos , and European society as a whole every success in these difficult but hopeful times .
Mr President , as an imaginative , radical and , for that very reason , responsible opposition , we too should like to state our agreement with the Luxembourg presidency .
We shall examine very carefully what the Luxembourg presidency undertakes , and we shall support every step , however small , which is a genuine step away from the present misguided policy and sets a new course towards a different , more democratic , ecological and social Europe .
A Europe , a European Union , which is not so much in the service of the banks and multinationals as in the service of the common man , and plays a constructive role worldwide to strike a balance in the name of solidarity and to prevent and resolve conflict .
That includes serious consideration of the call for genuine equality in the treatment of the accession candidates , including those which are not proposed as members of the first round .
But it also includes more detailed attention to employment policy .
I can also tell the House that we are to hold a Green employment summit in Luxembourg 14 days before the Council meeting .
Together with other elements of the European Assembly for Full Employment , we shall be present at the summit in Luxembourg in order to present our demands .
Among those will be the abandonment of the neoliberal , monetarist orientation of employment policy which amounts to seeing a solution in low wages and precarious employment .
We have no need of the spectre of Keynesian spending programmes , under which billions of ECU are buried and then dug up again for no discernible purpose .
We must launch a European employment policy , which will of course cost money , but which is first and foremost based on a policy transition to a different model of development : ecological programmes of investment in the future , public support for shorter working hours , direct strengthening of internal demands by means of downward redistribution and financial action in the third sector .
If we embark together on that course , we shall not have to see Agenda 2000 leaping into life as a roaring lion and then finishing up as a bedside rug for those who determine European policy at present .
Mr President , this is a very special afternoon for us Luxembourgers .
I am quite proud , as a representative of a country with 400 , 000 inhabitants , to welcome the Luxembourgish presidency team on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance in the European Parliament .
On your agenda you have several challenges , mainly in the field of environment policy .
You have to prepare for the conference on climate change in Kyoto .
This is an issue which is connected especially to the conservation of forests worldwide .
Mr Poos just referred to the action programme we have with Canada , which will be discussed this evening in Parliament .
Certainly , you have a serious commitment .
I should like to ask you , in this field especially , to take account of the NGOs ' complaints and wishes .
As there are virtually only Luxembourgers in the Chamber , I shall conclude in Luxembourgish .
Här Präsident , well mir de metteg ennert eis sin , ass ett mir eng besonnesch Éier an e Pleséira , Iech enorm vill Erfoleg ze wënschen an Ärer schwieriger Missioun am Dengscht vun Europa .
Vun eiser Fractioun huet Dir all die bescht Wënsch !
Merci !
Mr President , it has been said that the Intergovernmental Conference was called to prepare the EU for enlargement .
That task has not been accomplished .
The Commission is now asking for a new Intergovernmental Conference in the year 2000 prior to a possible enlargement .
But the Amsterdam Treaty makes it more difficult to unite Europe .
New Member States must meet even more stringent demands with regard to economic policy and public finances .
They must take part in monetary cooperation .
That will make sustainable economic development more difficult in the economies that are lagging behind .
A condition for inclusion is that the new Member States must abolish the borders between themselves and between them and the present EU .
Is the EU prepared to open up the labour market to new immigration , when we have 18 million unemployed ?
Can that be achieved without social conflicts ?
With its raised demands on the new Member States , Amsterdam in reality means a postponement of enlargement .
Contrary to the task incumbent on us , we are dividing Europe instead of uniting it .
There are fine words in the Amsterdam Treaty on openness , sustainable development and employment .
But , with monetary union , the fine words on employment will translate to higher unemployment .
The declarations on the environment are accompanied by abolition of the environmental guarantee contained in Article 100a ( 4 ) of the Treaty in favour of a dispensation procedure administered by the Commission .
Today openness can be instituted by eight out of fifteen countries .
Tomorrow it can be blocked by three countries , such as Spain , France and Germany .
As the provisions I would feel able to applaud are not there , I must refrain from applauding . But I will congratulate Luxembourg on taking over the EU Presidency .
We tend to have good Presidencies when the small countries are in charge .
Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity to draw the attention of the Luxembourg presidency to a current problem in my country as regards the transposition into Belgian law of the Community directive of 19 December 1994 on voting rights for European citizens .
I would say first of all that this directive is an example - to my mind , at any rate - of undemocratic decision-making in Europe .
In order to introduce these European voting rights , an amendment of the Belgian constitution is in fact necessary , with a two-thirds majority in Parliament .
However , both the Maastricht Treaty and this binding directive itself were approved by a simple majority in my country .
This effective precedence of a European directive over the Belgian constitution therefore means in fact that any minister with a simple majority or any European Council of Ministers is able to change my country 's constitution , which strikes me as unacceptable and undemocratic .
In practical terms , we Flemings are now faced with the massive problem that the right to vote for EU citizens in Brussels and the Flemish communes around the city amounts in effect to a kind of ethnic cleansing which disadvantages speakers of Dutch , in other words the Flemings .
I think this is a situation not unknown to the Luxembourgers , who also have their own specific language culture .
I therefore have to make the essential point today that the much-used slogan of ' richness through diversity in Europe ' must not remain a dead letter .
And this diversity means that a people has its own protected territory where its own culture is dominant , in which newcomers are welcome , but are expected to adapt .
The Flemings have to say that the speakers of other languages , the newcomers to their territory in Brussels and the vicinity , not only do not adapt , but also try to impose their culture , their languages and their laws .
At present , the European directive to which I have referred has not yet been transposed into Belgian law .
If the Luxembourg presidency or the Commission , as has been announced , nevertheless takes steps to force it down the throat of my country , Flanders , they must be fully aware that a whole people , the Flemings , will then turn against this Europe , and that would be a pity .
Mr President , it might be stating the obvious , but it is worth emphasizing the fact that the Luxembourg presidency occurs at a critical time in Europe 's development .
We have the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference and we have the Agenda 2000 document in front of us today .
Both in their different ways point us in the direction of the enlargement of the European Union .
That enlargement is of tremendous significance , not just in a symbolic sense but in a very real sense as well .
Enlargement is important for these countries wanting to join the European Union , but important for us too , as existing Member States .
There is no doubt that it is going to be enlargement which , in many ways and quite rightly , will be the headline-grabbing issue during the Luxembourg presidency .
But my special plea today is : please do not forget about employment .
In fact , let us place a new emphasis on job creation .
I am absolutely delighted that there is going to be a special job summit in November .
That will be of extreme important to everyone , not least the 18 million people who are unemployed in Europe today .
But I do not want that conference to be just a polite conference ; I want it to be a dynamic event .
A dynamic event which does not simply talk about best practice but an event which actually has before it well worked out concrete proposals and agrees to implement these proposals .
What I would like to see is , for example , recommendations on employability , on a more effective use of the Structural Funds , on enhancing competitiveness in the European Union , on promoting training and education , on coming forward about ways to promote moves from welfare into work , without in any way undermining the welfare state .
We need to be taking forward the single market action programme .
But also , I believe that we need to find extra resources to create jobs .
Perhaps one of the best ways to do that is to have low-interest Europe-wide loans directed at trans-European networks but also the development of small and medium-sized enterprises - one of the key ways to effectively create new jobs in Europe today .
If we are not going to do this , then we all run a very grave risk of fuelling the disillusionment which exists in Europe today about the whole concept of European cooperation and integration .
But today I am optimistic .
I am confident that we can build on what we have achieved in Amsterdam , take that forward , enhance the enlargement discussion and also create those badly needed jobs .
I think the indications that we have had this afternoon from the Luxembourg presidency are very encouraging and very sound .
I am also impressed by the very genuine determination to have cooperation with the European Parliament and I am sure that if the Luxembourg presidency reflects many of the priorities in this House , it will indeed be a successful presidency .
I wish you well .
Gudde mëtteg , Här Präsident ! Erlaabt mir , dei lëtzeburgesch Präsidentschaft an eiser Nationalsprooch , op lëtzeburgesch , ze begrëissen .
Mr President , the Luxembourg Presidency comes at a crucial moment for the development of the European Union .
After Amsterdam , fundamental decisions are expected .
On one hand , the citizens of the European Union are now looking towards the Summit on employment due to take place in the autumn .
Millions of Europeans without work , millions of young people without future prospects , are waiting for our responses .
Not for empty promises or for new reports or supplementary resolutions .
Since the Essen Summit in 1994 , Europe has regularly spoken about employment .
It is now high time for those words to be followed up with acts .
Unemployed people and young people want nothing to do with an ' alibi summit ' producing its umpteenth resolution .
They want practical and real solutions .
Europe alone cannot provide these practical solutions but it can stimulate , mobilize , guide and coordinate .
It can urge the Member States to apply initiatives for employment which have already been successful in other countries .
It can liberate the money sleeping at the bottom of European reserves so that it can be invested in job-creating products .
In brief , European can give back hope and trigger off national actions which alone can provide practical solutions to the problem of unemployment .
It has to be made quite clear : any policy aimed at dismantling the European social model would replace the unemployed with poor people .
That would be a policy against respect for the individual and against solidarity .
Such a policy would meet with the fierce opposition of the Christian Democrats !
In order for the employment Summit to be a success , the Luxembourg Presidency will not be enough .
All of the heads of State must commit themselves personally to it ; national parliaments should also make their contributions .
The European Parliament must play a vital role ; the social partners must become genuine actors ; the private credit sector must make employment investment a priority .
Once everyone throws their weight behind this task at local , regional , national and European levels , only then can we effectively fight unemployment .
The other strong point of the Luxembourg Presidency will be preparation for enlargement .
Millions of women and men from countries in Eastern Europe who have recovered freedom and democracy are now looking towards us .
We cannot and must not disappoint them !
' Agenda 2000 ' , presented this morning by President Jacques Santer , has launched the debate on the European architecture for the 21st century .
It is now for the Luxembourg Presidency to lay down the stepping stones for an historic undertaking which will reconcile our continent with itself .
It is true that our citizens are looking sceptically at the enlargement project .
Their doubts and fears must be taken seriously .
It must be explained to them that enlargement will be carried out thoughtfully , case by case , step by step , that it is necessary for the stability and peace of our continent and that in the long run it will have positive effects for everyone in economic and social terms .
Ordinary people 's commitment to this historic project is vital .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , stimulating that understanding and that commitment is also a task for the Luxembourg Presidency and will be one of its major ones .
Luxembourg is a small country but on several occasions in the past it has demonstrated that it is capable of leading great presidencies .
I am quite convinced that once again our hopes will not be disappointed !
Mr President , the Luxembourg Presidency promises to be lively but exciting .
The next six months will see contradictions arise calling for decisive choices for the future of European construction .
The strongest of those contradictions is that pitting , more than ever , the requirements of social policy and employment against the financial straightjacket put in place by the current economic and monetary union .
Increasingly , everywhere the debate is sharpening on the forced frogmarch towards the single currency , on the yoke of criteria and the stability pact , on the lack of a realistic timetable , even on the very logic underpinning the whole project .
Officially , this issue has been settled for five years but it is only now that our fellow citizens can practically verify the fact that these neo-liberal choices are quite simply incompatible with a social Europe .
That is why the ' euro crisis ' is bursting out all over .
Sweden , albeit a signatory , without any reservation , of the Maastricht Treaty , yesterday , now feels that the single currency project is uncertain and wavering and has decided not to join the Monetary Union in 1999 .
In doing so it has shown to those who doubted it that it is well and truly possible to change one 's option on the base of experience .
Great Britain , on the other hand , is waiting to see how things turn out before it decides .
In France , the Prime Minister himself announced that he would put to public opinion , when the time comes , the terms of the contradiction between social requirements and the march towards the euro , so that he can be helped in taking his decision .
The idea of postponing the single currency project is now under way .
Better still , it is no longer sacrilegious to ask the question : should the whole project not be put on the back burner ?
For example , it was believed that reducing public expenditure in social areas would reduce deficits .
But that is not working out which explains why all kinds of tricks are necessary in order to respect the criteria .
Why not instead choose a well-used relaunch of social public expenditure or in other words expenditure which should contribute to greater growth and more genuine jobs and therefore higher public and social revenues which would reduce deficits ?
The instrument of monetary cooperation for such a policy should in our belief be one not of a single currency or in other words an alignment on the strongest currency with all of the economic and political consequences of such a decision , but on a European common currency , a genuine union of national currencies for cooperation .
In any case , the time has come to agree to an open , taboo-free debate on the question which is in all the heads not of Europe 's adversaries but on the contrary of those who want to make it a success .
This question is the following one : what can be done to change European construction in depth so that our fellow citizens can recognise themselves in it and can once again commit themselves to it ?
That , in our view , is the great challenge facing us in the next six months .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you are taking over the Presidency of the European Union at a difficult stage when you will have to help to solve vital problems for the future of the single currency which your predecessors failed to deal with and which they have only postponed and handed over to the following Presidency .
I would mention , on this score , the exact geometry of the countries taking part in the euro , the direction to be taken by the exchange policy , the possibility of an economic government for the euro and its position vis-à-vis the European Central Bank .
You are going to need a great deal of skill in order to manage these fundamental problems because obviously it is going to be difficult to preserve the relevant consensus that we have now when it will no longer be possible to remain ambiguous and when decisions will actually have to be taken .
In order to put an end to discussions and speculation we have been told that you intend to propose the direct and definitive fixation before the end of the year of parities between a certain number of currencies .
This method , although technically skilful in appearance , is not , however , foreseen by the Treaty and in any case would leave unsolved the problems which I mentioned earlier , giving the Member States the feeling of being trapped just when finally those problems should be dealt with .
It is my personal view - but it is not the intention that you have manifested - that it would be wiser in accordance with Article 109 ( 4 ) of the Treaty that you ask the Council , by 1 January 1998 , to set for the single currency another date of entry into effect than 1 January 1999 .
That would then free the debate and focus it on questions of great importance for our future , in particular working out the monetary organization , the institutions and enlargement .
There is a very great temptation now to try to wriggle out of the situation .
Mr Poos has given in to this , perhaps , in part , by suggesting that , to use his words , we should use the most expedite method of ratifying the draft Amsterdam Treaty .
In fact , we were not really that surprised to hear , straight after the European Council itself , a head of State actually welcoming the fact that the slightness of the reform would , in his view , make it possible to avoid a referendum in his country !
What a strange democratic Europe it is when the failure to consult a people is regarded as a positive point !
It is out of this web of misunderstandings between the European Union and its peoples that we want to escape and we hope , Mr President , that the Luxembourg Presidency will help us to do just that .
Mr President , there is no doubt that the Luxembourg presidency is going to be an extremely difficult one for two reasons : firstly , because it is inheriting an unfinished Intergovernmental Conference and , secondly , because the problem of unemployment , which is now Europe 's number one problem , has so far been the subject of nothing but waffle .
Anyway , I am going to make a point that has an international implication , taking my cue from what happened at the recent NATO summit in Madrid , during which it was decided to extend that military organization to bring in Poland , Hungary and the Czech Republic , to demonstrate that Europe is still lacking a common European security policy .
At that summit in fact , only France and , very hesitantly , Italy voiced opposition to eastward enlargement that excluded Slovenia and Romania .
Only the French President dug in his heels , challenging the decision of the United States and giving a spirited defence of his own views , magnificently but , unfortunately , alone and in vain .
And so , at an important and historical event , Europe appeared still divided and still without influence .
US diplomacy first decided that enlargement should take place and then decided it should apply to three countries only , taking advantage of the divisions within Europe and the lack of a single voice from the countries of Europe .
In our view , it would have been better not to enlarge NATO eastward because of the risk of awakening fresh fear of encirclement in Russia and stimulating a renewal of pan-Slav militarism .
It would have been much better to bring those three countries , plus Slovenia and Romania , into the Western European Union , perhaps alongside their future accession to the European Union .
But what we object to is the absence of a single Community strategy , and that , unfortunately , will not change until the decision-taking process is reformed and the principle of unanimity abandoned and we decide to accord the common foreign and security policy a priority role in the process of European construction .
Mr President , the last speaker began by saying that Luxembourg is going to have serious problems , at any rate the presidency .
I would take a different attitude .
In my view , the Luxembourg presidency has a tremendous opportunity .
I believe that everyone in Europe is so tired of hearing all these completely empty declarations and so fed up with them that some real action must now be worked out at last , some real goals established , and I believe that the chances of success at this employment summit are much greater than people think .
And I can say this so confidently because I have great faith in the Luxembourg presidency - not because it is a small country , I do not think that is very important , but because I know that they have a positive approach and because they have the qualities to deal with matters clearly , calmly and also very practically .
I am pleased that yesterday , in the Committee on Employment , Mr Juncker specifically asked us to provide a contribution by mid-October .
We shall gladly do that , and I should like to say something now about the effort we should make and our criteria .
Firstly , it must be very practical .
A timetable must be drawn up , clear objectives must be laid down , methods need to be worked out , and you must be specific in terms of percentages , figures and so on .
The decisions must also take effect immediately , which means that decisions will have to be taken at the summit which mean something the next day , not least in terms of national budgets .
Because it is all very well to say that employment is primarily a national issue , but responsibility must then be taken for it in the national budgets .
I hope that before the summit , people will not have battened down their national budgets .
That applies equally to the ECOFIN Council .
There too , enough scope must be allowed to put into effect at second reading what is decided at the summit .
I would also like to focus on the commitments of the social partners , and I hope the same goes for Parliament , because they too play an important role .
As far as I am concerned , there should be no taboo regarding flexibility or modernization .
However , they can never be a one-sided sacrifice , made by employees .
Flexibility and modernization can only come about as the result of a contract where there is flexibility on the one side and more jobs , for example , or adequate security and social security on the other .
We should like to see one specific decision taken in any event , namely that the active labour market policy should be focused in the first instance on the 18 to 30 million people who are out of work .
There should be no more freestanding training in Europe , but a commitment that training is always followed by at least one year of work .
This is an old Delors proposal which should at long last be brought into effect .
And for that , we particularly need the social partners .
I have already said that employment policy is a national issue .
That is partly true , and partly nonsense .
One of the most important instruments is fiscal policy .
Fiscal policy is one of the areas which is primarily handled at European level , and if we wish to provide scope for incentive measures , then Europe will have to play an extremely important role in that respect .
Mr President-in-Office , I want to comment on just one aspect : the harmonization of taxation .
The extreme differences in tax legislation within Europe result in substantial distortions of competition and , in due course , the destruction of jobs .
The location of company headquarters and of many other business decisions today are determined not by economic aspects but , in practice , by fiscal aspects - by reasons unrelated to operational issues .
This is an area in which - and I appeal to you today before the European Parliament - you must make proposals , as you have suggested you will .
If no harmonization can be achieved during the first stage , at least realistic steps towards it can be attempted .
I know that my own government has said in the past that unanimity is so important in tax legislation .
I will make you an offer today : let us do away with the unanimity principle for tax bands and for the tax assessment base .
We should , in other words , be willing to take majority decisions on these aspects , without unanimity , because otherwise we will come no closer to solving this problem of tax harmonization .
That is why I am so grateful to you for mentioning this matter in your speech .
We look forward to seeing you taking genuine steps towards harmonization in the field of taxation , for the sake of our citizens and in the interests of competition in the global world market with the Americans and the Asians , and you will do so with the support of the European Parliament .
I would also ask that the Minutes should show that I have not used up all my allotted time .
Mr President , I would firstly like to wish the President-in-Office good luck and then to ask a series of specific questions to which I would , as far as possible , like to receive specific answers .
Beginning with the most immediate issue , the presidency-in-Office has the task of finalizing the text of the agreements of the Amsterdam Treaty and it has come to my notice that some Member States are contesting some of the agreements , specifically those relating to an extension of Parliament 's codecision powers and also certain aspects relating to the freedom of movement of people .
I believe that it would be desirable , Mr President , for the presidency-in-Office , as guarantor of the general interest , to create and mobilize every resource in order for it to be possible to guarantee that these agreements , arrived at during the Amsterdam European Council , are complied with .
As regards the operation of the internal market , the truth is , Mr President , that there continue to be violations of the concept of a Single Market , specifically in the area of the free movement of goods .
This corrupt , repeated and ongoing behaviour jeopardizes the very essence of the internal market and also the credibility of the European enterprise , since we cannot ask our citizens to believe in a reality which does not function correctly .
The question is quite simple , Mr President , and it is this : Would the presidency- in-Office agree to the idea , within the action plan approved by the Commission for the internal market , of imposing sanctions on or introducing penalties for those Member States which do not guarantee the freedoms they are bound to uphold under the Treaty ?
I welcome the reference made to the stepping-up of relations with countries in Latin America and I would be interested to know whether , Mr President-in-Office , in connection with the summit between the European Union and Latin American countries - which , in principle , looks as if it will take place under the German presidency - the Luxembourg presidency would be able to make any progress as regards specifying the place , conditions , format and date for the Summit .
I shall end as I began , Mr President , by offering my best wishes to the new presidency and I am sure that , on the basis of your experience and proven desire to defend the general interest , we will be able to achieve the results we all hope for .
Mr President , when summing up his presentation of Agenda 2000 this morning , Mr Santer said that our success will also be Europe 's .
Earlier , Mr Poos , when presenting his programme , pointed out a virtually obvious truth : in other words , that Luxembourg is taking over the Presidency of the European Union at a crucial moment for its development .
The success of the Luxembourg Presidency will therefore be Europe 's success and I wholeheartedly hope that it will succeed .
I do not want to insist on the main challenges of the Presidency which my colleagues have already amply commented on , but as a member of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs I would like to express our satisfaction at the Luxembourg Presidency 's intentions on tax harmonization .
In the European Parliament , we have often heavily criticized my country over this matter .
I hope that the Luxembourg Presidency will be able to convince the European Parliament that , in order to bring an end to any unhealthy fiscal competition , its global approach is the right one .
I can , therefore , reassure my colleague Mr Friedrich .
My colleagues in the Committee on Agriculture have asked me to say that , given the state of affairs in respect of Agenda 2000 , we expect the Luxembourg Presidency and , in particular , our friend , Fernand Boden , Minister for Agriculture , to pay a far more attentive respect to our position than the sorry fate reserved , for example , for 20 out of the 22 amendments in our report to save bee-keeping in Europe .
I know that the Luxembourg Presidency is aware of the new challenges which must be met in the future development of the common agricultural policy and that it intends to tackle them prudently , but also with vital determination for progress to be made .
But I would insist that the Luxembourg Presidency should not take the wrong turning and make European farmers and wine producers permanent victims of assistance .
Nor should farmers and wine producers be the main victims of enlargement : they are asking for no more subsidies but the right conditions in which to be able to produce responsibly , in terms of quality as well as quantity .
To justify price cuts pretending that consumers would benefit is proof of a certain cynicism in that our consumers are spending an increasing share of their income on superfluous things , often at jumped-up prices , and are spending less and less on vital goods , i.e. a healthy and balanced diet .
Thank you for your answer , Mr Poos .
The debate is closed .
Situation in Turkey and Northern Iraq
The next item is the statement from the Council on the situation in Turkey and Northern Iraq .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to say as an introduction that years come and go but certain elements of conflict remain .
Six years ago during the last Luxembourg Presidency I had the opportunity of holding talks with the European Parliament on the same subject of interest to us today and unfortunately it has to be admitted that the same problems remain .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that said , I should like to remind members of the European Parliament that the respect of human rights democracy in Turkey continues to be at the centre of the preoccupations of the Council of Ministers .
Since the Turkish invasion of northern Iraq the Council of Ministers - I must remind you - has expressed its serious concern .
While understanding Turkey 's desire to put an end to acts of terrorism , the Presidency of the European Union has emphasized that the Kurdish problem cannot be resolved by military means and can only be resolved politically .
It has urged Turkey to show the greatest restraint in particular not endangering the life of innocent civilians .
It has also urged Turkish leaders to withdrawn military forces from Iraqi territories as soon as possible .
Mr President , I must also recall that at the meeting of the Association Council with Turkey held in Luxembourg on 29 April of this year , the European Union reasserted the principle of Turkey 's eligibility to accession to the European Union , as stated by the Association Agreement dating back to 1963 .
This principle also features in the Commission 's Opinion which dates back to 1989 and which the Council has adopted .
Therefore , Turkey will be judged on the basis of the same standards and objective criteria as other candidates to accession .
At the same time the European Union has emphasized that pursuit of the strengthening of relations between the European Union and Turkey will rely on a certain number of objective factors , including a solution to the Kurdish question .
Fully aware of the extent of the problem facing Turkey in the south-east of the country , the European Union has nevertheless stressed that fighting terrorism must respect human rights and the rule of law .
It has therefore launched an appeal for a political - I repeat political - solution to be found .
It has also emphasized the rightful need for Turkey to honour its commitments as a member of the Council of Europe and the OSCE .
It appears that most of Turkey 's military forces have now been withdrawn from Iraqi territory .
Against this background the European Union notes with interest that the new government , led by Mr Yilmaz , will be launching economic and social programmes in order to improve living conditions in the south-east of Turkey .
At the meeting of the Association Council , the European Union recalled Turkey 's pledge to make fresh efforts to respect human rights .
Mr President , I think that it would be premature to comment on the Commission 's communication to the European Parliament and the Council on the subject of deepening the Customs Union , but I can assure you , ladies and gentlemen , that the Luxembourg Presidency will deal with this communication in the coming weeks and I am fully willing to come back to this question at your next part-session .
Mr President , here we are again discussing Turkey .
It is the same old story about Turkey .
It is the same old responses from Turkey , the same old denials from Turkey and the same old promises from Turkey .
What is more , from an increasingly discredited political elite in Turkey .
Political alliances wax and wane and Turkish governments come , promise , and go .
Remember the promise we received from the former Prime Minister of Turkey before we voted for the Customs Union in this House , to end arrests for freedom of speech - that awful crime , freedom of speech and freedom of thought in Turkey !
Well here today we have another press release from the new Prime Minister of Turkey , to end arrests for freedom of speech by the end of this month and to give guarantees for all press freedoms .
When I was in Turkey in March this year , we had a promise from the then Turkish Government to ensure that by the end of this year all human rights abuses in Turkey would be ended .
Human rights do not improve however , President , political democracy and the rule of law are mere buzzwords , repeated almost as a mantra by the political elite in Turkey .
The emergency rule in the south-east of the country was first implemented on 19 July 1987 , almost ten years ago to the day , in which time nearly 26 500 people have died .
That is the official number .
Goodness knows how many it really is .
And as the resolution states , more than 1 800 people have died in the latest incursion by Turkey into northern Iraq .
20 July is approaching , 23 years since the invasion and occupation of the northern part of Cyprus .
This morning we heard the Commission say that it had adopted a communication on relations with Turkey .
I have it here , I have only just received it and have not had time to study it yet , but what is clear is that it is asking us in this Parliament to support economic development in Turkey .
This morning Mr Santer and Mr van den Broek asked very reasonably for Turkey to help find a solution to the long-standing problem of Cyprus , using membership of the European Union for Cyprus as a catalyst .
What is the response from Turkey ?
The Turkish Foreign Minister yesterday said that were the European Union to open negotiations with Cyprus , then Turkey could not support the attendance of Rauf Denktash in the second round of meetings designed to solve the Cyprus problem .
What absolute hypocrisy !
And yet there are some chinks of light , and it is on these chinks of light that our hopes rest : the real desire for a proper development of Turkish civil society as reflected in the initiatives of TÜSIAD ; the business world in Turkey putting its muscle behind democratic development ; the trade unions and small business federations in Turkey coming together for the first time ever in an effort to force democratic change in their own country .
This is the hope of the Turkish people themselves for peace and stability in the future .
Finally , my group really welcomes and congratulates President Demirel and Prime Minister Simitis of Greece for their ground-breaking meeting and agreement in Madrid .
That is the hope we have for the future .
Mr President , unlike Mrs Green I believe that the new Turkish Government does give us cause for hope : hope that relations with Europe will return to normal , hope of further progress with democratization and human rights .
I actually welcome the fact that Prime Minister Yilmaz was able to achieve , just four days ago , a relatively large majority in the Turkish Parliament , with the support of two social democratic parties .
I hope that this caretaker government will be able , between now and the next elections , to get things moving and to improve matters in areas where the predecessor governments under Erbakan and Çiller failed to make any progress .
I have formed the impression that today 's debate is to some extent geared to defending the former government , which is no longer in office at all .
We in the European Union must look to the future .
I am expressly grateful to the Commission for taking an aggressive approach to this subject .
As far as our group is concerned , it is actually still too early to reach a final judgement today on what has happened in past years and months .
The new government needs time to lay its plans .
It needs time to make its presence felt , to stabilize its parliamentary majority , based on social democratic and conservative support , to introduce a new electoral law , to guarantee freedom of opinion and to implement all those articles that have rightly been referred to in this House .
So it would be better not to hold this debate now but to postpone it until immediately after the summer recess .
The brief speech by the President-inOffice suggested to me that he basically shares this opinion .
I should like to urge the House to give a moderate opinion , one in which we have no need to disown the position we take , Mrs Roth , but one in which we recognize the opportunities the new government has and jointly endeavour to ensure that Parliament 's influence is made to count here .
This also applies , obviously , to the withdrawal of Turkey from northern Iraq .
No doubt we all agree on that .
On this basis we should be able to adopt a sensible resolution and give the new government a chance .
Mr President , I too believe that this debate on Turkey is taking place at a very sensitive and special time , at a moment of transition when it is very difficult to assess the intentions of the new government . Let us not forget that this government came into being in the wake of major diplomatic efforts and in response to pressures from parliamentary forces , and so it is a government that should let us hope that this is going to be a new chapter in Turkish politics .
What has happened in recent months cannot be passed over without comment because the risk , the danger we fear is that the parliamentary agreement that enabled confidence to be placed in the Ylmaz government could have involved deals with the armed forces - we hope this is not the case - giving them a free hand to operate , clearly violating human rights in the south-east of the country , in Kurdistan and Northern Iraq .
I therefore believe that it is imperative to maintain an open channel of dialogue with the new Turkish government .
We have , of course , to call for compliance with the International Convention on Human Rights , as signed by Turkey - that is absolutely clear ; and we must call for an improvement in the conditions in which detainees are currently held in Turkish jails simply because for expressing their views - the most despicable reason for imprisoning a citizen - that too is absolutely clear . But we must careful not to close the door to this new experiment in government .
That could be a serious mistake on Europe 's part !
Mr President , Parliament is in fact very late in the day in discussing the situation in Turkey and northern Iraq .
Turkey has been occupying part of this neighbouring sovereign country for several months now , without very much criticism being heard .
Although I reject the terrorism of the PKK , this response from Turkey is no basis for a peaceful solution .
An immediate withdrawal is of course required , to be combined with a recognition of the minority rights of the Kurds .
Turkey has been going through difficult times for some years now .
I am pleased to say that the political instability seems to have been reduced with the arrival of the new government .
It is to be hoped that the military , although they support a secular Turkey , will now once again withdraw from politics .
The new Turkish Government is aware of the Union 's attitude and the five criteria , but the many expectations which were raised when the Customs Union was concluded have still not been fulfilled .
I can understand that the political instability has complicated the process of reform , but the everyday practices in Turkish prisons , the Turkish attitude towards the Kurds , the slow pace of constitutional reform and the immovable stance on Cyprus give my group no reason to review our policy .
The main point must still be that Turkey could be a candidate for membership of the Union .
The door is open if the criteria are met , and a great deal can be expected from candidate members .
In asking such things of Turkey , we are not discriminating against it , but simply applying objective criteria in an extremely difficult situation .
The withdrawal of troops from northern Iraq is only the beginning of a long process which Turkey must go through before it can accede to the Union .
And finally , it gives me no pleasure to read , in the Dutch media at least , that Vice-President Bülent Ecevit - responsible at the time for the invasion of Cyprus , it should be noted - has said in connection with the decision which we are hearing about this morning from Commissioner van den Broek and others that a start should be made on integrating the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus , if the Union does not change its attitude - in other words , if we continue to negotiate on membership with Cyprus .
And the integration of Northern Cyprus clearly implies a second invasion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we were talking earlier today about Agenda 2000 - about the future of Europe .
Now that we have moved on to debating Turkey , the issue is once again Europe - the issue is our joint future .
We want to share a joint future with Turkey .
We want open doors , not more walls .
We do not want a Europe that defines itself as the stronghold of the Christian West , but one based on laicism , where there is a place for everyone - Christian , Muslim , Jew or atheist .
But that future is based on one inalienable principle which the new Turkish Government really must take seriously , and that principle is : democracy and human rights .
Democracy and human rights has to mean more than the routine cosmetic protestations churned out by Mrs Çiller 's prayer wheel before customs union .
Democratization means providing a solid foundation for basic rights , such as guaranteed freedom of opinion and freedom of the press , as a precondition for any further open consideration of the future in Turkey .
Democracy means finally trying to find a political solution to the Kurdish problem ; it means an end to the military option and to any invasion of northern Iraq .
The Kurdish question is inseparably linked to this democratization : it cannot be delegated to the military even though certain people both here and in Turkey would have us believe that the military is the guarantor of democracy and the rule of law .
Was it not specifically the last military coup in Turkey , in 1980 , that left the present legacy of antidemocratic structures ?
But when I say no more walls , I also mean , indeed I particularly mean , that existing walls must be torn down .
Cyprus needs , at last , to look forward to some prospect of a solution .
The latest threats uttered by Mr Ecevit have not been exactly helpful here .
Mr President , I am not one of those who like Mrs Green likes nothing better than taking potshots at Turkey .
I disagree with the Council , and I think that the European Union 's policy towards Turkey is different to that conducted vis-à-vis other countries .
Turkey is not on the list of candidate countries for the European Union and the Turkish people have fully understood what that means .
I think that we are reproducing with Turkey what was scientifically constructed over ten years in Yugoslavia 's case and which led to the disaster that we know only too well .
However the European Union should clearly propose and clearly tell Turkey that it can enter the European Union and also tell it the conditions under which it can enter or join the European Union or , on the contrary , all of this is bla-bla-bla which is just an alibi for Turkey , enabling it not to respect human rights and enabling the European Union to continue to believe that it can conduct a half-hearted policy which is not a policy at all as we know very well and which will lead to disaster , disasters such as the ones in former Yugoslavia or Algeria .
We can do something different , but for that we need the will and it needs to be done quickly .
Mr President , it appears to me that the Commission 's Agenda 2000 document , which has been received so favourably here this morning , has landed as a kind of bombshell in Turkey .
In the discussions yesterday evening with our Turkish colleagues in the Joint Parliamentary Committee , I have never seen them so bitter , and Mr Ecevit 's statement about the annexing of Northern Cyprus points in the same direction .
However , I think this is somewhat mistaken of the Turks , because it was to be expected what Europe 's position on Turkey would be at the present time .
The option of membership remains open and relations can be developed further , but in political terms at any rate , a number of serious obstacles stand in the way of accession .
And as Mrs Green has already pointed out , these are obstacles of which the Turks themselves are increasingly aware .
When I look at what social forces such as the trade union movement and employers ' organizations are saying as regards democratization , their demands and wishes correspond reasonably well with what we are saying , and that is a step forward .
I think it is also important in terms of these future prospects , which I gladly hold out for the Turks .
I welcome the fact that the positions of the Council , the Commission and Parliament with regard to Turkey have clearly moved towards each other in recent years .
We in Parliament are frequently portrayed as an irresponsible body , and are certainly described as such in the Turkish press .
When I now look at the texts on Cyprus , the Kurdish issue , democracy and human rights , and then at the declarations from the Association Council or the section in the Commission 's Agenda 2000 , it strikes me that our positions are gradually moving into line .
There are texts such as this Commission statement , for example :
' Persistent cases of torture , disappearances and the Turkish record in combating terrorism in the south-east .
Turkey needs to exercise restraint , to make greater efforts to uphold the rule of law and human rights and to find a civil , and not a military , solution .
Persistent cases of torture , disappearances and extra-judicial executions , notwithstanding repeated official statements of the government 's commitment to ending such practices , call into question the extent to which the authorities are able to monitor and control the activities of the security forces . '
This kind of statement clearly shows why resolutions on northern Iraq are still necessary from time to time .
Mr. President , first of all , while congratulating the President-in-Office of the Council for the clear way in which he presented the Luxembourg Presidency 's programme , I would like to remind him that it was Mr Poos himself who , in the same capacity six years ago , advocated with equal clarity the need for a solution to the Cyprus problem .
We are now approaching the end not just of six , but of twenty-three years since the Turkish invasion of Cyprus and the tragedy of that dismembered island still continues in defiance of the principles of international law .
Unfortunately , there is another Turkish invasion .
Other flagrant violations of law are continuing , because the gulf between proper declarations and the political will to implement them encourages the perpetrators , who in the face of international outcry , invent excuses , give vague promises , and slander their victims .
The Kurdish tragedy is one of the most striking and prolonged examples .
For decades war has raged in the depths of the East with carnage and unrestrained bloodshed .
But for Ankara , as its President declared a few days ago in Brussels , there is no war , there is no nation of 14 to 15 million without rudimentary human rights , without the possibility of being educated and communicating in its own language .
According to Mr Güner Oztek there is only a band of terrorists which , by its criminal actions and its skilful propaganda , is leading international public opinion astray .
So Turkey is entitled to execute , to imprison , to torture , to persecute anyone who supports the rights of the Kurds , even members of parliament , authors and journalists , and finally , to invade a foreign country .
This monstrous hypocrisy must finally be brought to an end .
The political solution to the Kurdish problem and respect for human rights are conditions laid down most clearly for any kind of cooperation between Turkey and the European Union .
Let us hope that after the fall of the unnatural Erbakan-Ciller pairing , the new Yilmaz government will provide some guarantees along European lines , but for that to happen , the conditions specified by the European Union will have to be final and direct .
Mr. President , I too would like to congratulate both the President-in-Office of the Council , and Mr Van den Broek on what he told the journalists about Cyprus .
He expressed himself far more clearly to them than to us here , in Parliament .
A short while ago the diplomatic representatives of Turkey to the European countries went to Ankara to discuss ways that Turkey might use to improve its public image in the European Union .
For it is a bad image , related to the findings of numerous international bodies concerning persistent violations of human rights , the oppression of 15 million Kurds who live in Turkey , lack of respect for the principles of international law , the continuing occupation of part of the Republic of Cyprus , and lack of the rule of law .
However , improving Turkey 's image is not an issue of public relations .
It is a substantive issue , and I think that ought to be understood by the political leadership in Turkey .
A great opportunity now exists for Turkey to prove that it means what it says , namely that it respects the international agreements and treaties , that it respects human rights , that it agrees to withdraw occupying forces from Cyprus , that it wants good relations with Greece .
Any agreements will only count for something if Turkey keeps its word .
But recent statements give cause for concern , some mentioned by Mrs Green and others made by the Vice-President of the Turkish government , Bulent Ecevit , who recently stated that unless the European Union changes its attitude , his country would have no choice but to annex to Turkey the occupied part of the Republic of Cyprus .
We need a new start with Turkey , and let us adopt that as a working hypothesis and accept it .
That new start , however , must be characterized by sincerity and a conscientious effort to improve the unacceptable situations in Turkey .
Words must be turned into deeds , into substantive action .
We are no longer prepared to accept lies , deceptive promises , misleading words and threats like those by Mr Ecevit .
Turkey is a part of European history .
Unfortunately , its behaviour now obliges it to offer proof of that .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , although it is to you that I speak , I am thinking of the presidency that held office at the time when this violation of international law took place and Turkey sent its troops into northern Iraq .
I find it shameful that the Council could not find more forceful language to condemn that breach of international law , to call a spade a spade , instead of contenting itself with pointing out the acts of terrorism that had brought Turkey to act as it did .
I believe that we should be honest as between friends , but above all that we should not be cowardly .
We are , of course , conducting a debate that we should have conducted two months ago .
This was not our fault , but the fault of the Council in its refusal to accept our request for a statement at that time .
As Mr Langen has said , the new Government is now having to listen to charges that should have been laid against the former government .
There is continuity , there must be continuity within a state .
The government bears the responsibility for what the state does .
If the government in Turkey is to change every six months , we cannot always put out of our minds what the previous government said , and look only to the future .
We need confidence-building measures , too .
And this Parliament needs to know that it has a partner with which it can negotiate , a partner on which it can rely .
That is very important .
I too - like Parliament as a whole - have high hopes of this new government , Mr Langen .
But this new government must understand that it has to take these steps to create confidence , that it has to show us that it means to keep its promises .
I very much hope that that will happen , and that Turkey will play , or continue to play , its part in Europe .
I am in favour of Turkey 's retaining the option of accession .
But it must keep to everything that other candidates keep to - no more and no less !
That option it must have .
We want to have Turkey with us in Europe .
Sadly , the Turkish Government has constantly moved away from Europe with its human rights violations , its lack of democracy , the Cyprus situation and the unsolved problem of the Kurds .
We expect a peaceful solution to the Kurdish problem .
We expect an end to the occupation of Cyprus , and we expect the human rights situation and democratization to improve .
Then Turkey will have its place with us !
Mr President , I should like briefly to reply to the speakers who have taken a position and thank them for their contribution , even though sometimes they have been very critical of the Presidency .
As far as clear language is concerned , I can be quite frank in respect of the last speaker , given that six years ago I had the privilege , in the wake of the Gulf War , of visiting Kurdish refugee camps .
During that visit I also held talks with officials at the Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs and I clearly explained to them the position not only of the European Union but also of the European Parliament .
Let us make no mistake .
There is no ambiguity on this .
At the time and still today as you know there are some Turkish politicians who deny that there is a Kurdish problem and to say that there is not a minority : when I was visiting them they spoke of the Kurds as ' upland Turks ' .
That was the expression that they used .
They are quite frankly denying the problem .
In my view that was and still is unacceptable .
Apart from that I should like to say , Mr President , that despite some disappointments and certain frustrations I think it is the duty of the Council of Ministers of the European Union and the Commission to remain in a dialogue which I would qualify as critical , firm and constructive , with a new Turkish Government , while being very firm and refusing any ambiguity on the question of human rights and the respect of the rights of the Kurdish minority .
I should like to add , Mr President , that even though we should be careful and prudent we should also at the same time encourage by all the means at our disposal all Turkish democratic forces who want to promote democracy and the respect of human rights , but that in a practical way and not only in terms of words , words which have remained a dead letter for far too long .
Thank you very much , Mr Wohlfahrt .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Situation in Albania after the elections
The next item is the presentation of statements from the Council and the Commission on the situation in Albania after the elections .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , by way of introduction on the situation in Albania , I should like to sum up the facts .
I should emphasize that , following the collapse of civil order in Albania at the beginning of this year , the European Union played an active role to help Albania to restore political and economic stability , to restore internal security and promote democracy by proceeding to free and regular elections in the respect of international standards .
The Council also took the initiative in March to send an exploratory mission to Tirana which became the kernel of the consultative mission for Albania in the framework of the OSCE 's coordination .
This mission was responsible for giving opinions on the development of the situation in terms of the humanitarian situation , the economic and financial situations and security in the country .
The Council coordinated its action with that of other international organizations and fully supported the coordination efforts of the personal representative of the President-in-Office of the OSCE , Mr Vranitzky .
At that stage in the crisis , the Union 's particular contribution consisted on one hand of offering humanitarian aid , in particular food and medicine and , on the other , in contributing to the reestablishment of the Albanian police force and supporting the electoral process , a key point in the international effort .
As you know , legislative elections were held on 29 June and 6 July and the Council committed the political parties and all Albanian citizens to taking part in the elections in a spirit of peace , discipline and conciliation .
I should like to recall that in the framework of the surveillance arrangements set up under the aegis of the OSCE , the Member States send observers to the spot to oversee the proper functioning of those elections .
The Council has also emphasized its future relations with the European Union and Albania and on the full restoration of democratic principles , respect of human rights and the rights of minorities and the application of healthy economic practices as well as the existence of cooperation links between Albania and its neighbours .
The Council accepts with satisfaction the general assessment according to which the legislative elections took place acceptably .
It has also pointed out the need for Albania to respect the results of the elections and the authority of the new government now being formed .
The Council emphasizes the important role played by the multinational protection force which helped to create a safe environment for the elections and the various missions by the international community in Albania .
The Council has also committed all political and trade union formations in Albania to pursue with determination a process of national reconciliation in order to overcome divisions within society and to increase confidence in the authorities .
The conditions of international aid will also depend on the pursuit of this process .
Against that background the Union is determined to pursue aid for Albania on the basis of its common position of 2 June and bearing in mind the principal of conditionality .
The European Union will act under its own responsibility but will cooperate closely with other international organizations in the framework of the OSCE 's coordination .
In order to support this approach the Council will encourage the working out in conjunction with the Albanian authorities of a common and comprehensive international action plan .
For that purpose the Union welcomes Mr Vranitzky 's initiative to create a group responsible inter alia for defining the elements of such an action plan .
The European Union intends to contribute to its establishment and is prepared to work out a series of practical measures with a view to demobilizing the armed groups and establishing a climate favourable for security .
The Union also appreciates Italy 's proposal to organize on 31 July a conference of senior officials with the participation of Albanian officials .
This conference should lead to a ministerial meeting in Rome in September next .
In this context the Council expects the newly elected Albanian authorities and all sectors of Albanian society to work together with the international community for the stabilization , democratization and economic restoration of their country and abstaining from any activity running counter to those aims .
These joint efforts should lead to political and economic reforms which are needed and head in the direction of the respect of human rights and internationally accepted democratic standards .
The organization by the World Bank and the Commission of an international conference of donors will depend on the establishment by the Albanian Government of a programme of economic reform benefiting from IMF support .
An economic restoration strategy worked out by the World Bank will act as a framework for the country 's economic and institutional reform .
Commitments made by the Albanian authorities must be monitored .
On this basis the Council can envisage resuming the political dialogue begun with Albania back in 1992 .
The cooperation agreements dating back to the same year will continue to serve as a framework for deepening the country 's relations with the European Union .
Thank you , Mr Wohlfart .
Commissioner van den Broek will now speak on behalf of the Commission .
Mr President , I would just add one thing to what the Presidentin-Office has said and which I am happy to endorse .
I should like to take the opportunity to address a special word of appreciation to Mrs Lalumière , who was able to carry out her task as OSCE coordinator of the international monitoring activities so successfully , in what were often difficult conditions .
We were glad that the Commission was also able to provide the necessary support .
We hope that a new government will be formed in Albania before the end of the month , which can then cooperate with the international community on what is called the common international agenda for Albania , the purpose of this being to set out what needs to be achieved in the short , medium and long term .
The priorities which we have set ourselves here are of course democratic reforms , including the framing and adoption of constitutional law , improvement of the internal security situation - I am thinking here of the widespread possession of arms amongst the population - the necessary reorganization of the police , institutional reforms and improvement of the administrative machinery , and of course economic rehabilitation .
The international organizations which work closely with the Commission will each have an important role to play in this process , within their individual areas of responsibility , and as the President-in-Office has just explained , Mr Vranitzky , the OSCE coordinator , has already convened an initial meeting tomorrow , so as to dovetail the various activities in the framework of the common agenda .
We shall also be present in Rome at the end of this month to discuss the political and economic conditions which might be attached to the provision of aid .
And then in September , decisions will be taken at ministerial level on the implementation of the common agenda .
Once this implementation is under way and agreements have been reached with the new government , the meeting of international donors can be arranged .
We assume that this will take place in the autumn , and it should give further impetus to the programme of economic recovery .
A condition for this is that agreements are concluded with the IMF .
The Commission has provided assistance in this respect where possible in recent months .
Humanitarian aid has been made available through ECHO , and food supplies have also been held ready in case the situation should deteriorate .
A start has already been made under the PHARE programme with the refurbishing of partially destroyed prisons , and we have been able to provide assistance for the customs authorities .
The latter are very important for securing at least one definite source of income for the government once again .
The Commission is now assessing to what extent the whole PHARE programme for Albania needs to be reviewed , so that it can provide an adequate response to the new situation .
On the basis of the existing programmes , priority is being given to speeding up the programme aimed at local development , including job creation , assistance with the reorganization of the police , an audit of how the pyramid schemes were organized , infrastructure projects to improve the links between various towns , and improvement of the tax collecting system .
We are also working with the IMF , the World Bank and the EBRD on a document which will contain the policy strategy for economic recovery .
This document sets out the general approach and the short- and medium-term conditions for the resumption of international financial support .
We understand that this document will be finalized in the near future , and its annex will indicate what sectoral strategies have to be pursued in the areas of social provision , transport and government administration , and what the needs are for technical and financial assistance .
The new government of Albania will have to express its views on this document , and then agreements can be reached on the subsequent follow-up .
In short , we are monitoring the situation closely with the Council .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , thank you for those reports .
At long last , the situation in Albania seems to have taken a turn for the better .
I believe that the OECD has been completely successful , as mentioned earlier , and as an Austrian I am of course proud of the leading part played in that success by Franz Vranitzky .
The whole thing , of course , would have been impossible without the energetic support and assistance of the European Union .
I would like to make it completely clear that although it is true to say that the elections , by and large , were fair and equitable , they were certainly not completely peaceful - there were a few problems .
I would also mention , Commissioner , and I would ask you to look into it , that the observation of the elections by Members of this House did not take place under optimum conditions , because the ' visibility ' , to which reference has so often been made , was very minimal if indeed it existed at all .
You have praised Mrs Lalumière , and we all fully endorse that .
Actually , this House would have been fully entitled to be officially represented in the Troika , too , in the name of the European Union .
The European Union is hiding its light under a bushel to some extent .
I would , for example , also look into this : a great many radio sets were purchased for the observers , which were then to be handed over to the EU .

We - Mr Roubatis and I - were completely unable to find any walkie-talkies , and many other Honourable Members had the same problem .
Perhaps they went direct to the EU , I don 't know .
But I do think it should be looked into .
The essential thing , though , I agree , is to provide help now , in this difficult situation , where Albania urgently needs it .
We wholeheartedly support the conditional approach that was mentioned here , providing a clear guarantee that democratization can now be directly followed by economic development .
That is the right approach .
You will certainly have the solid support of the House on that .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , the elections in Albania were necessary to allow that country a fresh start .
The OECD worked with the Albanian authorities to prepare those elections , mainly using European money , and the multinational peace-keeping force , originally given a very different mandate , did in fact guarantee that things went ahead relatively smoothly on election day .
The fact is , though , that these elections were neither free nor fair - during the electoral campaign , for example , many candidates had no opportunity to present themselves to the voters in their constituencies .
For safety reasons , we ourselves , the observers , were not even allowed to visit the rural areas on election day .
And yet all Members who were there to observe the elections agreed that those elections must be accepted under the conditions that existed .
Because , after all , they were to be a starting point for the continuing development of democratic structures .
The new government has a difficult job ahead of it .
First and foremost , it has to restore order in the country - it has to collect the innumerable weapons at large , and above all it must finally dissolve the rebel committees with which what is now the governing party concluded a pact at the end of March .
We expect the government to arrange for independent experts to determine with relentless clarity just who was behind the pyramid schemes and so brought disaster upon the population with their criminal activities .
Of course the European Union must continue to help Albania .
Most of all , it must help to establish democratic structures , and I would thank the two gentlemen who have addressed us today for their reference to conditionality .
The fact that there have been eleven civilian deaths in the last three days alone shows that gathering in the weapons is an essential condition for further development .
The multinational peace-keeping force should be given a new mandate until the new government has restored order .
We of the PPE Group wish the Albanian Government every success in establishing majority within their party for the forces of democracy and leaving their communist heritage far behind them .
Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , the elections in Albania were certainly an important step that needed to be taken - no-one is disputing that - a step in the slow and laborious process of reconstructing the country .
But let us consider what happened during those elections .
First of all , Europe yet again emerged badly from events in Albania : it emerged as a political dwarf , divided by its usual internal squabbles , by the different positions assumed by the various Member States ; and , as usual , we had to adopt a minimalist position .
We have then to thank the OSCE and Vranitzky for putting Albania together again .
We hope that when , in the near future , it comes to the process of reconstruction , Europe will not continue with this low profile political suicide .
As far as the elections are concerned , I agree with Mrs Pack : let us be honest about it , the elections were neither free nor fair .
Obviously , we welcome the fact that they took place - and , moreover , had they not been held the situation might have been worse - but it is quite clear that there are parts of the country in which it is hard to talk of democracy .
We welcome the fact that all of the political forces accepted the outcome , but it is also true that , had the election result been different , had it been the democratic party and not the socialist party that had won , then the attitude of the defeated party might well have been different .
We shall need to look out for that in the future , Mr President-in-Office and Commissioner , because we want the future to be genuinely democratic and not settled in the old Albanian fashion , the old socialist fashion that we are familiar with , 40 years of obscurantism and communism of the grimmest , most loathsome and cruellest variety .
I hope that , first and foremost , it will be possible to disarm the armed gangs , so that they cannot threaten the lives of civilians , and that Albania will return to the path of economic development based on a liberal democracy .
Mr President , anyone who loses power to a dictator - or loses the fight against a person with aspirations to be a dictator - generally loses everything : assets , freedom , life itself .
On the other hand , a sign of a real democracy is when the victor gives the loser both personal security and the opportunity to criticise his way of ruling .
In addition , the loser must be given the means to make his criticism known to the voters .
We are really talking about enlightened self interest here .
The victor knows very well that the roles may be reversed at the very next election .
Recently there has been an election in Albania .
No one tried to make sure that the election campaign was conducted properly .
On the contrary , both principal candidates appear to have tried to prevent the other from speaking out and spreading their message .
But the election itself led Mrs Lalumiere as chairman for the international election observatory to say that it was possible to award it the grade ' approved with some hesitation ' .
I think that this , in spite of everything , is a success for Albania .
The election has not transformed Albania into a democracy .
If we want to be kind - and we do want to be kind here in Parliament - we could say that this is a springboard to democracy .
All eyes will now be upon Albania - both the government and the opposition .
We in the European Parliament hope to be able to see continued democratic successes .
We also want to emphasise , in particular , that the multifaceted help which we now want the EU to give Albania is in harmony with Albania 's development as a democratic constitutional state .
When the chief of the clan 's time is up , Albania will be welcome to join democratic Europe .
Mr. President , I think everyone who had the opportunity to be present as observers during the Albanian elections will have ascertained - if they judge objectively - firstly that apart from a few minor episodes , a few weaknesses that were evident , the Albanian people demonstrated both responsibility and levelheadedness towards the conditions that have arisen in that country .
I think we should regard that as a very important factor in the development of the situation in Albania . Secondly , the Albanian people 's demonstration called for three things : for Mr Berisha to go , for the return of its money , and for a change of the regime which existed and which bled the country dry .
The first was achieved by the vote , which threw Berisha out .
It is now time both for the process of changing the President of the Republic to be democratic , and for the international community and the European Union to contribute economic support so that the money lost by the people can be returned and the country can recover economically .
That is what the European Union should be looking at , and not supporting military rule in Albania .
Mr President , I believe that , as was apparent to all of the international observers , despite the earlier doubts and concerns that were justified by the particular conditions and difficulties that existed in Albania , the elections have to be considered to have been acceptable , thanks also to the presence of the multinational protection force and large numbers of international observers .
But the fact that the elections took place and were recognized to be acceptable not only by the international observers but also by the political forces of Albania is only the first stage towards rebuilding democracy in Albania .
For that reason , we need to set a range of objectives regarding a number of problems .
The first of those problems arises because the multinational protection force is to begin demobilizing in mid-July and withdraw completely by the end of August , by which time it is highly likely that Albania will still not have its own adequate system of internal controls .
We need therefore to request the United Nations to extend the mandate of the multinational force , giving it a new format and extending it to include other countries .
But the European Union needs also to cooperate with the new parliament and the new government ; and resources need to be used not just to produce consumer goods for export but also to produce consumer goods for use within Albania itself , to secure lasting and sustainable development .
Mr President , I must thank the President-in-Office of the Council and Commissioner Van den Broek for the information they have just given us on Albania .
Having been entrusted by the OSCE with the mission for coordinating observers for the mandate for assessing the elections which have just taken place in that country , I can confirm much of what has already been said .
Today following the elections which took place in conditions which were regarded as acceptable even though there were numerous incidents , I should like to insist on the following points .
Nothing has stabilized in Albania .
Every day incidents take place often leading to death .
The new authority is not yet in place .
The structures of a normal state do not exist .
The army is practically non-existent .
Justice and the policy must be fully reformed .
The population is still over-armed .
Everyone or nearly everyone has his or her kalashnikov and uses it .
In such a situation our responsibilities are still great .
I should express two wishes .
On the one hand , it seems vital that the European Union should resume rapidly its economic and financial aid to Albania without forgetting aid for democratization .
Time is not on our side and the population lacks everything .
This urgency does not , however , mean that we should send money without discretion .
From this point of view I earnestly want the Commission to show more vigilance in the use of the funds which it is mobilizing .
The financial pyramid affair shows that strengthening controls would not be amiss .
We must improve our methods .
On the other hand , concerning the presence of the multinational protection force in Albania , I should like this force which has carried out remarkable work not to be withdrawn brutally , as foreseen by the Security Council mandate .
This force is due to leave Albania in mid-August .
It would be highly desirable for the departure to be carried out progressively , as Albanian security forces are gradually put into place .
It would also be highly desirable for the tasks entrusted to this new force not only to be tasks of maintaining order but also to be those of training , in order to give Albania the army it needs .
Albania is a small country but it is a European country , geographically close to us all , and also situated in an extremely sensitive region .
It is in our interests to be generous , active and efficient .
For this purpose , I hope that the European Union will support the very practical and timely proposal just made by the former Chancellor of Austria , Mr Vranitzky , rapidly to set up a working group entrusted with coordinating the action of the various international organizations in Albania in order to avoid a dissipation of action and contradictions .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Commissioner , I am happy that you have just approved this idea put forward by former Chancellor Vranitzky .
Thank you Mrs Lalumière .
Pursuant to Rule 37 of this House , I have received seven motions for resolutions to close the debate .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mr Parigi will now speak .
Mr President , yet again in the case of Albania , Europe looked like an economic giant with political feet of clay .
Crisis broke out in Albania and the people were in revolt , weapons stores were pillaged and refugees were fleeing , but it was not until weeks later , as a result or a more or less isolated Italian initiative and after the UN had given prior authorization , that it was finally possible to send in a multinational force and restore a minimum of stability to the country .
Albania has now changed - and not only in appearance , we hope - its own leadership , which will , we hope , want to help resolve , with international support , the many problems afflicting the people of Albania .
However , we in the Alleanza Nazionale condemn the fact that the elections were not all together regular and suspect that the international community proved so indulgent only because it was the left that won .
I wonder if that same understanding would have been forthcoming had it been the opposite party that had emerged victorious !
We hope , at any rate , that Albania will be able to emerge from the tunnel in which it finds itself and that events in Albania will give Europe the impetus to establish as rapidly as possible a common foreign and security policy , so that we do not once again find ourselves unprepared and tragically lagging behind in the face of various crisis points simmering on our doorstep .
Mr. President , I see that some Members are almost disappointed that things have not turned out in Albania as they had expected .
Though they were in deep crisis , the Albanian people managed to conduct elections , which were indeed deemed satisfactory .
If some people have been disappointed , I am sorry .
The leader of the Socialist Party , Fatos Nano , managed to evade certain snares that had been set for him and certain provocations , and won the elections .
And not only did he win them , but he formed a government which does not comprise only one party , but many .
Many people are part of the government and the President of Parliament and some of the Ministers are not members of his party .
This is perhaps disappointing to some , but I am encouraged by it and I hope others are as well .
What we have heard from the President-in-Office of the Council and from Mr Van den Broek leads me to conclude that they agree with me .
Today we face a challenge , one which will lead us to the decision , I hope , that joint action is needed in Albania so that political , social and economic conditions in that country can be substantially improved .
We must help Albania to deepen its democracy , this democracy in its infancy , to control and disarm the armed criminal groups , and to plan an economic programme which will help it advance in a new direction .
I therefore make an appeal that we should not continue to act as in the past .
Let us not be timid about helping Albania , as we were timid when it needed our help but only a few European Union countries went there to do what they could .
I think the European Union as a whole should show a presence in Albania and act in a coordinated way to help that country .
I want to remind you that Albania is part of Europe , it is our neighbour , and we should aid those citizens , who deserve something better .
And I think Europe too will be better off if Albania prospers and if its economic situation improves substantially .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , the sequence of events shows that the decisions taken were the right ones .
Action was taken before the crisis could degenerate into a situation that would certainly have resulted in social disintegration as well as the collapse of the State .
To spend time now assessing what happened would be a sterile exercise .
The elections took place - we were not disappointed - and they did provide a turning-point from which to start afresh .
It is , however , necessary that Europe and the parties that function within Parliament , as in other countries , should take care to avoid trying to establish spheres of influence , because one of the positive factors that produced this outcome was the impartial approach adopted .
I think that the intervention of the multinational force was crucial here .
I have to say to the President-in-Office that Europe proved ineffective here .
Parliament called for joint measures , but only some countries agreed to act and so make an important contribution to resolving the crisis in Albania .
It is to be hoped that , in future , we shall see Europe united - in a programme of the kind described here and that has my support - and acting much more effectively and sensitively .
I would point out that , in the meantime , the parties that formed the governing coalition have met in Rome and reached positive agreements : those who have won must not claim to have won by a landslide and those who have lost must accept the democratic result .
The President-in-Office and the Commissioner ought perhaps to take note of that agreement - reached at Sant 'Egidio - which provides an important guideline for the future .
The guidelines that have been set are certainly positive ; I welcome the Commissioner 's programme which may be positive for all .
Mr President , I wish first to point out that Europe 's initiative fell short of expectations but was , at any rate , decisive .
The presence of the multinational force and the contribution made to the OSCE initiative were two crucial factors that ought not to be forgotten .
As far as the future is concerned , I believe that what matters most is to stop giving the impression we are currently giving : that most of what is necessary has now been done and that the page has been turned once and for all .
The elections were an important event and , since the alternative would have been chaos , Vranitzky was right to insist that they should take place at the end of June .
But we should delude neither ourselves nor others .
The situation in Albania remains delicate in all respects .
We must remember above all that Albania is not a poor country : the economic and social situation is bad only because the country has been impoverished by bad decisions , taken in both the distant and the more recent past .
The Council and Commission have now to be clear about the deadlines and programmes for the future , and Albania needs to be certain that these are programmes that will be followed through and deadlines that will be respected .
Commissioner van den Broek , I want now to make a crucial point that we talked about before the elections : the monitoring of international intervention and aid .
We do not want to see a repetition of what happened in the past !
We gave Albania more than any other country and the result was disastrous because of the lack of controls .
Let us have no more of that !
Mr Cars would like to speak on a point of order .
You are extremely keen for speakers to keep within their time limits .
This is something we must all respect .
As I am one of the few whom you have not had reason to interrupt , I would like to make you aware that you have often brought down the hammer a few seconds before the time limit for speaking was up .
I would ask you , therefore , to reflect upon whether this is the right procedure .
Mr Cars , time is one of this House 's major problems .
The Presidency cannot silence Members of Parliament , but advises them when they have used up their allotted time .
The responsibility or otherwise of continuing is that of each individual member .
In any case , I do what I can to ensure that we keep to the timetable .
The debate is closed .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B4-0349 / 97 ) .
We shall consider questions to the Council .
Question No 1 by Jaime Valdivielso de Cué ( H-0477 / 97 ) :
Subject : Inclusion in the revised Treaty of an article setting out a legal basis for voluntary work
Voluntary work and NGOs represent a growing phenomenon in society .
In Spain , 30 % of the public are involved in voluntary activity of some kind .
Hundreds of EU citizens take part in humanitarian and peace-keeping activities in regions suffering from hunger , poverty , epidemics or war .
The Treaty contains no specific legal definition of voluntary work . However , this kind of work is sufficiently specific and important for it to merit a Treaty article on its own .
Does the Council intend to propose inclusion of a regulatory article in support of voluntary work and NGOs ?
What concrete measures are planned to encourage cooperation between humanitarian organizations from different countries with a view to deriving maximum benefit from their efforts and helping bring about a European dimension ?
Does there exist any register of NGOs and humanitarian organizations which would make it possible to distribute the goods confiscated for reasons of fraud against the Communities , which as things stand are simply destroyed , among those most in need ?
I would like first of all to say that the Mr President-in-Office of the Council , during the June part-session , already had the opportunity to answer an identical question put by the Member of the European Parliament . I shall therefore echo that answer .
First of all , this question calls for the following points to be made clear - as an institution the Council of Ministers is not party to the Intergovernmental Conference .
You are also no doubt aware that , in the meantime , the proceedings of the Intergovernmental Conference have come to an end and the findings are now in the public domain .
I should like to emphasize that I do , however , share your opinion about the contribution made by NGOs and charitable activities to a wide variety of sectors because they represent decisive contributions to relieving many sufferings , while enabling in certain cases whole swathes of societies in development to take their destiny into their own hands .
Concerning practical measures taken in order to optimize the efforts of humanitarian organizations , the humanitarian aid regulation adopted in 1996 foresees , inter alia , the possibility of financing actions to strengthen the Community 's coordination with international humanitarian organizations and institutions , as well as nongovernmental organizations and organizations representing them .
As far as the creation of a register of NGOs and humanitarian organizations is concerned able to distribute to the neediest products seized because of fraud , I can only point out to the European Parliament that the Council has not been referred to in respect of proposals along those lines made by the Commission .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , your answer is an interesting one .
I would like to stress the fantastic and magnificent , although not unlimited , potential of European society , which could be taken better advantage of .
I do not believe that we are doing so at the moment - it is a lacuna we should all be aware of .
Secondly , to deal with a much more tangible aspect , the case often arises within the European Union that , for reasons of fraud , industrial forgery , etc . , we destroy illegally produced goods .
We often burn clothing , destroy blankets and footwear , because a trademark has been infringed , or for some other similar reason .
I understand perfectly why this is done : trade registers or the like have criteria which must be complied with , but it is a shame that we cannot take advantage of such goods to help those most in need .
I am happy to note that both you and I agree on the quite sensational role played by our NGOs in the area which has just been described , in particular concerning the neediest and the least-favoured .
I can appreciate the work carried out by NGOs given that I , as Minister for Foreign Affairs , am responsible for the cooperation and development section .
As for the last part of his speech and his desire , I can perfectly understand that perhaps it would be better for him to put his question to the Commission to find out whether it might take the initiative along the lines of what he wants .
Given that its author is absent , Question No 2 lapses .
Question No 3 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0481 / 97 ) :
Subject : Situation in Algeria
How does the Council assess the current situation in Algeria ?
What are the prospects for our relations in the short term , and what action is planned ?
In reply I would like to set out the following factors .
As you know , the Council is very closely following developments in the domestic situation in Algeria .
The Council is satisfied with the holding of legislative elections on 5 June last .
The Algerian people expressed its opinion in order and good security conditions following a request made by the Algerian authorities , a significant number of Member States of the European Union replied positively by sending observers on a national basis coordinated by the United Nations .
The Union has taken note of the report by the joint observation mission which confirms that , despite certain noteworthy imperfections , the ballot took place in conditions which might be qualified as ' generally satisfactory ' .
The relatively high turnout shows in our opinion the determination of the Algerian people to take its future in hand .
The Council feels that these elections are a step forward in the process of political reforms in the country .
It also hopes that the new multipartite assembly and the coalition government , with a large majority , will now be key actors in the process of reform towards building a democratic and violence-free society in Algeria .
The Council will very attentively follow the holding of the next round of votes , this time for municipal elections , due to be held in early autumn .
As far as bilateral relations are concerned , the Council hopes that the situation will enable a new EuroMediterranean agreement quickly to be concluded with Algeria .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , thank you for your reply .
However , since reference was made more to the immediate past and to the elections , I would like to ask you about the current situation : How do you view the conditional freeing of Abasi Mandani , leader of the FIS ?
Do you see it as an effective contribution to efforts at finding a solution to the violence ?
I think that it is in our interest to hold open dialogue with all the parties concerned in Algeria .
I think that yesterday 's release of Mr Abassi Madani might possible calm the situation currently prevailing in Algeria which concerns all of us .
This release might represent a step forward in the difficult negotiations and along the difficult road towards a solution to the conflict which has already claimed far too many victims .
Mr President-in-Office , would you really call it democratic if elections are held for privileged parties only , and if the party that won an absolute majority last time but was then overthrown by the military is excluded ?
Still , it is a step in the right direction , thank God .
Are you willing to bring further pressure to bear on the Algerian Government to allow genuine democracy , in which the Algerian people is represented , and not just represented by the kind of people acceptable to those in power ?
Quite apart from that , Mr President-in-Office , you know very well just how much support has been given to the party that gained the majority - financially , administratively and with all means available to the government .
I think I already emphasized in my first reply to the question that these elections represented a first step .
I can understand that you were not at all satisfied by the conditions in which these elections took place .
I think however that we should do all we can now to make sure that future elections are held in more democratic conditions .
I should like to say nevertheless that the current climate is hardly favourable for that .
Nonetheless that should not dissuade us from doing all we can on our side to open a positive and constructive dialogue which might finally lead to such democratic actions , without forgetting the very important fact that in any case parties which resort to violence and terrorism should not normally have a say in the matter .
All other democratic forces which accept the principles of democracy should be able to take part in the next elections in the country .
Question No 4 by John Iversen ( H-0488 / 97 ) :
Subject : Burma
Following the recent elections in the UK and France , has the Council changed its position on a joint boycott of trade with Burma ?
As far as the situation in Burma is concerned , I should like to say that , on 29 April last , the Council decided to extend for a further six month period the administrative sanctions provided for in the European Union 's common position on Burma adopted on 29 October 1996 .
This decision was taken following the failure to make any progress domestically in the country , particularly concerning the human rights situation and the process of democratization in the country .
At this stage further suggestions in the economic field were not adhered to .
Nonetheless these might be the subject of a later debate should the situation in Burma deteriorate further .
I can also confirm that the European Union is constantly vigilant vis-à-vis the situation in Burma and that it is looking at the question of the need for significant and rapid reforms with all of its international partners , the ASEAN states in particular , which it is asking to use all of its means of pressure at its disposal to influence the stance taken by the SLORC ( State Law and Order Restoration Council ) .
Thank you for the answer . Mr President-in-Office , I would like to ask you - for we all know that the situation is serious in the region and in Burma itself - when the question is to be put on the Council 's agenda .
Will it be in a month , two months , or has it already been decided when the Council will discuss further sanctions against Burma ?
I should like to add something in reply to the supplementary question just put . Sanctions has not yet bene taken , as I said , but I do not rule out the possibility of the Council of Ministers looking at this issue at the General Affairs Council in September .
Question No 5 by Ulla Sandbæk ( H-0490 / 97 ) :
Subject : Non-discrimination paragraph and Maastricht II Treaty
There is an established church in Denmark to which the state gives financial support for e.g. the maintenance of buildings and salaries for priests .
Could the effect of inclusion of the non-discrimination paragraph in the new Maastricht II Treaty in countries such as Denmark with an established church be that other religious communities could demand equal status with the established church and thus obtain financial support , and could they appeal to the courts if that does not happen ?
Mr President , in reply to this question I should like to say that only the Court of Justice is able to interpret provisions which in the future might be included in a Treaty on the European Union following the Intergovernmental Conference which has just concluded in Amsterdam .
I do not think it is for the Council to assess a text which has not yet even been signed let alone come into effect .
I might perhaps ask the President-in-Office precisely what the idea was of including the church in this non-discrimination paragraph .
What form of discrimination does the Council imagine a church could be subject to ?
Mr President , for the reason that I have just mentioned , all I can do is try to answer in a totally personal capacity the supplementary question put by Mrs Sandbæk .
In my opinion , at first reading , the future Article 6a of the Treaty will have no direct effect in other words individuals will be able to base their arguments on its provisions before a national court or before the Court of Justice of the European Community .
It will offer the Council , deciding unanimously on a proposal put by the Commission and following consultation of the European parliaments , the possibility but not the obligation to take measures in order to combat and not to ban a certain number of discriminations against individuals within the limits of the powers recognized for the European Community by the Treaty .
In this respect it should be noted that relations between the church or churches and the state within each Member State do not come within the powers of the European Community and cannot be the subject of Community measures .
Mention can be made in this regard of the final act of the Intergovernmental Conference on the status of churches according to national law .
Mr President , I am grateful to the President-in-Office for mentioning the Final Act which , unlike the Treaty , has already been signed and contains a clause on the relationship between State and Church .
Christianity is equally dominant in all Member States , and without Christianity there would be no Europe , but the relationship between State and Church has developed along very different lines in the various states .
So it makes excellent sense to allow subsidiarity to prevail here .
I should like to know whether you consider the mention in the Final Act to be adequate , and why it was impossible to grant the wish of the European churches and enshrine this relationship in the Treaty itself as well .
Luxembourg , in particular , must have had misgivings here .
I think you have answered your own question .
You have mentioned subsidiarity and I myself refer to that principle in reply to the first question which was put .
That is exactly the reason why , and there is no other .
I can assure you that Luxembourg has no reservation in this respect .
Question No 6 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0491 / 97 ) :
Subject : Road safety measures
The Council has recently been paying increasing attention to road safety , and this interest has been manifested in a number of resolutions .
In this connection , is the Council in favour of the proposals for all basic infrastructure projects to be subject to a safety impact assessment and for motor vehicles to be equipped with speed-limiting devices ?
Mr President , in order to answer this question I would like to say first of all the Council did adopt during the meeting of 17 and 18 June 1997 conclusions on the subject of the Commission communication on promoting road safety in the European Union a programme for the period 1997 to 2001 .
Having taken official note of this action programme presented by the Commission , the Council welcomed the fact that it provides for new common initiatives to define an integrated approach to road safety in the Community .
The Council did not explicitly express an opinion on the two measures for accident prevention mentioned by the Member of the European Parliament concerning speed limiting devices and the impact study on infrastructures concerning road safety .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the European Transport Safety Council has presented to the Commission - and , I assume , also to the Council - its celebrated plan which includes the ambitious objective of reducing the number of road accident victims in the European Union from 45 , 000 to 25 , 000 a year by 2010 .
An attempt is also being made to reduce the socioeconomic costs - which run into millions - which are currently the norm in the Union .
Amongst the binding legislation , it is proposed to make it compulsory to submit any infrastructure project for a safety impact study , something similar to what already happens vis-à-vis the environment .
We regard this measure as perfectly reasonable and would like to ask the Council for its opinion in this respect although , as the Council has stated , it has still not had a chance to study it .
We would , however , be grateful for Council 's opinion .
We feel the other matter is more debatable , but not avoidable , and we view it as a proposal to draw up pilot projects such as the possibility of equipping motor vehicles with speed-limiting devices with a view to reducing the number of accidents and victims .
It should not be forgotten that some lorries are already fitted with such devices and that , according to this measure , a reduction of just 5 km / hour in the average speed on European Union roads would result in no fewer than 11 , 000 lives being saved each year .
What is the Council 's opinion on this , although it has not yet examined the subject in any depth ?
Mr President , in his supplementary question Mr Camisón Asensio has already given us the tragic record of road accidents in the European Community : not only loss of human life but also a huge number of injured - 1 , 600 , 000 .
As a doctor I can assure you that often the fate of the injured , who are soon forgotten after the accident , is very difficult to bear , not only for the injured themselves but also for their families , without speaking of the exorbitant social and economic costs .
All of that should be brought into consideration .
I can tell you that the Council of Ministers fully agrees with you over the tragedy of this massive loss of life and it also agrees with the Commission 's proposal .
In our view we should neglect no possible way of preventing these accidents .
Question No 7 by Patricia McKenna ( H-0499 / 07 ) will not be called as the subject covered is already on the current agenda .
Question No 8 by Sören Wibe ( H-0501 / 97 ) , for whom Mrs Ahlqvist is deputizing :
Subject : Ecofin recommendations to Sweden
On 12 May 1997 , according to reports in the Swedish press , EU finance ministers recommended Sweden to reduce its budget deficit by cutting taxes on individuals and businesses and by making cuts in the public sector and / or the system of social transfers .
The Maastricht Treaty , to which Sweden acceded , sets an upper limit on Member States ' budget deficits but does not state how Member States should achieve that objective .
By making its recommendations , Ecofin has set clear political priorities .
Sweden is to make cuts in its welfare system despite the fact that surveys show the system to enjoy the support of the Swedish people .
Does the Council consider it appropriate for Ecofin to set political priorities in this way ?
Would it not have been better simply to recommend that Sweden meet the budgetary objective either by making cuts or by increasing taxes and other charges ?
Has the Council considered how many jobs would be lost in Sweden if the country were to lower taxes and make cuts as recommended ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Article 104C of the Treaty setting up the European Community stipulates that when the Council decides that there is an excessive deficit , it makes recommendations to the Member State concerned so that it can bring an end to that situation within a given period .
On one hand , in order to be effective , such a recommendation cannot be limited to a simple reminder of the budgetary aim .
On the other hand , the Council always gives its opinion in sufficiently general terms in order to leave a certain amount of leeway for the Member States concerning their domestic priorities .
The text concerning Sweden , to which the two Members of the European Parliament refer , have not yet been the subject of a publication in accordance with Article 104C of the Treaty and in our view it respects that balance .
Furthermore , the Amsterdam European Council confirmed that healthy public finances are a necessary condition for strong and lasting growth which in itself generates jobs .
It is also interesting to note in this context that the conversions programme presented by the Swedish Government in September 1995 for the period up to the end of 1998 goes along with the same approach .
Thank you , President-in-Office , I will pass on this answer to my party colleague , Sören Wibe .
But I also have a question : When will the text which concerned Sweden but has so far not been made public , be made public ?
I hope so , Madam , as soon as possible .
That is the only answer I can give you .
Otherwise , I would be dishonest towards you .
I would like to ask two related questions of the Council of Ministers .
If you reduce taxes , State income falls and the deficit increases .
So I cannot really understand the Presidency 's logic .
Should not Sweden be raising taxes to reduce the deficit in the public sector ?
That was the first question .
The second question is : if the Council of Ministers were to give Sweden advice on where to make savings , where would this be , in defence , child care or in social services ?
Where should Sweden make these cutbacks ?
As I see it this is a politically motivated recommendation whose real purpose is to try to make countries adopt a form of right wing politics .
I have no magic recipe and I have just explained the procedures that should lead to the reduction in budgetary deficit .
Assessment of the proposal is up to the Swedish Government and it is also up to that government to take the necessary measures in order to comply with these requirements .
Neither the Council nor the President-in-Office of the Council can give the Swedish Government lessons on this .
In this case it is the principle of subsidiarity which comes into play .
Is the President-in-Office aware that Sweden currently does not have a budget deficit in its public finances for current affairs .
Is he also aware of the fact that the apparently high tax level in Sweden is fictitious because it is the result of the fact that in Sweden there is a public social security system .
There will also be fictitiously lower tax levels in countries where the social security system and its charges are not part of the public sector but are private instead .
If I understood right , you were just clarifying your questions .
You have just told met that there was no budgetary deficit because of very high taxes .
I can tell you that in Luxembourg we have no deficit at all and we have fairly low taxes .
Question No 9 by Arthur Newens ( H-0503 / 97 ) :
Subject : Trade cooperation with Mexico
Will the Council make a statement on the progress of trade and cooperation negotiations with Mexico ?
I would like to apologize in advance because my reply might seem a little long , but I want to give you the necessary information which is available to us at this moment in time .
Negotiations for new agreements with Mexico are almost completed .
The only point which must still be cleared up concerns the arrangements and the starting points for negotiations on the liberalization of goods and services .
But I have high hopes that a solution can be found in the coming days so that the texts can be signed .
I have been told that this might be the case tomorrow .
I should like therefore to emphasize some of the especially important aspects of the new agreements .
First of all , concerning the substance .
Both parties have agreed to establish a framework favourable to the development of the exchange of goods , services and investment , including by means of reciprocal and progressive liberalization , taking into account the sensitivity of certain products and in accordance with the relevant rules of the World Trade Organization .
Furthermore both parties are committed to set up , inter alia , cooperation in economic , scientific , industrial , educational , social , audiovisual , cultural and regional areas , and to create political dialogue , including certain institutional provisions .
Furthermore both agreements include , like all agreements concluded by the Community , clauses concerning the respect of democratic principles and human rights , regarded as a vital element of the agreements .
In terms of form and procedure , the parties have negotiated a comprehensive mixed agreement , so that until it is ratified , an interim agreement of Community competence will come into effect .
This agreement also acts as an instrument for the negotiations , held by the joint council establishing it , for the liberalization of trade .
By means of a separate joint declaration both parties have committed themselves to negotiating at the same time the liberalization of services , capital movements and measures concerning intellectual property , etc . , which coming within the powers of the Member States , could not be dealt with in the framework of the interim agreement .
In doing so both parties have ensured that the various sectors which are the subject of liberalization have been treated in a comprehensive way .
It should be emphasized that the liberalization of goods will only take place once the Council has given its opinion on the outcome of the overall negotiations and once the comprehensive agreement has been signed .
While thanking the Minister for a very full statement and welcoming the progress made towards an agreement which we hope will foster better relations between Mexico and the European Union , will he comment further on discussions on human rights , which prove to be rather a delicate issue , and will he make it clear that we shall continue to pay close attention to this matter on which some of us receive regular reports or complaints on behalf of Mexican citizens ?
We believe that real progress on this will be of benefit to both our peoples .
There is no special problem for the areas which you have just mentioned .
I think that we are also trying to take account , in that the new generation agreements with Mexico , our horizontal human rights policy .
Question No 10 by Birgitta Ahlqvist ( H-0506 / 97 ) :
Subject : Demise of democracy in Belarus
President Lukashenka has dissolved the democratically elected parliament and installed a puppet parliament .
The right of opposition newspapers to operate in Belarus has been severely restricted , as has the opposition 's freedom of expression , and many opposition leaders have been temporarily imprisoned .
Belarus can probably now be described as Europe 's least democratic country .
Is such a state of affairs to be tolerated in Europe in 1997 ?
Unfortunately , most of Europe 's democracies are watching in silence as this situation unfolds .
I have raised this issue with the Commission , but its reply was that it would ' wait and see ' .
Has the Foreign Affairs Council discussed this matter ?
Has it discussed joint actions to bring pressure to bear on the President of Belarus to restore democracy ?
Has it discussed the future of trade relations between the EU and Belarus ?
I should like to say that the Council is following with considerable concern the development of the situation in Belarus and has urged a joint effort in order to try to exercise its influence on the Belorussian authorities so that they restore full respect and practice the democratic principles accepted internationally .
A European Union fact-finding visit led by a former Dutch minister of justice was sent to Belarus in January 1997 to find out whether the referendum was legal , to assess the new relationship between the different branches of the government - executive , legislative and judiciary - and determine whether that relationship complied with the principles of the separation of powers and also to check whether the opposition media were indeed the subject of harassment .
It detected a number of serious constitution and political irregularities in the country .
On the basis of these findings the Council agreed in February 1997 that relations between the European Union and Belarus would be taken in a global approach , emphasising that the European Union did not wish to isolate the country and was still determined to continue the process enabling the country when the time comes to play a significant role within European structures .
Nevertheless , it is now Belarus which holds the key to that process .
The Council is also studying the consequences of this attitude for the European Union and the country in question .
It agreed that in the absence of positive measures by the Belarus authorities : a ) the Member States of the European Union would not support Belarus ' application to join the Council of Europe ; b ) the European Union would not proceed to the conclusion on the interim agreement nor a partnership agreement or cooperation agreement ; c ) bilateral contacts with Belarus at ministerial level would be the subject of a case by case assessment ; d ) technical assistance programmes instigated by the Community and its Member States would be reexamined , and assessed on the basis of the principle that they should serve the reform process .
Following the events surrounding the demonstrations in March 1997 and the wave of arrests of demonstrators and opposition members , in April 1997 the Council of Ministers adopted a declaration criticising the Belarus authorities and restated that cooperation between the European Union and Belarus could not continue unless convincing efforts were made to set up in Belarus a political system respecting internationally accepted standards in terms of human rights and political freedom .
It invited the Belarus authorities to translate into action their commitment to open consultations with the Thirteenth elected Supreme Soviet in order to achieve a fair equilibrium between the powers in the country .
The Council welcomes the setting up of a bipartite working party made up of representatives of the Belarus Government , the Thirteenth Supreme Soviet and European Union experts which will try to achieve that aim .
I should also like to point out , ladies and gentlemen , that the group held its first meeting in June this year and has not yet completed its work .
The Council will continue to follow the findings of this working group with particular attention as well as the development of the overall situation in the country .
The European Union 's efforts complement and strengthen those made by the OSCE and the Council of Europe .
I am pleased that the Council , at least , has more concrete actions at its disposal for tackling the situation in Byelorussia than the Commission .
I asked the Commission this question earlier and received a very , very guarded and cautious response .
The past year in Byelorussia could just as well have been an exciting thriller , but it is in fact reality .
We must do something concrete .
At least now I can see that the Council 's aspirations have more substance to them .
It is not enough to express concern , to assess and to investigate .
This has already been done .
We know what it is like for the people .
We also know that the media is being censored , we know that unions have been banned and that there is a ban on demonstrations .
I will follow up this question later but for now I am pleased with the response I have received from the Council .
I do not think that was really a question .
If I understood right , you were just thanking me for my reply and informing us that you would remain attentive to the situation in Belarus .
I should like to give a joint answer to the questions put by Mrs McIntosh and Mr Crowley , both of which refer to the consequences of the abolition of duty free taxes in ports and airports , for journeys taking place within the European Union .
First of all I should like to point out the maintenance of duty free sales in intra-Community passenger traffic is contradiction with the existence of an internal market without borders .
If the Council , when adopting the directives establishing the abolition of tax frontiers in 1993 decided temporarily to prolong duty free taxes for intra-Community travel until 30 June 1999 , it was precisely in order to avoid the social and regional problems which might have arisen from a sudden abolition of those sales .
In other words the idea was to give enough time to the sectors concerned , in particular airport authorities , airlines , ferry companies , the producers of goods usually sold in duty free shops , those running those shops and others to prepare for the abolition of intra-Community duty free sales provided for by the 1993 directives .
This is a very disappointing reply from the Council .
Fiscal frontiers remain in place .
Also , border controls are now worse between the United Kingdom and other countries because you have both Schengen and other non-Schengen countries .
I would repeat my question to the President-in-Office : How does he intend to protect the interests of those currently employed , in particular in the ferry , airline and tourism sector , as well as the travelling public ?
I accept that , being an island , the United Kingdom is going to be particularly disadvantaged by the removal of dutyfree .
It will be more expensive to travel .
Being an island , it is more inaccessible .
The contribution of duty-free to the United Kingdom economy , to our tourism sector and to our employment sector is higher in terms of maintaining tariffs , maintaining the service , choice of service and employment .
Would he please answer the question ?
I want to thank the President-in-Office for his response .
Following on from what he has said , Parliament has been told by the Commission that it cannot undertake any action because the Council has made a decision and has refused to alter that decision in any way .
Therefore , can the President-in-Office give us a commitment that he will bring it forward at the next Council meeting to see if there can be a reversal of the decision or an extension of some kind ?
Secondly , as has already been mentioned by my colleague with regard to peripherality - and the President-in-Office also mentioned this - the fact is that people leaving the Community would still be entitled to buy duty-free .
Do you know the numbers of Community citizens travelling outside the Community as against the number of Community citizens travelling within the Community on a regular basis ?
In Ireland alone the ratio is about 74 % for those travelling within the Community and 26 % for those travelling outside .
Mr President , although I know that I am going to disappoint Mr Crowley , I have to point out that it is the Commission and not the Council which has the right of initiative in this area .
I should like to ask the President-in-Office , first of all whether he has any evidence to suggest that tourism will be adversely affected by the end of duty-free within the European Union ?
Secondly , if duty-free were to continue , can he give any logical reason why travellers by air and by sea should be the beneficiaries , but travellers by train or by car crossing national borders should have no opportunity of duty-free ?
What is the logic of that ?
Mr President , although my life is not being made easy I shall nonetheless try to offer some answers .
I think that we are in the internal market logic .
I am very well aware of this : when we were discussing all of these directives and not only this one , setting up the internal market , perhaps some people were not really aware of the possible consequences .
I do not know whether everyone then asked the question , when adopting these directives , which I recall were adopted by the Council of Ministers in order to set up the necessary legislative framework for a proper functioning of the internal market .
Today , after three years of functioning , we have drawn the first conclusions from this and we can see that some provisions can still be improved so that the internal market can work properly .
Both this morning and this afternoon I think that we have spoken about many things also concerning the internal market , as well as the provisions which will be necessary for that internal market to work one hundred percent .
I think that we are here talking about something to do with the functioning of the internal market .
That is the whole problem .
There are consequences which I admit sometimes are unfortunate but this is a fact that we have to get used to : if we have an internal market that means that we want to eliminate certain forms of competition which in terms of an internal market could , let us not forget , be unfair .
Mr Wohlfart , I do not think that members of this House wish to make things difficult , but sometimes things are difficult and perhaps this is a difficult issue .
Let us see if we can try to make things a little easier now that Mr Lindqvist has the floor for one minute .
I am not sure that it will do so .
This question has been raised several times previously .
The answer has been more or less the same each time .
We have the facts .
I would like to ask the Council if , following a number of questions from many Member States , it would consider asking the Commission to carry out an impact analysis of the effect on employment and tourism in those countries affected by the abolition of duty-free shopping so that we can gain a proper insight into the consequences of such abolition .
This is really about the loss of many jobs in the EU region , which is perhaps the biggest problem in Europe at the moment .
Mr President , employment is one of our main concerns and you can be quite sure that I am the last person not to be concerned about people losing their jobs : I think that is one thing which unites us in a question which may divide us .
I know very well that decisions have been taken , I would like to remind you , unanimously by the ECOFIN Council at that time to set up these arrangements as I describe them with a transitional period .
If there are difficulties I can assure you that this is something which also concerns us .
If you have any questions about the effects on tourism and other branches of our economic activities I think - and believe me it is not because I want to ask you a question - but I think that in this context the Commission is better prepared than I am to give you more satisfactory answers .
Question No 13 by Clive Needle ( H-0510 / 97 ) :
Subject : Changes in EU policy welfare requirements of animals as ' sentient beings '
What changes in EU policy does the Council envisage following the introduction into the Treaty of the European Community of a new requirement to pay full regard to the welfare requirements of animals as ' sentient beings ' ?
Mr President , I thank the President-in-Office for that welcome statement of the new priority , which I am sure will resonate around the Community and be very much welcomed by a lot of people .
I have to say this question was tabled in the first flush of joy after learning in the press about this rather unexpected inclusion of the protocol which many people in this House have been arguing for for such a long time but , I suspect , could hardly believe would actually happen .
I would like the Council to be aware that since then we Members have received an enormous outpouring of confidence that things will progress .
For example , there will be progress on battery hens , there will be progress on conditions in zoos .
Now that raises all sorts of expectations and people will be looking for concrete progress in the coming months .
I understand what you are saying about the need to first ratify the protocol , but can you tell me if work is beginning on certain specific areas where we can look for progress in the short term , so we can make people even more confident that these are not just words in a Treaty , but will actually result in specific action ?
I would like to thank Mr Needle for his positive reaction to the Council 's reply .
In respect of his concerns about putting into practice various measures aimed at improving the fate of animals in various areas such as farming , transport , the internal market and research , I should like to say that any changes to existing legislation on this matter must , before being submitted to the Council , be the subject of a Commission proposal .
I hope that we shall soon be receiving Commission initiatives and proposals heading in the direction which he desires .
Question No 14 by Christine Oddy ( H-0512 / 97 ) :
Subject : Sri Lanka massacre
Is the Council aware of the current inquiry into the murder of 24 Tamil civilians in the village of Kumarapuram in Trincomalee , Sri Lanka in February 1996 by military personnel ?
What moves will the Council take to ensure that the results of the independent inquiry are made public when its investigation is completed and will it support moves to ensure that the families of the 24 civilians receive compensation from the state . Payment would indicate the commitment of the state in establishing proper accountability and preventing future infringements by security personnel ?
The European Union has persistently expressed its concern at the violent violations of human rights in the civil conflict in Sri Lanka .
The European Union has already made comments in the framework of political dialogue with Sri Lanka and is undertaking steps in the appropriate international bodies , in particular by means of declarations .
As far as the specific case mentioned by Mrs Oddy is concerned , it has not been made directly known to the Council .
It is however ready to ask for further information from the relevant Sri Lankan authorities , thanks to the means offered by the institutionalized dialogue .
The Council recalls its declarations of 17 April 1997 welcoming the exchange of letters between the President of Sri Lanka and the head of the opposition , concerning a joint approach by both parties to the ethnic conflict in the country .
The European Union hopes that this agreement will help to restore confidence and bring an end to the policy of confrontation .
I welcome the comments of the President-in-Office .
I would like to draw the presidency 's attention to the fact that the massacre is particularly serious because it included women and children .
It cannot , therefore , be attributed to the army trying to purge the Tamil Tigers and terrorist combatants .
The organization which informed me is very well respected in Sri Lanka .
I would urge the Council to take very serious note of this .
I would be very willing to help by passing on the information I have received .
As the time allotted for Question Time to the Council has run out , Questions Nos 15 to 37 will receive written answers .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Agenda
I want to announce that the Leader of the PPE Group has informed the Bureau that Mr Graziani is absent , he is unwell and has requested that the agenda should be changed and the debate on the Graziani report ( A4-0140 / 97 ) should be postponed .
Rule 96 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure states that once the agenda has been approved , it may only be changed pursuant to Rules 97 and 128 to 132 , or following a proposal by the President .
Since today we do not have a quorum so that a proper vote can be taken , the Bureau accepts the proposal by Mr Martens that the report by Mr Graziani should not be debated .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I would just like to support your proposal - although it has no statutory value - and to wish our colleague , Mr Graziani , all the best for a swift recovery so that he might present his report at the September part-session .
Mr President , may I thank you on behalf of the PPE Group for your understanding and flexibility .
Let us hope that it will be possible to deal with the Graziani report on EU / Canada relations during the next part-session in September .
Situation in Albania after the elections ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Albania after the elections .
Mr President , today , more than ever , Albania needs Europe .
This is the real message of our debates this afternoon .
More than 1 , 500 people were murdered in the run-up to the elections of 29 June and 6 July , and about one million automatic firearms are still in private hands .
For this reason , the outcome of the recent elections , which many Members regard as satisfactory , must not lead the Council and the European Union in general to lower their guard .
The Council must , in particular , do everything necessary , appropriate and expedient to stabilize and democratize Albania , not least by means of economic aid conditional upon respect for human rights and the application of democratic principles in that unfortunate country .
Only an approach of this kind can justify the policy of expansion to the countries of former Eastern Europe which the European Union is conducting .
We can no longer resign ourselves to the principle that ' something is better than nothing ' .
Mr. President , I hope that despite the absence of the Commission and the Council , we can point out the following :
The elections were indeed difficult , but in the end they were accepted by everyone .
I recall , for example , that Mr Berisha , who controlled the television in Albania , forbade the transmission of anything about the pre-election campaign .
Now , however , the difficulties to be faced by the new government are beginning .
Mr President , since all that needed to be said has already been said , I want to stress the following :
First , we hope - and I would very much have liked to have the views of those who are absent - that there will no longer be any support at all for Mr Berisha 's regime , since his perfidy needs no further proof either within Albania or in relation to his adventuring abroad , because there are already signs of that .
I hope that both the Community bodies and the Member States that are in any way involved will have nothing to do with him .
Secondly , so far as aid is concerned , Mr President , we have granted Albania the largest ever amount of aid percapita .
What has happened to the money ?
Thirdly , as a priority , future aid must go towards compensating the victims of the pyramid swindle , for which the previous regime was entirely responsible .
Otherwise , there will be no political stability in the country .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Ariane
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0237 / 97 ) by Mrs Mouskouri , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council Decision establishing a programme of support , including translation , in the field of books and reading ( Ariane ) ( C4-0294 / 97-94 / 0189 / COD ) ) .
Mr. President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , you will perhaps remember that about two years ago , in April 1995 , in this chamber I very enthusiastically presented the Ariane programme .
I remind you that it is a programme whose aim is to support the spread of literature , dramatic art and reference works by means of translation , to promote cooperation in the field of books , and to contribute to the better training of translators .
You will also perhaps remember that after that first presentation. we had to wait for more than a year before the Council finally expressed a common position on the amendments we had proposed at first reading .
To that already time-consuming process were added the difficult negotiations carried out in the context of the Conciliation Committee , and those negotiations finally led to an agreement with the Council .
Today , I would like to present to you the product of that agreement about the Ariane programme , while trying at the same time to preserve undiminished enthusiasm , because it is indeed a programme which deserves our support .
And that , because the translation of books , a knowledge of history and an appreciation of culture will contribute to the reciprocal approach of Europe 's citizens .
I will begin with the amendments that our delegation managed to get the Council to agree with .
Those amendments relate to two very important issues .
First , the priority given to the translation of works written in the Union 's less widely used languages .
Those works benefit from the Ariane programme 's support , even if they have never previously been translated into other Union languages .
Secondly , the priority that ought to be given to small , independent publishers .
I should also add that our amendments concerning the creation of a data bank to promote coproductions , and for the creation of a dictionary database as a useful tool for translators , were adopted as well .
Yet , though in the case of the amendments I have just mentioned the negotiations , difficult as they were , led to success for our delegation , unfortunately the same cannot be said about the other two thorny issues that were the subject of conciliation with the Council .
I am referring of course to the funding of the programme and to comitology .
I can do not more than express my sorrow and disappointment , not only because the duration of the programme was reduced to two years , 1997 and 1998 , with a total budget of just 7 million ECU , but also because despite our persistent efforts the Council left us no margin for negotiation on that point .
As for the issue of comitology , I must stress that the order was adopted in a compromise way , because at the last minute and quite suddenly the Commission did not support our proposal .
Perhaps my last comments may cast a shadow on my pleasure at the adoption of the Ariane programme .
But let us not forget the most important thing : this programme goes some small way towards the mutual acquaintance of European cultures , more substantive communication and approach between Europe 's citizens , and finally , towards the creation of a real citizens ' Europe , which I cannot imagine without a cultural dimension .
I hope that in the next two years of its implementation , even with so small a budget , the Ariane programme will show what it can offer and I am sure that it will be renewed .
I hope that by then the members of the Council will have grasped the thread of their own Ariane , which will help them emerge from the labyrinth and acknowledge the importance of the European Union 's civilization and cultural dimension .
I also believe that it is better to have a programme with a little bit of money that is accepted by everyone , than a programme which would always remain at the pilot stage .
Mr President , the Ariane saga has come to an end .
The communication between European cultures through books and reading is being contemplated with a derisory amount of 7 million ECU for the years 1997-98 .
Despite the efforts by the European Parliament - in particular the rapporteur , Nana Mouskouri , and the committee - to increase the budget following the conciliation process , the Council 's surprising lack of dynamism or rather that of one or two Member States , means that not one more jot has been added to the budget of this programme which undoubtedly is a very special instrument for asserting the cultural diversity that the Council is so attached to .
The specific reference to cultural diversity that the Council introduced at Amsterdam in Article 128 confirms that .
It is a shame that the Council did not make the changes to that article that everyone wanted and that would have made things work by means of majority voting instead of the current unanimity that desperately holds everything up .
The same inadequacy of financial resources occurred in the case of another European flagship programme , Socrates , promoting exchanges of students and teachers and language teaching .
That occurred despite the fact that it is one of the European Union 's biggest success stories .
What can justify the inexplicable contradiction in the European Union between the priority that it claims to give to a programme and the insufficient means that it makes available for it ?
There is also a contradiction between the hopes raised among the public and the frustration that is then brought about ...
This contradiction cannot be found in other areas of European Union policy .
When a decision is taken to implement agricultural or transport measures , the means to make them possible are not then denied .
Even research , another poor relation in the past , has now had its resources increased for the next budget , perhaps because it is more closely linked to industry , perhaps too much for the interests of my country .
Who would dare deny the vital importance of culture to express the European spirit , single yet diverse , to cement local and universal citizenship , to fight exclusion , to strengthen cohesion , to instigate new urban policies and last but not least to create new jobs ?
I am certain that the next treaty , not the Amsterdam Treaty , but the next one , which this IGC helped to prepare negatively , will give cultural policy the central place that it must now occupy in the project for a Europe of citizens .
Mr President , Mrs Vaz da Silva is quite right to tick off the Council and the Commission about the derisory budget for the Ariane Programme .
But I would like to quote that ' it is better to light a candle than to curse the darkness ' .
Mrs Mouskouri has certainly lit the candle here and kept it lit through very dark days .
We would like to congratulate her on that .
There are great hopes riding on the Ariane Programme , particularly in countries where minority languages are increasingly being used by our young writers and among the small publishers who have the courage to publish these books , knowing that they will probably make no money on them and , even worse , might possibly lose money on them .
We have to recognize this as a cultural service that we must protect and support .
As more and more of our young writers begin to know other , similar people in other countries , we are finding , as they discover common , imaginative trends between themselves , that a whole new type of literature is being produced .
We should celebrate and sing for this .
It is a pity Mrs Mouskouri could not have sung her report today .
But the fact of the matter is that in addition to the dangers for small publishers , we are facing the onslaught of a massive , blockbuster culture where huge amounts of money are made on sometimes quite appallingly bad books .
I would like , in supporting Mrs Mouskouri 's report and congratulating her on it , to say : let us say it for the small books ; let us say it for the little , special minority language books ; let us say it for those who still enjoy the pure and absolute pleasures of a good book .
Let us at least show the next generation that there is more to life than some of the books that are being produced and sold in all our airports .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if I may say so I should like very much to respond to this debate in the very positive spirit which Mrs Banotti has just expressed , and most particularly to join her in paying tribute to the sterling and lengthy work which Mrs Mouskouri has undertaken in advancing this project and seeing it to a successful conclusion .
I would say not only that we should rejoice at what the project and the scheme can now do to help small publishers and minority cultures , but also that we should very much regard this as paving the way to something more substantial in the future , as that is certainly the intention of the Commission .
Therefore , I hope that Mrs Mouskouri will be un successful in one thing she said she was trying to do ; and that is to dampen her enthusiasm .
We do not want her to succeed in that , because we need her enthusiasm in order to make a reality of the project and also to begin the work of going on to greater things .
I understand the disappointment that has been expressed about the sums involved , although I suspect that if Parliament got the same percentage of its original request for all the things that it wants to spend money on , it would be doing above average here .
Nonetheless , I understand the feeling that , faced with a challenge , the sums involved are small .
However , the Ariane Programme represents real progress in the development of our support in the field of culture and one that we should be gratified at bringing to the point of formal adoption today .
It is of short duration precisely because it is envisaged as being a transitional programme .
It provides the basis upon which the Community can go further in its support in the fields of books and reading , and provides the opportunity for the Community to reflect on the long-term priorities and instruments in our cultural policy .
That is not just a vague general expression of hope .
It is much more specific than that because the Commission has already committed itself to presenting a proposal for a global programme in this area , and that will happen in the near future .
But I make no apologies for the fact that before coming forward with a global programme , we want to hear the Community institutions and interested cultural organizations contribute their ideas and say what their priorities should be .
The conference is planned for November to enable people to do just that .
Perhaps I should just say a few words as regards the management of the Ariane Programme for this year .
The tendering procedure has already been launched to establish the necessary implementation measures and around 480 applications have been received : 340 for the translation of literary works , 20 for the translation of theatrical works and 30 for the translation of reference works , quite apart from 20 further training projects and around 80 cooperation projects .
That is a significant increase on last year 's pilot scheme where only 320 applications were received in all .
The results will be presented in September to the committee created in accordance with Article 5 of the Decision establishing the programme , and the outcome will be formally announced in early October of this year .
So , although there has been a long period of gestation , I hope those who have worked so hard in favour of this project will feel that now it has been launched , it has been well and truly launched and that real and positive results are very much within our sights shortly after the summer break .
I can assure you on behalf of the Commission that we will try to ensure that the management of the programme is as effective and efficient as possible because with a financially limited programme it is all the more important that it should be properly run .
We hope that once again we can rely on the support of the European Parliament - and we know we can - in carrying out this task and laying the foundations for a more substantial , global programme in what I hope will be the not-too-distant future .
The Bureau congratulates Mrs Mouskouri .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Free movement of doctors and mutual recognition of qualifications
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0246 / 97 ) by Mrs Fontaine , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directive 93 / 16 / EEC to facilitate the free movement of doctors and the mutual recognition of their diplomas , certificates and other evidence of formal qualifications ( C40307 / 97-94 / 0305 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report we are debating concerns the joint text , approved by the Conciliation Committee , relating to the free movement of doctors and the recognition of their qualifications .
I would remind the House that the Directive submitted to us by the Commission forms part of the long sequence of measures adopted since 1975 by the European institutions in an endeavour , step by step , to make this freedom of movement a reality .
In particular , this Directive introduced a new article containing commitology rules .
At second reading , Mr President , three important points formed the subject of amendments by Parliament .
Those amendments were rejected by the Council , so that conciliation became inevitable .
The three points in question related to nationals of Member States who hold qualifications awarded by third countries , the role of the Advisory Committee on Medical Training , and the commitology procedures .
As far as the commitology was concerned , we wanted to reintroduce the Management Committee in place of the Regulatory Committee .
Well , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on those three points we can now see that the overall result was positive .
Incidentally , I am grateful to the Dutch presidency for its personal commitment to ensuring this favourable outcome .
I must also thank the Commission which , it has to be said , gave us the kind of support we are increasingly coming to expect .
I am thinking especially of the declaration which the Commission agreed to annex to the joint conciliation text , which specifically relates to the equivalence of medical qualifications obtained outside the European Union .
Mr President , this is a problem we are going to have to resolve , within the more general framework of the system of mutual recognition of diplomas .
The same applies , incidentally , to the difficult issue of the numerus clausus , which threatens to arise more and more frequently as professionals become more and more mobile within the Community - something which , of course , we can only welcome .
I would also take this opportunity to remind the Commission that it promised me a study of future trends in this respect , in connection with the report I presented to this House some months ago on the progress made with implementation of the general Directive .
On the subject of the commitology , we have managed to find a very acceptable solution .
Finally , as regards the last point , it has now been specified that the Advisory Committee on Medical Training will send opinions and recommendations to the Commission and the Member States , which will allow that body , as we wished , to help to provide a comparatively high level of training for general practitioners and specialists in the Community .
Finally , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the progress made with the conciliation procedure in general , which has enabled us , in quite a short time , to arrive at the results I have the honour to present this evening .
Mr President , Commissioner , the freedom of movement of individuals - as Mrs Fontaine pointed out - within the European Union is constantly being obstructed by the fact that diplomas , examination certificates and other credentials are not recognized in all Member States , or are subject to conditions .
This is incomprehensible to many citizens , and dilutes their enthusiasm for Europe .
When I hear that , according to Mrs Fontaine , we have been working on making adjustments here since as long ago as 1975 , that seems to me a very , very long time .
We see the same thing in the many petitions that are constantly being presented to the Committee on Petitions , because European citizens have extreme problems as a result of their diplomas not being recognized within the Union .
Today , we are debating this amendment to the Directive to facilitate the free movement of doctors .
That really is a very long title .
My group welcomes the result so far achieved by the Conciliation Committee , and we shall accept it in that spirit .
We do regret , however , that this conciliation procedure has been unnecessarily protracted by the behaviour of the Commission .
Mrs Fontaine previously touched on a number of points , and I agree with what she said .
I should therefore like to thank Mrs Fontaine for the work she has done and the rapid progress she has made with it to enable us to accept this proposal today .
Parliament was able to get what it wanted in the so-called management committee procedure .
This is important because , by this procedure , the new developments in the medical field can be properly taken into account .
The amendments proposed by Parliament were also accepted by the Council ; they were drafted and presented by Mrs Fontaine in the course of the conciliation procedure .
My group , however , had great difficulty in accepting the Directive , principally because acceptance took the form of a statement by the Commission without prior notification of Parliament .
That statement merely emphasized that equal treatment of diplomas gained outside the European Union is one of the outstanding problems .
We trust that further rapid progress will be made with this , so that people who have acquired their credentials outside the Union will be able to practise their professions inside the Union , too , where they have made their homes .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , pursuant to Article 8 of the EC Treaty , Union citizenship confers upon every national of a Member State the right of freedom of movement and residence within the sovereign territory of the Member States .
However , this fundamental right of the individual is being obstructed by numerous obstacles which restrict the mobility of those who would like to live and work beyond the borders of their country of origin .
In particular , the recognition , certification and validation of educational courses and qualifications is often a stumbling block to their progress .
As a member of the Committee on Culture and the Committee on Petitions , I often find myself dealing with these obstacles to mobility .
I therefore welcome the Directive on freedom of movement for doctors and the mutual recognition of their diplomas within Community territory , in the version contained in the joint draft that is now before us .
It will bring us a step closer to our objective of free movement of individuals within Europe .
I note with satisfaction that the conciliation committee , originally in the face of resistance from the Commission , persisted in its view that the Advisory Committee on Medical Training should have the right to make recommendations to the governments of the Member States and the Commission regarding the recognition of diplomas .
For Germany , in particular , it was especially important that the association of specialists should be included .
This guarantees a comparably high standard of medical training within the Community .
The recognition of diplomas acquired by EU citizens in third countries was also discussed in the conciliation committee .
The problems associated with that are being dealt with within the framework of the general rules on the recognition of university diplomas .
It is , therefore , exclusively EU citizens that benefit from the Directive .
As we steer the European ship today , our objective is to establish the genuinely free movement of persons within Europe .
Let us set our course for that objective .
I believe that this Directive will make an important contribution to this , and I thank Mrs Fontaine for her great and successful efforts .
Mr President , Mrs Fontaine , Commissioner , Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee unanimously adopted the draft decision - and it was right to do so - under the benevolent leadership of Mrs Fontaine , who had the idea that the purpose of the medical profession is not solely to provide a good standard of living for doctors but , more to the point , to safeguard the interests of those who are ill , or who believe they are ill , which means that they are not far from being so .
This safeguard is based on three pillars : the rigorous nature of university and hospital training , a high standard of technical and scientific knowledge and , not least , the ability to deal with those who are sick or injured , and their families , in a spirit of ethical correctness and respect for the individual .
The mobility of health service personnel , an innovation some 25 years ago , is now going to increase exponentially .
The adoption of the Directive , in accordance with the joint text , will enable the delicate balance to be struck between health requirements and the necessary consistency of medical practice within the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I start by joining all the other speakers in expressing our thanks and congratulations to Mrs Fontaine for the work she has done with regard to this important issue .
I would add that quite apart from the work she has done during the progress of this directive , she has presented it with such clarity this evening that it is completely unnecessary for me to say in any detail what the directive does and the advances that it has made .
I am very glad also that Mrs Fontaine was able to say - and was joined by other speakers such as Mrs Zimmermann - that the conciliation procedure worked well and achieved a satisfactory outcome .
Rather than hark back to the difficulties which were involved , we should concentrate on the outcome which has been very positive .
I am very glad indeed that has been the case .
We are pleased at the prospect that our proposal will soon be adopted .
This will enable the lists of those diplomas in specialist medicine qualifying for automatic recognition to be updated through a much simplified legislative procedure and that in turn will greatly facilitate the free movement of doctors in the European Union , which is an important objective for us all .
When you think of the numerous changes that have occurred recently in the sphere of specialist medicine , the absolute necessity to update the lists on a regular basis becomes very clear .
So the directive really answers to the needs of the medical profession and those who are responsible for dealing with applications made by doctors from all over the European Union for the recognition of their qualifications .
In the debate , both Mrs Fontaine and others referred to the difficulty caused by diplomas obtained outside the European Union .
I am not going to pretend that this directive solves that problem but I am glad that it was possible to achieve agreement in the course of the conciliation committee that a Commission statement would be added to the minutes of the committee concerning the ninth recital , saying that the Commission stresses that the need to establish the equivalence of diplomas awarded to doctors outside the European Union is one of the relevant problems to be tackled .
That does not amount to a solution to the problem but it amounts to a serious and formal recognition of the problem which at least is the first step towards working towards its solution .
I should like to thank the European Parliament and the Council for the great effort they have put into overcoming the difficulties which have presented themselves in this area and welcome this small but important step forward in achieving the much wider objective of the free movement of people , including professionals , to enable them , when properly qualified , to carry out their professions throughout the European Union .
The Bureau congratulates Mrs Fontaine and I personally , as a doctor , thank her for the respect she has shown for the medical profession .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Towards sustainability
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0235 / 97 ) by Mrs Dybkjaer , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Decision on the review of the European Community programme of policy and action in relation to the environment and sustainable development ' Towards Sustainability ' ( C4-0170 / 97-96 / 0027 ( COD ) ) .
, rapporteur . ( DA ) Mr President , sustainable development is defined in the Brundtland Report of 1987 as a process of change with the aim of meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to satisfy their needs .
A simple aim which , however , has proved difficult to achieve .
The matter we are now debating concerns - at least , according to the title - the EU 's policy and action in relation to the environment and sustainable development .
It is worth repeating it : policy and action .
For , without a policy concept , we act blindly but , without action , policy ideas are no more than empty words .
On ceremonial or official occasions it always seems so easy to reach agreement on the general political intention of doing more for the environment .
So at that level it has never been difficult to agree that we should be more environmentally friendly .
The difficult part is and has always been to translate the fine words into action .
Yet action , i.e. the concrete implementation of the declarations of intent , is absolutely crucial , precisely in the field of the environment , otherwise things go wrong .
But in the review of the Fifth Environmental Action Programme the Commission placed most emphasis on the preeminent general policy considerations and much less on concrete action .
And that despite the fact that the reports serving as background documentation clearly showed that , without measures to tighten up the action programme , the EU could not meet the objectives laid down .
And , without extensive adjustments , we shall not be able to achieve sustainable development .
In its first reading of the review of the Fifth Environmental Action Programme therefore , the European Parliament decided to rectify the situation and adopted a number of amendments , all with the overriding aim of concretizing and tightening up the Commission 's draft .
It was also our view that , in a review of an environmental action programme , we have a duty to secure a sensible adjustment in those areas in which it is clear that it will not otherwise be possible to achieve the objectives laid down in the programme .
Otherwise what is the point of having a review ?
After all it should not be forgotten that the objectives we are talking about were adopted jointly by the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament in 1992 .
Unfortunately the Commission was only willing to accept one or two of Parliament 's amendments , not the most important ones , and things do not look much better for the moment with respect to the Council 's position .
But the European Parliament has not lost all hope and confidence in the Council of Environment Ministers .
The Council did not really address Parliament 's amendments from first reading , but in a protocol indicated its will and desire to cooperate with the European Parliament .
That is fine .
Now we just hope that the Council will honour this declaration .
At present the Council 's common position is sadly far apart from that of Parliament .
In some areas the Council has indeed improved on the Commission draft , but in others regrettably it has moved in the opposite direction .
So now we hope that the Council will take inspiration from the European Parliament 's proposals , not least because the environment has a very high priority with us and a large majority of the population in all the Member States .
And the environment really is an area in which the EU can deliver the goods and show positive results to the Union 's citizens .
I hope that the Council will not miss that opportunity .
Happily we have seen examples in the past to show that the Council can be quite environmentally friendly and progressive when it feels like it .
I myself experienced that when I took part in the Rio II summit in New York last month .
It was clear there that the Council is a driving force in global environmental policy .
We are therefore very interested in having good cooperation with the Council , just as the Council has indicated that it wants good cooperation with us .
So , to give the Council a helping hand , the political groups have joined together in cutting back the number of amendments to just a few more important ones , all of which are aimed at taking us further down the road to sustainable development .
The amendments of course vary in content , since they deal with quite different areas within environmental development .
But they have one thing in common .
They set out to transform environmental policy into concrete action .
Sustainable development is absolutely essential to our society and , ultimately , to the survival of mankind .
The difficulty we nevertheless have in achieving sustainable social and economic development has to do with the fact that , in the rich countries , we have built up a lifestyle that goes in exactly the opposite direction .
It puts great pressure on natural resources .
Lifestyles cannot be changed overnight .
We who try at regular intervals to bring about such changes are aware of that .
But , as we know , every journey starts with the first step , and the first step is called concrete action .
I will not go so far as to say that Parliament is the ' last action hero ' , but we do see it as our task to put things in concrete terms and shift the focus to action .
As though we were making a film , we raise the clapper-board and shout ' action ' .
Finally I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , the committee chairman and the secretariat for the good cooperation we have had .
I think I would not go far wrong in calling it sustainable .
Mr President , I should first like to thank the rapporteur warmly for her detailed and devoted work in this field , and I trust that her efforts will be crowned with success .
I hope that the Council of Environment Ministers , which after all is made up of individual Environment Ministers who find a great deal to say at home about preventive environmental protection and about how important it is for us to protect the climate and how important it is to pursue environmentally compatible agriculture and about how important sustainable , environmentally compatible development is for industry will , when Parliament has taken its decision tomorrow in favour of the environment , also recognize Parliament 's viewpoint when it comes to a conciliation procedure , or perhaps even earlier , because we still have a great deal to do .
President Santer was saying this morning that the primary functions of the Union were to create sustainable growth and new jobs .
I would say that sustainable growth , properly used , does create new jobs .
Because we all know that we not only can create new , lasting jobs through environmental repairs - something that still has to be done in many places , because things are a long way from being as they should -but , in particular , we can do so by undertaking preventive environmental protection in all areas ; in other words , our aim must be the rational use of energy ; our aim must be to guarantee a water supply that is environmentally compatible and provides people with enough water ; our aim must be to organize waste management in such a way that we are not choked to death by our own waste mountains .
That is the only way to achieve the sustainability that we talk so much about .
The rapporteur has introduced very sound and important amendments in all areas , which my group would like to support .
I would particularly stress the preventive environmental protection in all areas : in agriculture , in industry , in motor vehicle manufacture most of all , and in the chemicals sector , because it is particularly important there for us to proceed with very great care and very great deliberation .
The energy sector , too , is very important .
There is one other point , too , that I should like to mention where I think further progress must be made , and that is the involvement of the public ; this applies particularly to the many local schemes in connection with Agenda 21 .
Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , there is an Italian proverb that says that saying and doing are often half the width of the sea apart .
Let us not see half the width of the sea between saying and doing in the environmental sector !
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Dybkjær and commiserate with her because her group did not give her an actual draft directive to get her teeth into .
This programme is extremely difficult to address but she has done it with great energy .
Even when I disagree with her , I admire her .
The report adds some very useful aspects to the review of the fifth action programme , and it is going to be interesting to see whether the Commission will take these on board .
There are a number of points which the EPP would like to highlight about the Dybkjær report and that it hopes the Commission will accept .
Amendments Nos 20 to 22 are three amendments which spell out ways in which we can get better observance of European Union law .
Mrs Dybkjær here goes further than what the Commission has proposed so far , amongst other things , calling for a common European environment inspectorate .
I do not know whether we are ever going to move towards that .
Many people might dislike the idea as being too interfering , but I think I speak for many Members in this House in saying that the European Environment Agency , to some extent , has been a disappointment to Members of the European Parliament .
It seems to have got tangled up in its own methodology .
No doubt it is doing interesting and useful work , but it is not terribly useful to us .
We would also like to see more prompt action by the Commission under Article 171 .
Regarding Amendment No 25 , we hope that the Commissioner will take on board this amendment because it contains ideas for drawing up environment plans for the applicant countries .
The Commission report which we received this morning is extremely gloomy on this .
It says : ' The Union will not be in a position to cover the financing gap by the time of enlargement that emerges as the applicant Member States face up to the consequences of trying to comply with European environment law ' .
Mrs Dybkjær gives us some ideas as to how we are going to address that .


My group very much prefers Mr Virgin 's Amendment No 40 to Mrs Dybkjær 's Amendment No 31 on climate change , which we think sets unrealistic targets .
Finally , on the vexed question of Amendment No 34 , where Mrs Dybkjær introduces a new waste hierarchy - new because it is not actually the waste hierarchy as set out in the packaging directive : we would all like to see more recycling , more re-use - a lot more .
But the Commission 's own studies have shown that there is no waste treatment option that is best for all materials in all Member States .
Not ' one size fits all ' , here .
A varied Community , in my view at least , needs various solutions .
I therefore hope that the Commission will not agree to Amendment No 34 .
I cannot quite see whether there are any Labour MEPs from the United Kingdom here tonight .
I suspect that one of the reasons why they are not here is that they are probably trying to persuade Mr Tony Blair not to change the election system in the United Kingdom for the European elections .
It fits very well with the waste hierarchy , if I may say so .
The question is : will the present Labour MEPs be re-used , recycled or , as I suspect , treated as inert waste for landfill ?
Mr President , the rapporteur - who is to be thanked for her report - ends the text by saying that ' we are tired of fine words which are not translated into action ' , and what she does in the report , which was unanimously approved by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , is precisely that : she makes concrete proposals in a number of very familiar areas - water quality , waste processing , the stabilization of CO2 emissions , an attempt at setting up a corps of inspectors to monitor compliance with Community Law , the proposal that sanctions be implemented where necessary and , with reference to waste processing , perhaps working in two directions , one of these being attempting to deal with disasters caused by those who pollute and do not pay - which is the case in many countries - and the other being prevention .
Last weekend I was in Baracaldo , a town in the Basque country , where there had been a million-square-metre lindane spill which is now costing the local authorities a great deal of money to clear up .
I therefore believe that we firstly need to pay attention to prevention and bring about the situation in which those who are actually causing the pollution and using natural resources pay for their actions , which has not been the case hitherto .
Mr President , we are talking about something which ought to be very simple but which appears to be very difficult , which is that the European Union should fulfil its own promises as far as environmental policy is concerned , in other words the Union should meet its own targets .
I would very much like to congratulate Mrs Dybkjær , even nominate her as an ' honorary green ' for her persistent attempts to persuade this Union to secure the necessary means to fulfil the environmental promises which it has itself included in the fifth action programme for the environment .
It is a radical programme which we support and which we have actively worked to bring to fruition .
I would like to make particular mention of amendment proposal 37 , point f which means that the newer EU Member States will not have to lower their environmental standards .
On the contrary , the EU ought to ? ? is to learn from its new Members and adapt itself to them , which is of particular significance at the moment as it also affects how we behave in relation to other new members .
Mr President , last time we discussed this issue I was forced , on behalf of the Green Group , to ask the Commissioner responsible for environmental issues , Mrs Bjerregaard , to reconsider her position as Commissioner for the Environment because of the rare display of arrogance shown in her treatment of Parliament 's demands .
I very much hope that I will not have to do the same this time as well .
I hope that the Commissioner for the Environment has realised that her prospects of working in a trusting relationship with Parliament 's environment committee are at stake .
If , with the same arrogant attitude , she once again rejects those decisions which Parliament will most probably adopt with a large majority , it would be a disaster for the EU 's environment policy .
I also think that it would be something of a personal disaster for the Commissioner for the Environment .
So , I hope for the sake of the EU and Mrs Bjerregaard that those environmental decisions which will , in all probability , be adopted here in Parliament will be met with a different response this time .
Mr President , since 1967 more than 200 measures have been adopted for the benefit of the environment .
In 1992 , with the Rio summit , we saw some very encouraging targets set .
Admittedly , the results from New York are somewhat discouraging .
Nevertheless , the European Union has performed well .
The results from Amsterdam also give a clear signal of our determination to move forward .
Furthermore , on Saturday 12 July , a dispatch from the European Agency fuelled our optimism by listing a whole package of measures adopted by the Commission to take account of environmental concerns in all Community policies .
You will have to excuse our taking the Commission 's professed aims so seriously .
Those aims reflect our concerns , our very legitimate concerns , regarding our responsibilities on this planet , which is not our personal inheritance but something we hold in trust for our children .
Sadly , we are a little sceptical because there are many precedents - such as the consideration of these environmental concerns in the Common Agricultural Policy or in transport policy - which suggest that there may be a lot of ground to cover yet .
We shall only be completely convinced when we see the announcement of clear financial commitments and a firm timetable .
Mr President , I would like to join with the rest of my colleagues in congratulating the rapporteur for the work she has done .
However , we are not over-delighted , because she has not been sufficiently selective when presenting amendments and accepting others - something we mentioned during the work of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection - and sometimes fundamentalism is the worst enemy of progress when it comes to environmental policy .
When arbitrary proposals are made , with no basis in reality and technical knowledge , reasonable proposals are discredited and , in this report , there are a great number of reasonable proposals which we want to support , but we could have avoided certain things which genuinely do not stand up .
How are we going to achieve the objective of groundwater being nitrate- and pesticide-free when we are all well aware of the fact that , between 1950 and 1996 , European agricultural production , fortunately , went up from 20 quintales of wheat production to over 65 on average last year ?
This was achieved by means of improvements in seeds and also by means of the farm machinery used , which is absolutely necessary .
The proposal is unrealistic .
Later , in another paragraph , we say that we want to control ozone-depleting substances , and I am all in favour of this objective .
But then we say that such substances must be abolished as and when potential alternatives become available .
In the very next paragraph , it is stated that there must be a 50 % reduction in the use of methyl bromide , leading to a complete ban by 2000 .
I would like to ask the Commission and the rapporteur what technical alternatives there are to replace this product .
This is just one of the examples which do not stand up .
We are seeking , it would appear , to change our priorities in terms of waste disposal every two or three years .
This , also , is an unrealistic aspiration - society cannot deliver this .
Later , we state that we are going to make a 50 % reduction in the number of vertebrates used for experimental purposes by 2000 .
Yet another totally arbitrary proposal .
And so on . Some very significant proposals in this report thus appear less important and it would have been preferable to have deleted those other proposals which lead nowhere .
Mr President , the report currently under discussion is excellent .
It is fundamentally concerned with the EU 's credibility in environmental policy , its capacity to progress from fine words to action .
What makes the report even more interesting is that it also tries to correct some of the system errors within EU policy , where currently the EU sometimes actually makes environmental problems even worse .
Amendment proposal No. 7 which is about adapting agriculture to meet the needs of the environment and amendment proposals 18 and 19 on standardisation work and on public procurement are important sections of the proposal .
Amendment proposal No. 26 , which concerns the World Trade Organisation , WTO , and the environment is also extremely important and will probably become even more important in the future .
There are a couple of other amendment proposal which I think are of great importance as well and these are amendment proposals 2 and 37 , point f which concern the new Member States and state that they do not have to lower their environmental standards .
Or at least the Commissioner responsible , Mrs Bjerregaard has promised that they need not do so .
So I hope that we can support these texts .
We will be supporting all the proposals tabled in this report .
Mr President , the European Parliament 's discussion of the review of the fifth action programme for the environment is very important .
The rapporteur has brought vital aspects to this review which are worthy of our wholehearted support .
There are good grounds for continuing the debate on many of the points to obtain a deeper analysis .
On the climate issue , the report proposes that greenhouse gases be reduced by 20 % by the year 2005 , 30 % by the year 2010 and 50 % by the year 2030 .
It would certainly be desirable to attain these levels , but it is not realistic .
Prior to the Kyoto meeting on the climate , the Council of Ministers agreed a position of a 15 % reduction by the year 2010 .
The PPE group 's proposal is 20 % and this concentrates on carbon dioxide emissions .
This is a level which it is possible to reach .
But it will not be possible to reach this important environmental goal if , at the same time , nuclear power is abolished .
This is demonstrated by the fact that Sweden , within the framework of the commitment prior to the Kyoto meeting , has been given permission to increase its carbon dioxide emissions by 5 % by the year 2010 .
This is because of the decision to close two nuclear reactors , a decision , which I think is totally wrong .
This gives a snapshot of what will happen if several other countries follow Sweden 's example .
The EU 's plans for the climate would fall like a house of cards .
An aggressive environmental policy would include the replacement of a number of fossil fuel based power stations with nuclear power .
In the long term this would save people 's lives .
From a study of the material in the Commission 's external report it is possible to calculate that nuclear power has saved approximately 20 000 lives in the EU over a ten year period if a comparison is made with a situation where the same amount of energy had been produced using coal powered power stations .
The demonstration of electric cars in front of the Parliament building points to the environmentally friendly vehicles of the future .
I am convinced that competitiveness will have greatly increased within 5-10 years and that we will have vehicles with no emissions .
This would be the case for carbon dioxide as well if nuclear power were to be used for battery charging .
This would be a decisive environmental victory .
I also share Mrs Jackson 's views on the hierarchy of wastes .
In Amendment No 10 , something of the utmost importance to all opponents of atomic energy is being put to the vote .
Let the Euratom Treaty be abrogated in its present form but its safety aspects incorporated into the Treaty on European Union .
If that amendment should actually be adopted tomorrow - as I hope - then it would probably be the first time in the history of this Parliament that an anti-atomic amendment reaches the conciliation procedure .
That would mean that , for the first time , the Council would have to come to terms with criticism and rejection of its atomic policy .
There was a similar amendment once before , but that one started from the extremely naive assumption that all Europe 's atomic power stations would be shut down by the year 2002 .
Anyone who realizes that 34 % of all the electrical power consumed in the EU comes from atomic power stations - in France , the figure is 70 % - will appreciate that this is not an option .
Also , the safety and health provisions must be retained at all costs -if only , of course , because eastward enlargement will bring certain States into the Union whose safety standards are absolutely different from our own .
In that case , of course , they would have to observe those safety provisions .
If all environmentally aware Members , across party boundaries and across national boundaries , too , can find it in their hearts to vote together in tomorrow 's vote , then we have a chance to get to the conciliation procedure .
I would really look forward very much to such a procedure , and I believe that , here again , I must most sincerely thank our rapporteur , Lone Dybkjaer .
She has done all this really , really excellently , and if we succeed then that success will be hers , too .
Mr President , the Fifth Environmental Action Programme forms the basis of the European Union 's present environment policy .
So this review of the programme is tremendously important .
However , the key question is therefore how this basis should be amended in order to arrive at a better environment policy in the Union .
The essential problem with the Fifth Action Programme is that many of the promises set out there have not been translated into action or legislation , mainly because of a lack of political will .
The only way of resolving this situation is not the one chosen by the Commission - continuing on the present course with a few minor adjustments to take account of new thinking - no , my group stands completely behind Mrs Dybkjær , who has preferred to define the objectives of the revised action programme much more clearly , linking them to established data on which action must be taken .
Since it is the Council in particular which has been responsible for the lack of action during recent years , it is very disappointing that it has not taken the trouble to consider Parliament 's amendments from first reading .
Because of this institutional failing on the part of the Council , Parliament has no option but to retable most of the amendments from the first reading .
I hope that in the conciliation procedure which lies ahead of us , the Council will now listen better and take more action .
Mr President , I would first like to thank the Environment Committee and , in particular , the rapporteur , Lone Dybkjær , for the thorough work that has gone into this recommendation .
As the Commission has made clear in its communication on the Council 's common position , we join with Parliament in expressing regret , as Mr Eisma also did a moment ago , that the Council has drawn up a common position without first having made a thorough examination of the amendments adopted by Parliament on first reading or , for that matter , the Commission 's amended proposal .
After our debate today , the Council will have a fresh opportunity to examine Parliament 's amendments , and I hope that the two institutions can conclude the decision-making procedure on this proposal before the end of 1997 .
In some areas , as Lone Dybkjær also pointed out , the Council has weakened the Commission proposal .
I think in particular of Article 2 on agriculture , on which both Mrs Graenitz and Mr Valverde López had some strong points to make .
Here the common position is very weak , and it does not address the question of integration at all .
So we can all take comfort from the fact that Agenda 2000 , which Commission President , Mr Santer , presented today , adopts a quite different and progressive approach to the question of integrating environmental issues into agricultural policy .
The weakening of the proposal by the Council unfortunately is also in evidence in the context of environmental accountability , which is covered in Article 3 .
Here the Council in its common position seeks to limit the possibilities of action at EU level , so that they amount to no more than promoting measures at national level .
Here I believe that the Commission and Parliament have a joint interest in giving environmental accountability a higher profile .
At all events , that is what I understood from the debate yesterday morning on proposal 90 / 220 , in which Mr Bowe stressed very clearly Parliament 's interest in this matter .
Sadly the same remarks apply to Article 4 , in which the Council has weakened the provision on an improvement of access to the legal system in the field of the environment and has deleted the provision under which it is proposed that consideration be given to introducing sanctions for failure to observe new legislation .
These were some of the points to which Mrs Jackson devoted special attention in her speech and , as Mrs Jackson is of course aware , we have been very active on the question of failure to observe environmental legislation .
The environment is the only area in which we have hitherto resorted to the expedient of fines . We have done so against six countries and - it would seem to me - with very good results .
I note with regret that Parliament , out of a desire to limit the number of amendments , has accepted the Council 's moves to weaken the proposal .
There seems still to be a misunderstanding or , perhaps more accurately , some differences of opinion on the review we are now debating , since our view is that it should not replace the Fifth Environmental Action Programme .
The aim of the proposal is to secure the more effective implementation of the Fifth Programme up to the year 2000 .
The proposal therefore singles out the measures which should be given top priority for adoption at EU level in order to solve some of the outstanding problems .
The priorities indicated must of course be transposed into concrete proposals , and the Commission has that well in hand .
At this stage in the implementation of the programme , it is important in the Commission 's view to focus on some of the key issues , which merit special attention and special support .
Several speakers have referred to them in the debate today .
Parliament has indicated that it wishes to add certain subjects , and that is understandable since there are many important issues in the field of the environment .
What we must not forget of course is that , the more priorities we assign , the less attention we shall be able to devote to each individual issue .
As regards the amendments relating to the consequences of enlargement to include Austria , Finland and Sweden , which Mr Gahrton and Mr Sjöstedt mentioned in particular , I should like once again to stress my determination that no Member State - old or new - will be obliged to lower its environmental standards .
We have been at pains to ensure that that need not happen , and Parliament will be aware that a whole series of proposals exists here , relating among other things to the motor oil programme and recently the acidification programme with the associated proposal on a reduction of sulphur emissions .
Whether we can give effect to our wishes and keep our promises to the new Member States , of course , also depends on our sticking to a procedure under which we can be sure of being able to deal with the proposals within the timeframe available .
Mr President , Parliament 's recommendation contains 38 amendments to the Council 's common position .
A further two amendments have been added .
The Commission can accept 16 of these amendments wholly , in part or in principle .
Of these amendments the Commission had already accepted five in conjunction with the first reading and incorporated them into the amended proposal of December 1996 .
Unfortunately the Commission cannot accept the 24 other amendments , first and foremost for institutional reasons .
The ones it cannot accept are Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 16 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 24 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 30 , 31 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 39 and 40 .
Mrs Jackson will have noted that we can accept Amendment No 34 , which is entirely consistent with the Commission 's original text .
Mr President , in presenting the proposal we are now debating on second reading , the Commission 's starting point was that the Community must set a good example and point the way forward both internally and at international level . We shall have an opportunity later this evening to discuss the UNGASS meeting in New York .
There is a need for increased political commitment and action at all levels , if we are to give effect to the overarching strategy and objectives of the Fifth Environmental Action Programme , geared to sustainable development .
As we can observe around us in Europe , in Denver and in New York , this is seen as an immensely important challenge , in which the EU has a major role to play .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Shipments of waste to non-OECD countries
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0241 / 97 ) by Mr Virgin , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Regulation establishing common rules and procedures to apply to shipments to certain non-OECD countries of certain types of waste ( COM ( 94 ) 0678 - C4-0048 / 97-95 / 0029 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , this report concerns the regulations governing the export of waste for recovery to countries outside the OECD .
There is , in fact , a strong link between this report and that on environmentally hazardous waste which we discussed recently .
Parliament won a significant victory then , when it managed to get several more groups of environmentally hazardous wastes included in the decision , including a number of substances on the ' Green List ' , which for the most part includes environmentally harmless substances .
It is this list primarily which this report addresses .
This is also the background to a number of amendment proposals .
The Commission 's proposal is based on allowing an export to take place if the country of destination has accepted it .
There is a conflict here as far as the substances which we consider should be treated as environmentally hazardous are concerned .
This is corrected through amendment proposals 8-10 , where it is established that the new Annex , Annex No. 5 , which is currently being drawn up and which will cover environmentally hazardous waste , should be included into this Regulation as well .
The question of the legal basis to be used has also been a problem .
The Commission wants to use Article 113 , as the issue is considered to be trade related .
The Council is of the opinion that the issue is partially environmentally related and that Article 130s applies . Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights supported this line with some convincing arguments .
I am also sure that Parliament views this as the most obvious line .
Otherwise , the proposal in the report is based on changing the decision making procedure for countries which have said no to the import of waste for recovery which is on the green list , or those which have not responded at all .
The Commission proposes a complicated consideration procedure to change the importing countries ' position .
It says in the proposal that ' it is possible that those countries which have responded by saying that they do not wish to accept certain or all types of waste / ..... / are perhaps not totally aware of the significance that their response will have on their own industry . '
I think that this quote reflects an authoritative attitude which is quite shocking .
My amendment proposal is based on the fact that no means no .
This must be respected and exports must not be allowed .
But a country may change its position if it wishes .
It must be relatively simple to make such a change of position .
This is covered in amendment 4 and also in the methods given in Article 4 .
Where countries have not responded we should treat this response as a no , but with the possibility that this may become yes in the future .
In view of the fact that this proposal will take a long time to conclude there is time to open up export channels which are important both for the exporting and importing country .
Examples of this can certainly be seen within the textile sector .
We have been subjected to a considerable barrage of letters recently .
These are particularly concerned with charity organisations which work within the textile sector .
This sector traditionally includes exports from the EU to countries outside the OECD , exports which do not really pose any environmental problems .
It is important , particularly for the many aid organisations , that such export is not prevented , and that simple channels are opened and simple decision making procedures put in place to promote such opportunities .
It is important to maintain this trade after all and to have the tools in place to give consent quickly for such exports .
This should be perfectly possible within the framework of the additional proposals which this report contains .
Mr President , waste is not just something that we want to get rid of at all costs .
Waste is also an extremely profitable business , and on that business the Commission has its beady eye in this proposal on waste shipments .
According to the proposal , as much waste as possible should be shipped as fast as possible beyond the borders of Europe , and never mind the consequences , never mind the environmental damage suffered by those who have received the shipments , and never mind the current EU legislation .
As the draftsman of the REX Committee , I have taken a look at the draft regulation and , like Mr Virgin , I could only shake my head at some of the points proposed there .
The Commission bases its proposal on an obsolete list of wastes .
The Basle Convention , and indeed the EU itself , has long since classified many of them as hazardous .
Tin residues are to be shipped to Albania , cobalt scrap to Colombia and nickel wastes to Brazil .
Then the Commission assumes that countries which have failed to reply to its proposal have simply forgotten to do so .
As for the countries that have explicitly rejected these proposals , the Commission intends to go round knocking on every door to get individual authorizations .
Well , ladies and gentlemen , if we are unwilling to inflict something on ourselves , we can hardly inflict it on someone else .
And we certainly cannot maintain that those countries which are reluctant to accept the gift of waste that Europe wants to lavish on them may possibly be totally unaware of the economic consequences of their refusal .
What unparalleled arrogance !
As if people outside Europe were unaware that cadmium and aluminium residues can destroy the environment .
We in the REX Committee sifted through this whole complex business and came to the conclusion that a ' green list ' really must be a list that is totally above suspicion - all green , without the occasional spots of yellow or even red .
We unanimously decided to give our full support to Mr Virgin 's amendments to the Commission 's proposal .
In any case , a new Directive on waste disposal is coming into force on 1 January 1998 .
Why should we be in such a rush at this stage to become involved in a directive which is going to be obsolete anyway in six or nine months ?
Mr President , this Parliament has for years been campaigning for a new waste policy , for waste avoidance and waste recycling within the European Union .
We have achieved one success .
In Article 39 of the Lomé Convention we laid down that no toxic or hazardous wastes must be exported to the ACP countries .
Unfortunately , there was no comparable agreement with other Third World countries .
But our view is that the time really has come to put a stop to waste exports to the Third World .
In this context , incidentally , South Africa has decided that it will not import any wastes and will not export hazardous wastes .
And we have achieved a worldwide breakthrough with the Basle Convention .
The revised version of the Basle Convention says that from 1 January 1998 any export of hazardous wastes outside the OECD countries is to be prohibited .
That resolution was adopted six months ago , and in fact it is already applicable .
So why , in this situation , does the Commission have to present us with another document which basically revokes that resolution , which has been a rule for six months ?
The Commission has the audacity - after that resolution has been adopted and the world-wide breakthrough has been achieved - still to propose to export hazardous wastes .
And it has the additional audacity - as Mr Virgin pointed out earlier - to include the following statement in Recital 5 of its text : ' it is possible that countries which have replied that they do not wish to receive some or all types of waste listed in Annex II of the Regulation may not be fully aware of the significance of their response for their industrial sector . '
Meaning what , precisely ?
That sentence is neo-colonialist - as if those countries did not know what they were doing , did not know what their potential was !
I believe that that sentence alone is sufficient for us to reject the entire document .
We discussed that in committee .
We tried to create an objective basis .
We shall give our complete and full support to the amendments Mr Virgin has tabled , as an attempt to arrive at a conclusion by objective argument .
Personally , though , I believe this document deserves to be thrown out ; we should not even vote on it !
Mr. President , it is now certain that some of man 's activities pose a grave threat both to the environment and to public health .
It is on the basis of that general thesis that we must examine the Commission 's proposal for a review of Regulation 259 / 93 .
The issue of exporting waste is certainly not a purely commercial one .
It is directly related to the environment and the health of all our planet 's citizens , not just that of the Union 's citizens .
We must take particular account of the destruction we are ' preparing ' today for future generations .
Consequently , it must be regarded as established that if a country has not responded to the Commission 's invitation to accept wastes for storage or processing , that does not mean that the country in question agrees to receive them .
And this , precisely , is the aim of Mr Virgin 's amendment , which I believe will be approved because it is unacceptable for the Commission to grant itself the right to interpret a country 's non-response in its own interests .
The environment 's resistance has been greatly reduced by industrial activity both in the developed world and in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
The outcry made as he departed this life by the great explorer and environmentologist Cousteau , to whom mankind owes so much , is very recent .
His outcry about the destruction that threatens our planet and will very soon be upon us , was very strident .
Let us take it to heart .
It is a political duty of the first magnitude , a direct priority on the world 's political stage , for the European Union to adopt a decision finally to put an end to this rationale of exporting wastes , which is no real export but a transfer of the problem to some other part of the planet .
As for the point in the Directive which refers to the type of waste , the green list which according to the commission contains harmless substances , many of which , however , are harmful to the environment and to public health , I consider it very important to take account of the list included in the Basel Convention and incorporate it in the proposed regulation .
Let me also mention another important issue , that of monitoring the implementation of this regulation .
The European Union will have to apply strict sanctions to Member States which infringe the regulation , and will certainly have to provide procedures to prevent the illegal transport known to be taking place .
I congratulate Mr Virgin on his report and I fully share his thoughts and views .
Mr President , the moral of this debate is : for heaven 's sake read your post carefully and reply to questionnaires carefully .
It seems to me that there are a number of misapprehensions around on this issue and when the Commissioner replies I hope he will bring a breath of fresh air into all this .
Like many British Members , I have received a large number of representations on this issue very suddenly and quite late in the day from the Red Cross and the Salvation Army , from Help the Aged - not Help the MEP - and so on .
They are all saying and I quote from one letter : The European Commission 's proposal here with the Virgin report will ban the trade in used textiles .
That is not true and it would be extremely helpful if the Commissioner when he replies could confirm that the trade in used clothing between these Member States and third countries can go on where those countries have definitely indicated that they want to import them .
That would help .
Secondly , the Commission 's main problem is the very large number of countries which have simply not replied to the note verbale .
Perhaps they thought it was just another letter about the European Parliament 's procedures .
Whatever it was , it went straight into the wastepaper basket and no reply was sent back to Brussels .
Could the Commissioner say how many third countries never replied to that note verbale ?
And could he say how many countries replied that they did not want these wastes ?
I can understand the Commission when it says that perhaps countries said they did not want these wastes but they did not realize what they were saying .
However , I have some sympathy with Mr Virgin .
If a country says that it did not want to import these wastes , then it did not want to import these wastes .
For us it would be rather like an unsuccessful mail order company to go back to them and say you did not really mean to refuse that , did you ?
You ticked the wrong box , didn 't you ?
Go on , you really want it .
That cannot be right and I hope the Commission can put matters straight tonight .
I have great sympathy with Mr Virgin but could the Commission say whether there is a simple mechanism for those countries which have so far indicated that they do not want to import these wastes , or have not given an answer , simply to change their minds if the full facts are brought to their attention ?
Mr President , I must say that I am also interested in an answer to the question put by Mrs Jackson , and I will add to Mrs Jackson 's remarks that I do not think the Commission has adopted the right approach with this proposal . If there was some dissatisfaction over the replies received and if not enough replies were received , an initiative could have been taken to seek a clarification of the replies instead of presenting this proposal .
But the proposal has been presented .
I support all the rapporteur 's amendments in the report and I agree that the Commission has taken a completely paternalistic attitude , which Mrs Jackson illustrated splendidly .
It is therefore important that we in the European Parliament adopt amendments that do away with this paternalistic attitude and at the same time of course institute a procedure that is simple enough for us to alter facilities for the export and import of waste when countries really make it clear that that is what they want .
Mr President , I would like to welcome Mr Virgin 's report on the Commission 's proposal to regulate the trade in certain types of waste to the non-OECD countries .
It fills a gap in the current regulations controlling the export of waste in the European Union .
But many of these materials have significant economic importance to the countries to which they are exported and we would wish to see the trade continued , but in an organized and controlled way .
However , in recent days , like my colleague Mrs Jackson , many of my colleagues on this side have been lobbied heavily by charitable organizations alleging that by voting for the Virgin report , we are about to ban the export of secondhand clothes and other textiles to non-OECD countries .
In response to these approaches , I should like to make the following points .
Firstly , I believe that the industrial waste exporters have mistakenly given an unnecessarily exaggerated and frightening picture of the present situation to the charitable organizations .
There is no immediate or real danger of a ban being put into effect .
The Virgin report itself involves a cooperation procedure which will take months , or perhaps years if the Council does not get a move on .
Having read the legislation we all know that the non-OECD countries have been written to at least three times asking if they wish to accept waste textiles on the green list of waste of the Basle Convention .
It should be noted that we cannot change the Basle Convention .
It is an international convention which is not alterable by the Commission or Parliament .
The European Parliament has taken a very reasonable approach to this matter .
Mr Virgin 's report asks the Commission to respect the wishes of countries who reply to the Commission saying they would not accept wastes , or only certain types of wastes .
We have decided to suggest that those countries who have not replied so far should not be sent wastes until they do .
Finally , we recognized possible problems and suggested that the Commission should set up a committee procedure to enable countries to change their minds quickly and easily if they feel they have made a mistake or not understood what has been sent to them .
Even after that we will be working out a compromise at second reading with the Commission .
I think the rapporteur 's proposals are perfectly reasonable and they have the support , amazingly , even of Greenpeace .
They respect the right of countries to make their own decision .
Nevertheless , it is worth saying that we have considerable respect for the work of the charities which approached us and for the work they do throughout the world to alleviate poverty and encourage economic development .
We can assure them that we will ensure that no European legislation hampers their activities .
There have genuinely been some misunderstandings as to what this proposal involves .
I therefore greatly welcome the opportunity to clarify the situation .
I should say at the outset that in spite of the vehemence with which some have spoken , I am going to indicate support for seven amendments out of the ten that have been put forward .
I should start by thanking Mr Virgin for his report on the draft proposal .
The proposed text should be considered against the background of Council Regulation 259 / 93 .
It is that regulation that sets out a comprehensive system of supervision and control on shipments of waste within , into and out of the Community .
The proposal which we are discussing today provides for specific rules on the export of non-hazardous or ' green list ' wastes to countries that are not members of the OECD .
It is true that there are eight items which are hazardous which are still covered , but the intention is - and that is provided for by Annex V of Regulation 259 / 93 - that those will be introduced into that category in due course .
So the overwhelming bulk of this proposal is about non-hazardous waste .
Article 17 of Council Regulation 259 / 93 has a provision whereby the Commission notifies non-OECD countries what the contents of the non-hazardous waste list are and then asks them whether they would accept the shipments of those wastes without recourse to a controlled procedure , or whether they would prefer a more stringent approach .
The Commission has sent letters to each one of the countries concerned and the current proposal takes full account of these replies .
There has been a real misunderstanding here .
There is absolutely no question of the Commission adopting a paternalistic attitude in any way .
When a country replies and says it does not want the waste , that reply is fully respected .
There is no question of waste being sent to that country .
There have now been about 30 countries that have not replied .
That is the answer to Mrs Jackson 's question .
What do you do if a country simply never replies ?
The initial Commission proposal provided for the shipment of nonhazardous wastes being allowed in those circumstances .
For the first and third group - that is to say , the countries that had informed the Commission about their refusal to let the waste in and the countries that did not reply to the questionnaire - that export would now only be possible on the basis of explicit approval by the country concerned for each individual shipment on the basis of prior , informed consent .
That means that if a country has not replied , we do not just assume that the answer is ' no ' .
In my view that would be just as paternalistic a view as to assume that the answer is ' yes ' .
The answer is that we do not know what they think .
Therefore , the procedure that is now proposed is that in each case of a consignment that is sent , the country concerned has the absolute right to say ' yes ' or ' no ' and has to give its explicit approval if the answer is ' yes ' .
So the assumption is ' no ' unless explicit approval is given .
That seems to me not in any way paternalistic , but fully to respect the rights of the country to have a particular consignment in or not and assure that the wishes of the country concerned are respected where it has not given a general reply .
I was asked what happens if a country changes its mind .
The answer is that it only has to write a letter saying it changes its mind - there is no elaborate procedure whatsoever - and the change of mind will be respected .
There is no question of forcing waste on anybody who does not want it .
Indeed the procedure is quite complex for a country which has not replied .
In each case , for each shipment , there has to be a prior approval by the country concerned of that shipment .
Let me now tell the House the view the Commission takes on the ten amendments .
The purpose of the first amendment is to add Article 13 ( s ) as a legal base .
That is an amendment that the Commission cannot favour because the European Court of Justice has long established and repeated that the legal basis for a Community measure must be based on the objective and contents of the act .
The objective of this proposal relates to trade relations with third countries .
It is a classic instrument dealing with shipment authorizations to regulate external trade .
The shipment authorization referred to in Article 15 ( 7 ) is the equivalent of an export licence .
The surveillance system referred to in Article 17 ( 2 ) is equally a classic instrument of that kind so that the proposal clearly falls within the remit of Article 113 .
The fact that the trade relates to waste does not affect its legal base and is an ancillary aspect to the objective of the proposal , which is to regulate trade .
The Commission has , however , decided to accept the second and the fifth amendments .
They concern the countries that replied explicitly to the Commission that they do not want to receive imports of waste .
The Commission felt it inappropriate to ignore those express written wishes and therefore what Parliament wants will indeed prevail .
All Community exports of non-hazardous waste will be stopped to those countries once the regulation is in force .
So the amendments that are accepted are very important ones - the second and the fifth ones - and ensure that if a country says ' no ' , it will not be possible to export non-hazardous waste to that country .
If the country says ' yes ' it will be possible .
If a country does not reply , each individual shipment will have to be approved .
Amendment No 4 on the review mechanism for countries who change their position , can also be accepted .
The Commission decided not to accept Amendments Nos 3 and 6 , which relate to the countries that did not reply to the questionnaire .
We have instead proposed that Community exporters will strictly use a prior , informed consent procedure in that case .
We stick to our original position because a non-response from a country cannot be considered as an indication that a prohibition is sought any more than it could be considered that a consent is given .
The general principle of the green list of non-hazardous waste is that products included in it are subject to normal commercial transactions .
The current proposal includes the prior informed consent procedure whereby only when a positive response is received from the competent authority of the country concerned would any shipment be allowed to leave a Community port .
Any more restrictive prohibition would penalize legitimate and laudable transactions , for example , used clothing from Oxfam , about which we too have received a report .
I welcome the opportunity to clarify the points raised by both Mrs Jackson and Mr Bowe about such things as the export of second-hand clothes , which count as waste .
This is in no sense designed to stop that .
It will not stop that except in the case of countries that have expressly refused to receive such consignments , and that they are entitled to do .
The Commission will also accept Amendment No 7 .
The date of review should indeed be changed to 1998 to take account of the time that has lapsed since the text was drafted .
I refer also to the fact that reference has been made in the debate by Mr Telkämper to a proposal for 1998 .
That relates to hazardous waste and therefore should not be confused with this proposal which relates essentially to non-hazardous waste .
The Commission does not have any objection to Amendments Nos 8 , 9 and 10 .
They all relate to the classification of wastes as hazardous or non-hazardous .
Annex II of the draft regulation can only contain non-hazardous wastes .
I am aware of the fact that the international classification of waste is changing regularly .
The Commission is fully prepared to adapt the list whenever that is necessary .
As I have said , seven out of the ten amendments are accepted .
These are not minor textual ones .
Sometimes the Commission stands up and gives an impressive tally of the number of amendments that have been accepted and they all amount to minor wording changes .
That is not the case here .
A number of substantial ones have been accepted .
I believe that the main cause of controversy will now be dealt with in a way that should be acceptable to Parliament which allows the trade in such goods as second-hand goods to proceed unimpeded , which does not impose the view of the European Union on third countries , which allows them unequivocally to say ' no ' , if that is what they want to say , and where they have not replied , allows them to give a view on each shipment before it is sent and ensures that view prevails .
I think that this is a reasonable proposal .
I welcome the fact that Parliament has given us the opportunity to improve it by putting forward some important amendments , the bulk of which we are ready to accept .
I hope , as it goes forward , Parliament will feel that its wishes have been substantially listened to and where not , that there have been reasonable grounds for not doing so , and that the proposal that is now put forward is sensible and orderly , fair both to the exporters and to the countries concerned , not imposing our will on anybody else but enabling legitimate trade to continue .
Mr President , I have a question to ask Mr Virgin .
It seems to me that we are on the verge of agreeing on all this , and what the Commissioner has said has been extremely helpful .
Mr Virgin has achieved an enormous amount by getting the Commission to agree to two key amendments which he has tabled .
In the light of what the Commission has said in relation to Amendment No 3 , where I think there was a genuine misapprehension , would Mr Virgin consider withdrawing it ?
Mr President , I would first like to comment on this dispute over regulations .
I think that amendment proposals 8-10 , which the Commission has finally accepted , demonstrate that this issue includes an environmental aspect which was not predicted .
It is perhaps not as strange as it seems , as the Commission started out with a different view of what is known as the green list when this proposal was originally tabled .
In view of the fact that Parliament , and eventually the Council as well has decided that certain substances on the green list should be treated as environmentally hazardous , the natural response is to say that this proposal includes environmental aspects which must be acknowledged .
Perhaps we still have a discrepancy in meaning on this point .
On the other hand I am pleased that the Commission has otherwise accepted so many of our amendment proposals .
Mr President , we may have different views about what constitutes paternalism .
But are the countries concerned really under any obligation to reply if they don 't want to ?
Can we not simply leave things as they are ?
After all , we are all glad that some of Mr Virgin 's amendments , and our own , have been adopted .
As for paternalism , I should be very cautious about what it actually is .
Mr President , I would like to reply to that .
We accept the principle that Mr Kreissl-Dörfler puts forward , that countries should not be compelled to have what they do not want .
The amendments we now accept would have the following effect .
If a country says No , that No is final and the goods cannot be exported to that country .
If the country says Yes , then they can be .
If a country does not answer , they can only be exported if , in the case of each individual shipment , the country at the receiving end says Yes .
Therefore the country at the receiving end either says nothing , in which case it cannot be exported , or it says Yes , in which case it can , or it says No , in which case it cannot .
In all cases the wishes of the country concerned prevail .
I hope , therefore , that on reflection Mr Kreissl-Dörfler will feel that we have reflected the principle he wants .
There is nothing paternalistic about it .
We are not forcing anything on anyone but we are setting out a clear basis on how to proceed fairly .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Environmental agreements
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0224 / 97 ) by Mrs Graenitz , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on environmental agreements ( COM ( 96 ) 0561 - C4-0013 / 97 ) .
I should like to introduce my report on the Commission 's communication with a personal note .
In the city where I live more than 90 % of pollutant emissions by the local heavy industry have been eliminated in recent years by a voluntary agreement , without that industry being forced to shut down or substantially restrict its production .
Even so , I believe that voluntary environmental agreements can only be developed and concluded as a supplement to environmental legislation , but not as a substitute for it .
I shall now say why I believe that .
Half an hour ago we were talking about the fifth environmental action programme , and one point that became very clear was that there is a need for new instruments to enable sustainable growth to be effectively achieved , in addition to environmental legislation .
I believe that is right , and that we need these new instruments .
That is why I also called upon the Commission in my report - and I hope that Honourable Members will be able to support me here - to define those new instruments more precisely than is the case in the present communication .
I believe it is very important to know what the advantages and disadvantages of an instrument are , so that a political decision can then be made on where it is to be applied in such a way as to promote sustainable development , advance the protection of the environment and not result in any backsliding or delays .
When we talk about voluntary agreements , that can mean many different things , which is precisely why this kind of definition , this kind of greater accuracy , is so necessary .
The advantages can be listed quickly enough : Measures can be tailored to specific situations .
That is more dynamic , faster and in any case more cost-effective because capital expenditures in industry can be better geared to legislation .
Legislation for individual cases can be avoided .
It is possible , and seems particularly important to me , to anticipate statutory regulations .
Regional problems can be solved .
But the voluntary agreements do involve one very great disadvantage , which in my opinion cannot be remedied and must therefore be taken into consideration .
A voluntary agreement is a private law contract between two parties .
That private law contract contains no legally effective protection of third parties , not for the individual citizen , each citizen affected by the scope of the voluntary agreement , and not for any other industrial concerns , undertakings active in that field .
I believe that the ECJ is therefore quite right to point out that this is a very important point and must always be borne in mind if instruments are to be introduced .
We shall certainly hear of many other advantages and disadvantages during the debate .
I should just like to refer to one other point which seems to me especially important . I am not really sure how this disadvantage of a voluntary agreement can be remedied , or at least converted into an advantage .
What I am talking about is public involvement , transparency .
Something more must be done here to improve the situation . The question of ' free-riders ' is one that absolutely must be resolved , because it may well happen that ' free-riders ' , as we have seen with past agreements , especially in the wastes sector , can bring the whole edifice down because only a few people will be left to bear the costs , and those costs will then be too high .
In conclusion , let me make one final point : we not only need to deploy the right instruments to progress in environmental policy , but we also need to deploy the right instruments at the right location .
I believe that a great many Member States , a great many regions , have achieved notable successes with these environmental agreements .
I have held talks in various Member States , and I must say that - in the Netherlands , especially - these voluntary agreements have advanced to a stage where they do a great deal of good for the environment .
But I do believe that the necessary powers are lacking , lacking both to the Commission and to the associations ; so we have not really made much progress yet , as the Commission itself comments in the Green Paper on food law .
Finally , may I thank the Commission 's services and Parliament 's services for the assistance they have given me with the production of this report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in days of cash shortages and strict budgets , environmental policy has a particularly hard time .
Effective environmental legislation does not come cheap .
Even if it pays off in the long run , over a period of years , it is unrewarding at the time .
Anyway , we are all very well aware that legislation is necessary , even if it is sometimes less than ideal .
And we know , too , that it is not enough .
For years , the European Parliament and its Environment Committee have been trying to find and apply new instruments to advance the aims of environmental protection .
From this standpoint , the environmental protection agreement is an extremely interesting instrument .
Many of our Member States already have experience of it .
Mrs Oomen would certainly have been able to give you some examples from the Netherlands if she had been able to speak tonight , but unfortunately she cannot be here .
It is important , too , to realize that although the agreements are entered into voluntarily they can also provide positive incentives .
They stimulate the imagination , suggesting completely new ways of protecting the environment and solving , or at least tackling , problems which legislation cannot deal with effectively , if at all .
For example , there are environmental hazards which arise only in particular Member States , and perhaps only for a handful of producers in those States .
The cost of solving such problems by EU-wide legislation would be totally disproportionate to the cost of an agreement that could be handled very quickly within the small circle involved .
Environmental agreements are no substitute for legislation - I agree with you there -but they can be an outstanding complement to it , and increase willingness to do more to protect the environment without introducing compulsion .
I regard environmental agreements as arrangements between industrial sectors or companies and the authorities , designed to reduce or prevent damage to the environment .
In some cases they are even a key to success , doing a great deal of good to the image of a whole sector of production .
In any criticism of that , we should help to point out existing shortcomings and weaknesses and , in some cases , even use them as a springboard for later legislation , if possible .
Where I come from , we have the so-called Environment Pact for Bavaria , which helps to reduce the quantity of waste produced , promotes the development of efficient energy use and boosts environmental management in industrial concerns and elsewhere .
The eco-audit is one such approach , and that eco-audit has done a great deal to bring about a situation where thousands of enterprises have now declared their willingness to play an active part here .
We do still need a contribution for the sector- , material- and product-related systems , and environmental agreements would be a way of achieving that .
I have no doubt that prohibitions and provisions of environmental policy are inadequate to solve the present problems .
But I do believe that the Commission communication is a start , and we should try to take full advantage of all possibilities within the European Union .
Environmental agreements need to be approached very carefully , and the rapporteur , Mrs Graenitz , has indeed done that in her excellent report .
She has highlighted the drawbacks of the agreements and also set out very clear and strict criteria which they have to meet .
In the process , however , the advantages have been lost sight of to some extent .
My group has therefore tabled a number of amendments , both in committee and now in plenary .
The fact is that agreements can be a very useful instrument , that is quite clear .
Mrs Graenitz refers to this herself , and in the Netherlands we have had very good experience of them .
Other Member States have also had positive experience of these instruments .
However , they must be used in the right circumstances , then they really can play a useful role in environment policy .
This fits in extremely well with the Commission 's efforts to extend the number of instruments .
The scope should be created for Member States to implement EU legislation by using environmental agreements .
Our amendments need no further explanation , and I hope the rapporteur will accept them .
This morning , we heard the Commission presenting Agenda 2000 .
The European Union 's environmental legislation will be an enormous stumbling-block when it comes to the future Member States taking on board the acquis communautaire .
Agreements can play a role here .
This has now been included in paragraph 18 of the resolution : an agreement could ensure that industries investing in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe already respect the European Union 's environmental legislation .
I should like to know what the Commissioner 's reaction is to this idea .
Mr President , the Commission 's communication on environmental agreements is a good piece of work .
From the list of practical experience of these agreements at the end of the communication , it is clear that this instrument is being used throughout Europe , but that there are major differences in its legal status .
In my view , therefore , this legal status needs to be clarified .
I can fully endorse the requirements laid down by the Commission for these agreements .
Only if strict criteria are established for the contents of an agreement and it has a binding legal nature can the instrument be of use .
If that is ensured , an agreement is a match for detailed legislation .
Indeed , it can be a much more effective means of achieving environmental objectives .
I therefore feel that the motion for a resolution contains some paragraphs which are too negative in tone .
It is even said that agreements may trigger a crisis of confidence on the part of the public .
To my mind , that is going somewhat too far .
I would say that much more damage will be done to public confidence if environmental protection objectives are not achieved than if selective use is made of these agreements .
The objection that third parties might not be adequately protected does not hold water if the agreement is given proper legal form .
I therefore cannot agree with the paragraph which says that agreements can never be a substitute for legislation .
It only needs to be made clear which articles of a directive can be implemented by an agreement , and which cannot .
Mr President , Commissioner , environmental agreements in the European Community are one thing and environmental agreements at national level are another .
In the Netherlands there have been more than one hundred legally binding national agreements , dating back over many years .
They operate well in a small , compact country .
In my own country , with its 80 agreements , things are rather more difficult because it is a very different story in terms of size .
I believe such agreements need to be underpinned by statutory provisions which must come from a European level .
The Commission has now tackled this subject .
I am very glad that the Commission has been so bold and believes that it could , according to Brussels , help to co-ordinate these voluntary agreements .
All I know is that there are over 100 directives that my own country has not even implemented .
So how do you expect to be able to control voluntary agreements from Brussels ?
That was one question I was very anxious to ask you .
Commissioner , I would also be interested to know how you can argue in favour of contractual agreements rather than voluntary commitments although you know full well that you cannot be a party to this pact at all .
As far as I know , the Commission has no right to conclude voluntary agreements .
I believe the initiative for this kind of procedure lies elsewhere .
The Commission generally has the utmost difficulty in getting European directives moving .
Very few of them have been set on their way in the last two years , and now you think that by means of large-scale deregulation back to the national governments you can advance the cause of environmental policy through voluntary agreements .
I don 't think so !
A voluntary instrument is all very well so long as it is not required to replace framework directives that have not been passed .
That must not happen .
I think it is important that the European Commission should produce much more and much clearer framework legislation for voluntary agreements .
That must be made clearer in this report .
Then I can imagine that voluntary agreements at European level might make sense .
National ones , of course , are very welcome !
Mr President , I should like to thank the Environment Committee and the rapporteur , Mrs Graenitz , for their thorough work and for the well balanced speech that Mrs Graenitz gave here in the House a moment ago .
The question of environmental agreements with industry is a difficult one .
The Commission has therefore based its communication on a very broad consultation with industry , non-governmental organizations ( NGOs ) in the field of the environment and experts from the Member States , and we have taken part in conferences on the subject .
As Mrs Graenitz also mentioned , environmental agreements are an important element in the Fifth Environmental Action Programme and are one of the policy instruments that can be used .
I think it is good that the motion for a resolution recognizes this point .
Environmental agreements must be transparent and must be reliable .
That is not a feature common to all the agreements signed in the past or hitherto .
Parliament 's motion for a resolution rightly stresses the need for both transparency and reliability .
The Commission recommendation is designed to ensure that future agreements meet these requirements .
There is agreement that general provisions in environmental directives can be implemented in certain cases through binding environmental agreements , whereas provisions conferring rights on individuals must be implemented through national law .
Most of these points are also mentioned in the Resolution adopted by the Council on 19 June .
A number of questions are more controversial .
We must clearly work further on these points on the basis of the decisions and resolutions of Parliament and the Council .
Let me just mention three of them : the relation between legal provisions and agreements , the enforceability of agreements and the use of the agreements in the Community .
A major danger , or perhaps just a danger where environmental agreements are concerned , is that they can lead to what might be called privatization of environmental policy .
In my view there may be a danger of such privatization occurring when there is a disparity of information between the private and public sectors , or when the public authorities are unable to give effect to their views as regards what is feasible or , for that matter , what is economically viable .
In both cases , the danger of such privatization can be averted by involving the legislator in setting the objective , for example as an element in an EC Directive .
The enforceability of agreements is closely bound up with their legal status .
Where the implementation of directives is concerned , there is an obligatory requirement that they take a legally binding form .
The most difficult question is probably whether and to what extent agreements should be used on a Community-wide basis , which is what Mr Florenz , in particular , was concerned with .
In its communication of 1996 , the Commission clearly recognized the difficulties that arise when this instrument is applied on a Europe-wide basis .
On the other hand , we have already devised arrangements with industry which are giving results .
As far back as 1989 , for example , the Commission agreed with industry that the content of chemical substances should be indicated on the packaging of washing and cleaning products .
This arrangement works effectively and satisfactorily .
It is quite clear that we must agree on how to carry on with this work in the future .
Rather than indulging in a highly theoretical debate on a modus vivendi , I think we should apply a practical procedure .
This would require that the Commission report on the results achieved and the experience gained , and that the reports in question be presented to Parliament .
Let me therefore end by saying that environmental agreements , in my view , offer a means of furthering environmental policy , but that this means should be used selectively and with great care .
Commissioner , you are recommending contractual , voluntary agreements .
My question is this : who at European level can conclude a contract with industry - even if there are only five sectors ?
Mr President , I too would like to put a legal question to the Commissioner . During the debate in committee , and here as well , it has become increasingly clear that the legal systems in the various States seem to be too diverse , that public law and private law are not the same everywhere , although all our legal systems are based on Roman law and so would have to make that very distinction .
I should like to make the following request : when we have a new communication , new information to Parliament , more attention should be paid to the legal aspect than has been done in the communication we are considering today , because to my mind that precise point is one of the particularly critical and important ones - the question of what the legal basis is .
There was one question to which I should like to have an answer , which is the following : could we now use environmental agreements for industries which invest in Eastern Europe so as to ensure that the present environmental legislation which is familiar to us is applied there too ?
Does the Commissioner think this is a good example of how to use these agreements at European level ?
That was my question .
Mr President , first Mr Florenz asked me the question , who was actually able to conclude agreements at European level .
As Mr Florenz is aware , that will depend on the area concerned .
There will be areas in which there is some form of representation and in which the industries in question will feel adequately represented by European organizations .
In other areas , however , this will not apply , so it will not be possible to conclude such an agreement .
That will need to be considered on a case-by-case basis .
That is precisely why we said in the communication , and I said in my answer today , that we need to gain some experience .
I gave a good example of something that has been successful .
Parliament is aware that there are countries which have had good experience of concluding environmental agreements , but the difficulty is precisely , as Mr Florenz indicated , that of knowing who in the world fits the bill at European level within the individual areas , and that is something we need to find out in concrete terms .
I also agree entirely with Mrs Graenitz that we venture into wide range of questions when we apply this instrument , and that is why we chose to present the communication .
We know there are countries which have had very good results ; Mr Eisma pointed that out .
We have heard the same thing in Council meetings .
Other countries , for example the one I hail from , do not apply this facility .
That means that , in the areas where we consider it appropriate , we must try it out and see what possibilities exist .
In each individual case , we must consider the legal position and we must consider the question of representation before we can take the matter further .
I will say to Mr Eisma that we have not actually considered the problem in relation to Eastern and Central Europe in the present communication .
I am reluctant for the moment to say anything specific on whether we can use the facility or not .
The difficulty here will no doubt consist to an even greater extent in the question who can actually enter into such an agreement on behalf of others .
On the other hand , I would not venture to reject the possibility of using such an instrument here too , so I would rather leave the question open in this particular debate .
We have simply not examined the matter .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
UNGASS Planet Earth summit
The next item is the debate on the statement by the Commission on the UNGASS Planet Earth summit in New York .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , three weeks ago heads of state and government from across the world gathered in New York for a Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly to assess progress towards sustainable development .
That meant of course progress achieved since the Rio Conference on Environment and Development in 1992 .
Commission President , Jacques Santer , represented the European Community , and it was also a great pleasure to see two Members of the European Parliament as observers on the Community delegation .
Generally , great expectations were placed in the Special Session .
Expectations were particularly high in the EU , and the European Parliament played an important role in the drafting of the EU 's ambitious agenda , particularly through its Resolution of 14 March .
To what extent were the EU 's ambitions fulfilled ?
The press gave a distinctly negative response to the general outcome , although the leading role of the EU was recognized .
I am convinced that the EU can take much of the credit for the positive results achieved in spite of everything . I will therefore present a slightly more differentiated picture of the situation .
To begin with , good results were achieved in the discussion of new subjects .
As pointed out by the European Parliament in its Resolution of last March , the Special Session offered a much needed opportunity to discuss new subjects .
Parliament urged that the EU should take the lead in New York .
And the EU did so by proposing two new initiatives .
One aimed at getting to grips with the persistent grave problems arising from the scarcity of fresh water .
The other was concerned with promoting the move to a more sustainable use of energy .
Both initiatives were concretized in the final results of the Session , which lay down principles and a timetable for the concrete progress that must be made through the Commission for Sustainable Development ( CSD ) .
A second area in which we did not achieve our aims , but which some would nevertheless class as a partial success , is that of forests .
The EU pressed hard for the Special Session to prepare the way for negotiations on a forest convention .
This was not possible as a result of strong opposition from the USA , Brazil and certain influential NGOs in particular .
The Special Session set up an intergovernmental forum which was to investigate the possibilities for a convention and report on the results to the CSD in 1999 .
On this basis , the CSD will take a decision in the year 2000 on whether a convention should be drafted and , if so , what form it should take .
There is also a consensus on implementing the recommendations of the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests and on promoting the conservation and sustainable management of forests in other fora , for example in the context of the Biodiversity Convention .
We have made it clear that the EU will work hard to implement the panel 's proposals and to bring about agreement on a forestry convention .
I will now cover those areas in which the UN Special Session did not meet our expectations .
Parliament 's Resolution of 14 March states that both climate change and the financing of sustainable development are priority tasks .
With regard to climate change , the result was not encouraging , despite the efforts of the Union .
But the text does refer to the need for ' significant ' reductions in emissions and is thus somewhat better than the Denver text .
President Clinton 's speech also contained some encouraging elements .
He expressed admiration of the EU 's stance and moved a little closer to the more progressive attitude of the EU when he conceded that the United States had not hitherto taken climate changes sufficiently seriously .
The President also pledged to take the initiative in convincing Congress and the American people of the need for a significant reduction in the emission of greenhouse gases .
But the EU must now continue to put pressure on the USA and other parties , including Japan , which bears a heavy responsibility as host of the forthcoming Conference of Parties in Kyoto .
We must do what we can to ensure that the countries concerned make their attitude clear .
That will enable us to initiate serious negotiations on reduction targets at the preparatory meetings prior to the Kyoto Conference .
Finally , as regards the financing questions , the EU took a leading role in securing confirmation of the Rio targets .
The EU also sought to mediate between the hard line of the United States and Japan , on the one hand , and that of the G77 countries on the other .
The EU proposed that the participants should make a commitment to a reversal of the trend in official development aid and that a procedure should be introduced at intergovernmental level to discuss innovative financing ideas .
These proposals were too ambitious for some and not ambitious enough for others .
The final text on aid does not in the end go any further than Agenda 21 and repeats the unfulfilled promise of the industrialized countries to set aside as soon as possible 0.7 % of their Gross National Product for development aid .
What possibilities does all this offer us for the future ?
To begin with , we have drawn up a good programme of work for the CSD for the next five years and have secured a decision on a new Rio + 10 summit in the year 2002 .
Until then , the EU must concentrate on making concrete progress in the CSD on those areas - fresh water and energy - in which the EU has taken the initiative , as well as on the new intergovernmental forum on forests .
Secondly , the EU must develop a strategy to implement those things on which agreement was reached in New York .
And thirdly , the EU must decide what steps it can take independently of the UN processes to promote sustainable development on a global basis .
Let me say one thing about the Resolution presented by Parliament , which also considers the continued work .
I agree in broad outline with the content of the Resolution .
If I mention it at all this evening , it is because we were a little concerned over the - one might almost say - vehement condemnation of China in paragraph 10 .
I think it inappropriate to refer to China as destructive , even though we share Parliament 's view that it will be necessary to continue pressing actively for the greater integration of China into environmental progress .
The Commission intends at the beginning of 1998 to present a communication to the Council and Parliament on the implementation by the Community of the results of the Special Session on progress with regard to sustainable development in the world as a whole .
We look forward to Parliament 's active participation in the development of the EU 's strategy for the future .
Mr President , the five years that have passed since the well-meaning resolutions of the Rio Summit in 1992 have been characterized by a lack of commitment in the West to meet the challenges of climate change and environment and development .
Changes in the industrialized countries ' consumption and behaviour patterns have not taken place and this , by default , has encouraged inaction in the South .
The Party of European Socialists is concerned that poverty and under-development continue to be a cause of environmental degradation .
Wealthy countries have not kept their promise to devote 0.7 % of their GDP to development aid and cooperation .
The crucial link between sustainable development and environmental protection is therefore still missing .
It is good that we are not here tonight to criticize the Commission .
It always make a change when we are such a small bunch in this Chamber and we are all together on this .
But the pitiful results of UNGASS , despite strong leadership from the European Union and , in particular , the new UK Government , highlighted the fact that on climate change , financing , water and forests , the gulf between the undertakings given in Rio and the steps to honour them is enormous .
But all the blame cannot be heaped on the shoulders of our own governments either .
So , where does it leave us ?
We can pat ourselves on the back in Europe and say that our position at UNGASS was comparatively progressive in pushing for global protection and sustainable development , for a global tax on aviation fuel and our commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 15 % by the year 2010 .
In comparison to other players , this was excellent but we are still left with a mighty big agenda for Kyoto in December .
In reality we need to pick up the pieces and work towards the next opportunity .
The most pressing issues remain : targets for greenhouse gas emissions to be agreed in particular by the USA and Japan , protection of forests , fresh water resources , development of renewable energy , the fight against desertification and protection of biodiversity .
It is all still there on the agenda .
And none of these issues will be advanced without speeding up the implementation of Agenda 21 and tackling the twin issues of public development aid and the negative role played by perverse subsidies .
Investment in improving the global environment is investment in jobs and prosperity and it is high time this was given more credibility by finance ministers .
In attempting to build agreement on these issues , we have to put our own house in order in Europe and secure the involvement of the different actors in civil society in implementing sustainable development and environmental education both at home and in the South .
One of the ways we can do this is to increase the support to local Agenda 21 processes which are emerging very patchily across the European Union .
At a time when we are cutting our budgets for development , for work on protection of international forests and for urban environment networking and pilot projects , it is sometimes unclear whether our deeds match our rhetoric .
Our aspirations are fine but our efforts are insufficient .
The time to start work on these problems is now and we need a more committed political will from all our governments , our industries and our finance ministers than we have at the present time .
Mr President , Commissioner , I attended the conference in New York , together with Mrs Dybkjæer , as a representative of the European Parliament , and I am bound to say that even during the conference I felt a sense of depression creeping over me .
Sadly , there were many areas in which not much happened , although the problems - the greenhouse effect , for example - are so pressing .
In that particular area , we are heading straight for disaster .
Even so , there were a few encouraging signs .
For one thing , the European Union really was a driving force in the negotiations , and although opinions may differ among the Member States the fact remains that we must acknowledge that the Commission and the Council presidency together steered the European Union in the right direction .
All the Heads of State and Government made constructive comments .
Secondly , I do not take such a critical view of the role of the USA as was sometimes expressed in the media .
In Denver the USA was the bad guy , as it were .
In New York , Clinton himself admitted that the Americans contribute only 4 % of the world 's population but 20 % of its emissions of greenhouse gases , and that that must change .
I regard that in itself as a step forward .
We all know how difficult negotiations are within the USA , but now , for the first time , the President has made a positive move .
I believe there is no alternative to negotiations , including multilateral negotiations -no alternative but resignation , and we can hardly tell our children that that was the reason why we did nothing .
We must take the opportunity that now exists , before Kyoto .
We must step up the pressure on Japan , and I believe that we should also look at the specific situation of the G 77 .
One could argue about the exact wording , but the fact of the matter is that the AOSIS countries and a few ACP States , which are making an effort , played no part in the G 77 in New York , while large countries like China , and Saudi-Arabia too , pressurized the G 77 in the wrong direction .
So , in our negotiations with the ACP States too , we should try to draw attention to our common interests and make it clear that something has to be done here .
That , of course , can happen only if we Europeans can convincingly show that we are standing by our obligations in the area of development aid . All of us must work together - Commission , Council and Parliament - during the discussions of the European Union budget and at other times , too , to ensure that development aid is increased and not further reduced .
We also need to put our own house in order when it comes to protecting the environment and , especially , the climate .
I think the idea of introducing international taxes on aviation fuel is a good one , but we in Europe should also be wondering whether - at least at the European level , for intra-European flights - we may not be subsidizing air travel unnecessarily , if we impose a tax on diesel railroad locomotives but not on aircraft .
Anyone who says that environmental protection , and climate protection in particular , involve reducing the quality of life and economic success , should consider this example : an acquaintance of mine worked in New York for a while , and he told me that in New York people wear sweaters in summer , because the air conditioning is too cold , and turn the fans on in winter because the heating is too hot .
That has nothing to do with quality of life - it 's just a waste of energy !
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for her speech .
Broadly speaking , I agree with her and Mr Liese in their somewhat pessimistic assessments , but also on the positive aspects .
At the same time I recall that , when we had the Rio Conference back then , we were not particularly enthusiastic over the outcome either .
We also said then that there were too many words and too little action .
But we eventually realized that the Rio Conference was good , compared with other summits .
Amongst other things , we got a Convention on Biological Diversity , and a process was set in motion with Agenda 21 .
With the aid of Agenda 21 we got a common agenda for local and regional work to promote a better environment .
Suddenly it is not really so far from Strasbourg to Johannesburg .
Then , most important of all , we got Rio + 5 .
But , before everything starts to look too rosy of course , we have to add that , disappointingly , we did not achieve the aims we set ourselves .
In a wide range of areas , things went the wrong way , and the most disastrous outcome of all was that the developing countries did not get the help we had promised them .
On the contrary , development aid has progressively diminished in recent years .
As the Commissioner said , we did not secure a reversal of this trend at UNGASS in New York .
But let us not lose heart .
We must take a positive view of the situation .
We have to admit that it could all have been much worse .
It would have been much worse , for example , if President Clinton had not come on Thursday and made a certain commitment for Kyoto . Now it is our task to ensure that the commitments made are brought to fruition and become a reality .
Here the EU should help him and we parliamentarians , not least , should join in putting pressure on the American Congress .
I also think it positive that we obtained a decision to make sustainable energy part of the CSD 's programme of work , and I call on the EU to play a leading role here .
Apart from that , it was a good thing that the role of the NGOs was strengthened .
Looking back on Rio , we realize that it was not possible on the whole to manage both the NGOs and the official programme , but in New York NGOs , parliamentarians and heads of government were circulating round the UN building together .
There were even rumours that the UN , as part of a reform to come , will formalize the role of the NGOs in the system .
This brings me to my last point .
I have also tabled an amendment on the matter , because it was forgotten the first time round .
It concerns a strengthening of the role of parliamentarians in the UN system as a whole and , in particular , a strengthening of cooperation between the various parliamentarians .
We actually had good experience with the initiative taken by the Dutch Presidency in New York , as a result of which it proved quite useful to have a dialogue .
I think we can make use of that , and I ask the chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee , Tom Spencer , to take the matter up .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , in Spain there is a saying which goes ' in the land of the blind , the one-eyed man is king ' .
I say this because , in fact , the European Union , as seen earlier in Mrs Dybkjær 's report on the fifth environmental action programme , did not comply with the 1992 objectives .
However , it proposed , at the New York Summit , that CO2 emissions would , at any rate , be reduced by 15 % by 2010 , in contrast to the United States which not only proposes this but says that it is going to ask its citizens , that country being , as we all know , the most polluting country in the world : it has 4 % of the world 's population and accounts for 24 % of CO2 emissions .
Also , in connection with another undertaking made under the terms of the Rio Agenda - 0.7 % for Third World countries - the US is currently channelling only 0.1 % of its GDP towards development cooperation .
Nor is the European Union achieving 0.7 % . However , the average is 0.30 % - down from 0.35 % , admittedly - which means that the European Union , although not the perfect champion of environmental issues , can still offer an example to other countries .
What Mrs Bjerregaard said about fresh water and forms of renewable energy is very good , if one takes into account that 20 % of the population does not have access to fresh water and that one in every two Africans has no access to it .
But we were not told whether financing has been proposed for this Agenda and for this timetable .
Mr President , I don 't think it matters all that much whether the New York summit was better or worse than the Rio summit , or whether the action taken may have been better or worse .
What does matter , perhaps , is what the situation is now compared with what it was five years ago .
In this case , the various parameters are clear enough .
If we look at the problem of biodiversity , the situation is not getting any better .
Five years after Rio , it seems that seventy species are disappearing every day .
It seems that food production per head of the human race is diminishing ; that drinking water resources per head of population are diminishing ; that the north-south divide is widening ; that the global temperature is still climbing and that , in general terms , the world we live in is even more unsustainable now than it was five years ago .
That is what matters .
So did we , at Rio , take decisions and institute mechanisms that offered us some hope of improvement ?
Personally , I think not .
But I do pay tribute to the efforts of the European Commission and the European Union : it is true that , in relative terms , they have tried harder than other countries have .
Having said that , I must add that there is a considerable difference between adopting objectives - which is what the European Union has done - and appropriating the resources to achieve those objectives .
Consider the problem of reducing greenhouse gases .
It is hard to see how we are going to be able to achieve that objective in the European Union , since the unanimity rule will still apply in Amsterdam regarding the tax on CO2 .
How are we to proceed ?
As far as forests are concerned , what is to prevent the European Union from taking steps within the European Union ?
Calling for a convention is all well and good , but we could perfectly well take collective action within the European Union to promote sustainable forestry operations .
Finally , a global tax on air traffic and aviation fuel is a good idea .
Why not apply it to flights within the European Union ?
I think it would greatly enhance the credibility of the European Union if it were to take specific action .
Then we could propose that action to others from a position of strength .
Mr President , it seems to me that when we look back on conferences we do so from different angles . It 's just like the celebrated half-full or half-empty glass of water - we see different things , depending on our standpoint .
This conference commits the European Union , which is the world 's largest association of industrialized nations , with great wealth and a population that can already do a lot and has the ability to do more , to work in the sector of climate protection and sustainable development , both within this Union and in the countries of the Third and Fourth Worlds , and in those planning to join our Community soon , to improve the environmental situation .
We also need credibility , we need to set a good example .
Then we shall be able to tell others why it is right to work to improve the environment , and what the rewards are .
If we want a future that offers sustainable development , employment and quality of life , we must work on our environment .
I believe a great deal still has to be done , including the preparations for Kyoto .
The road to Kyoto should be paved not just with good intentions but with a lot of hard work .
If we now work together - Parliament , Commission and Council - to develop proposals for Kyoto , and if those proposals can then be accepted and implemented , we shall have made our contribution to ensuring that , at last , the glass is neither half full nor half empty but full to the brim with quality of life and a healthy future for all mankind .
Mr President , I think that I agree with Mr Liese that there is cause for great disappointment .
I understand the position of the Commissioner , who of course still sees some rays of hope , but in the end I think we have to conclude that progress has been incredibly slow , and that the UN has once again shown that it has become a bureaucratic machine , where countries fly in , make fine statements , depart , and then repeat that little or nothing has been done .
When it comes to the environment , we may well ask ourselves : do things have to go on like this , not least with Rio ?
I do not ask myself that as a matter of course .
Just look at what has happened .
On climate , as has already been said , while we have a statement of the need for a binding , meaningful and realistic effort to achieve something , we have no really practical measures , these will only come in Kyoto .
And if we succeed there , then yet another journey will have begun .
The chapter on forests , with its fourth paragraph requesting a follow-up by the intergovernmental panel on forests , has just been left aside .
Let us be thankful , then , that calls are being made for national forestry programmes .
And , as I now read in English , ' problems remained , including unnegotiated paragraphs dealing with legal instruments and difficulties , mostly in the field , means of implementation , official development assistance , finance , mobilization of resources , etc . '
Whereas production and consumption in the West have remained the same in this period , deforestation is continuing and support through development aid , as you yourself have said , is actually being reduced .
The figure of 0.7 % is not being achieved and , even worse , the level of aid is declining .
The total capital which public authorities across the world are currently investing in developing countries is declining , whereas the amount of investment in the private sector has increased sixfold in five years .
Six times more than state development aid - and put together , these factors are also likely to have implications .
There have been no successes .
I think we must eventually recognize - and this was in fact recognized in the text - that in the area of transfers of finance and technology , and in terms of capacity building , there is an enormous amount of ground to make up .
The decline in development investment and the debt crisis are the main obstacles .
In the end , I think that if no solutions are found to them , then the circus should simply be wound up .
Perhaps I am being a little gloomy at this late hour , Mr President , and I hope that the Commissioner still has some glimmers of hope to offer us .
Mr President , I will not prolong the debate unduly at this late hour .
There are just a few things I want to mention in connection with what I said earlier .
The first point is closely bound up with the forthcoming international conferences , the most important of which will be that scheduled to take place in Kyoto , about which most speakers had something to say .
My comment is that it is patently obvious that we in the rich part of the world must improve our relationship with the G77 group of countries .
It is not the first time we have seen that there is a gulf between our views .
It is also not the first time we have experienced difficulty in putting across arguments on environmental matters , and it is quite clear that , precisely in the context of climate issues , we shall end up with the traditional clash of cultures unless we make a special contribution , and of course we are prepared to try to do that on behalf of the EU .
My second comment is that , basically , I agree with Mrs Graenitz in that it is possible to describe such a conference either as a half-full glass of water or as a half-empty glass of water .
That was a very apt image .
Mrs Van Putten 's speech developed ideas on the same lines .
It is indeed tempting to focus on all that was not achieved .
On the other hand , I think it would be wrong for us to do so .
I think we should focus on the progress that has been made .
I think we should also be aware that there seems to be a will to reform the UN system .
I know all the arguments that it has been tried before without results .
Nevertheless I think that we must support moves afoot in that direction .
It was also gratifying to me , as it has also been to you here in Parliament this evening , that we were successful as a cooperation organization and as a Union in coming forward with a progressive environmental policy : we have presented a profile to the outside world that others have taken note of .
That places a responsibility on all our shoulders .
It is not easy ; we have to sustain our effort in preparation for Kyoto . But I hope to encounter the same interest and good will , when we continue the work on this matter .
On that matter , I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 12 midnight )
Approval of the minutes
The minutes of yesterday 's session have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I should just like to point out that yesterday , regarding the Rothley report , I gave two written explanations of vote on Amendment No 74 , which unfortunately I am unable to find in the minutes , and also an oral explanation of vote on the amended Commission proposal .
I should like to ask you to ensure that this is noted in the minutes .
Mr President , this is a personal statement .
Members may recall that on the Monday of the last partsession I made allegations about Mrs Angelilli , which on the Wednesday she denied .
I provided her with a copy of the document on which I had based my allegations .
I have received a letter from her this morning indicating , amongst the usual torrent of abuse , that she does not intend to sue the magazine , as I suggested .
I hope Members will draw the appropriate conclusions .
I will make a copy of her letter available to you , Mr President .
Mr President , it is not often that we pay Parliament 's services compliments but we always find the daily news briefing extremely helpful .
The summary of yesterday 's great statement by the Commission has been avidly sought by everybody who takes the English version , so much so that there are none available , and there are a number of Members who , I know , would like the succinct encapsulation of the Commission 's proposals that Parliament normally provides .
I wonder whether you could ensure that the services , on such great occasions as yesterday , make sure that there are ample copies available in English ?
Mr President , as it is my profession to act as counsel ex officio , I wish , in order to respect the ethical principles which we have always adhered to in this Parliament , to condemn Mr Ford 's attack , for the simple reason that Mrs Angelilli is not present , so she cannot explain her own position .
I would have said this irrespective of which Member or political grouping was under attack .
( The minutes were approved )
Waiver of parliamentary immunity
Mr President , ladies and Gentlemen , I am astonished .
The matter involves the election of a professor at the University of Thessaloniki , which was invalidated in 1993 by the supreme court in Greece .
I dealt with the matter as Dean together with the University 's Legal Committee .
The Minister for Education reappointed the candidate , the candidate submitted a complaint against me in 1993 , together with the President of the Legal Committee we submitted detailed memoranda and the matter was consigned to the archives .
I am surprised , because after 4 years the matter has arisen again .
I would not wish to believe that the issue involves only political motivations , but with its sudden resurgence after four years the facts speak for themselves .
I ask the relevant Parliamentary committee to state its conclusions about the matter as soon as possible .

Thank you , Mr Trakatellis , but , under Rule 6 , we only have to announce this here : this is not the forum in which to consider the matter .
MED programmes
The next item is the report by Mr Fabra Vallés , ( A4-0236 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on Court of Auditors Special Report No 1 / 96 on the MED programmes ( MED ) , submitted pursuant to Article 188c ( 4 ) , 2nd subparagraph , of the EC Treaty , together with the Commission 's replies ( REP CC 1 / 96S - C4-0512 / 96 ) .

Mr President , as you rightly stated and as is shown in the agenda , we are now going to address , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , the Court of Auditors ' report No 1 / 96 .
This report is drafted in extremely clear terms and presents , in the context of decentralized cooperation , the problems there have been regarding conflicts of interests , defects in the Regulation relating to tenders and the lack of a legal basis in the case of some decisions .
I believe , Mr President , that this case must be treated as an example , not only because of the importance of decentralized cooperation , but also in terms of the procedure to be followed in the future should another , similar case arise .
Specifically , the description of this case as an ' example ' justifies the fact that the amendments have been addressed with the utmost caution .
I refer both to the 72 amendments which were examined in committee and to the 17 to be examined here today in this part-session .
By accepting the greatest number possible of such amendments , I am thereby seeking the greatest consistency possible in terms of what we are voting today , since we will thereby avoid Parliament 's occupying a weak position , which would not help this matter in any way .
Moreover , I am obliged to reject amendments since it is sometimes forgotten what our obligation as Parliament is and what our capabilities are .
Neither the European Parliament nor the UCLAF are investigating authorities ; neither the European Parliament nor the UCLAF are public prosecution services .
We cannot prosecute anyone .
We are restricted to presenting , here today , the Court of Auditors ' report No 1 / 96 and to giving our political opinion on it .
We cannot , therefore , deal with any potential legal effects , let alone make specific pronouncements about them .
Mr President , I would like to draw attention to what I feel has been the Commission 's correct reaction .
It has instigated an administrative investigation and has sought to discover how far the companies cited in the report might have been involved in other programmes , in other DGs and even in other divisions .
This has not been an easy task and is the reason for the delay .
It should be noted that the same persons were often , under different names , involved with other companies , and we have had to cross-reference addresses , company names and peoples ' names .
I say again , this has not been an easy task .
I would also , at this time , Mr President , like to issue a warning which , in medical jargon , might amount to the setting-up of a screening process , or , as those of us on the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy say , an early warning system .
We have to find a formula whereby we can find out about similar situations at a very early stage .
I am aware that this cannot be done through the Court of Auditors , since that body has its own programmes and always examines matters a posteriori , but I believe that the Commission should have the means - which do , moreover , already exist - to be able to implement such an early warning system .
Furthermore , one of the points I would like to stress in my speech on the report we are presenting is to examine whether the UCLAF should continue in its present form , being totally and absolutely dependent on the Commission , or if it should act independently of the Commission .
I have nothing but praise for the UCLAF , since I have been a member of the Committee investigating fraud in Community transport and I have been able to witness how effective it is and what fine work it does .
However , I am concerned about whether it is able to act with the same degree of freedom within the Commission .
At any rate , we commend the Commission 's efforts at finding out who is accountable , and demanding repayment of the improperly appropriated sums and the drawing-up of a black list .
I conclude , Mr President , by mentioning that I have the following request to put to the Commission : we would ask it to adopt the measures set forth in this report , since this will be a prerequisite for approval of the 1996 negotiations .
Mr Commissioner , you have six months .
Mr President , the Committee on External Economic Relations was very disturbed to hear the serious criticisms made by the Court of Auditors concerning the management of the MED programmes and is anxiously asking for the Commission to take rapid action in following up and answering all the Court 's criticisms , for all the investigations to be carried out , for all the abuses to be punished and for the Commission to report back promptly to Parliament on a regular basis .
The Committee on External Economic Relations is also , and , I would say , above all , in view of its competence in the matter , concerned that the Mediterranean policy , which is an essential dimension of the Union 's identity in the outside world , should not be jeopardized by the unlawful conduct of certain officials outside , or even inside , the institutions .
We are neither comforted nor satisfied by the suspension of the programmes , which also hits deserving projects , condemns businesses and jobs and threatens the newly established decentralized cooperation .
We would rather the Commission equipped itself , as soon as possible , with the necessary resources and rules to manage the MED and MEDA programmes rigorously and effectively .
I would like to mention four of the guidelines for the new course recommended by the Committee on External Economic Relations : first : a drive for public promotion and all-round visibility of invitations to tender , project selection procedures and work progress reports .
Second : the assumption by the Commission , rather than delegation to outside firms , of direct control of invitations to tender and project implementation , with its own staff , using efficient , modern monitoring systems , as the Commission is indeed capable of doing .
Third : the shifting of the centre of gravity of expenditure towards projects with a more substantial infrastructure content , as the representatives of Mediterranean non-member countries request whenever we have the occasion to meet them .
I mean projects in areas such as water supply , telecommunications and transport , rather than consultancy and conferences .
Fourth : the resumption and strengthening of decentralized cooperation , not least through civil social networks .
In this connection I would heartily recommend the creation , as is occurring with the Central and Eastern European countries , of a network of Fellow Members ' Innovation Relay Centres to strengthen the links between universities , hospitals and research centres on both shores of the Mediterranean .
In conclusion , Mr President , Commissioner , I take the view that fraud should be prosecuted with the utmost severity , though this should not be allowed to overshadow the political objective of Mediterranean cooperation .
Mr President , I can only agree with what Mr Malerba has said , not least because the Committee on Regional Policy objected to the Court of Auditors becoming involved in what is a strictly political matter .
The Court of Auditors rightly noted breaches and irregularities in procedures , but , as I have already stated before the Committee on Regional Policy , it would have done better to draw the matter to the Commission 's attention in the appropriate way before reaching the point of sanctioning breaches of procedures and other irregularities - this being in the spirit of the European Union and hence according to a kind of theory of communicating vessels .
The Court of Auditors certainly has the duty to proceed along those lines , but it is completely outside its powers to intervene in a purely political matter .

The indications emerging from the other Committees as well , as Mr Malerba has just confirmed , prompt a further thought : the system of control also needs to be revised and reorganized , and care must be taken to ensure that the role of UCLAF is made independent , in order to improve its efficiency , remove some of the conditions imposed on it and render it less subject to the imposition of conditions ; something that Mr Malerba rightly mentioned in that connection , namely that UCLAF 's activities have always been well targeted and finely tuned , needs to be stressed here .


What we have difficulty with is seeing a commitment postponed , and therefore broadened in content , which the Union should , on the contrary , be accentuating and refining within the context of Euro-Mediterranean policy .
We therefore take the view that all the necessary measures should be adopted , but also that the MED programmes should be reinforced and implemented quickly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing today , and voting on tomorrow , the report by our colleague , Mr Fabra Vallés .
Until a short time ago , this report still bore the title ' Interim Report ' , and I wish to emphasize that point quite explicitly and deliberately .
Now , it seems , for administrative reasons , to which everything is subject , that we are no longer allowed to call an interim report an ' Interim Report ' .
Therefore I shall say it here : it is an interim report !
And nobody here should console themselves with the thought that tomorrow we shall take a decision and then the matter will be removed from the table .
It will be neither off the table nor under the table , and certainly not under the carpet !
If we examine carefully the resolution that we are about to approve , we can find plenty of hints to indicate how and in what way the relevant committee , the Committee on Budgetary Control , and thus the Parliament , will deal with matters .
We are agreeing with the committee today , before the summer break , for the sole reason that this will enable the MED programmes to go ahead , so that at last those people can be helped who are least able to do anything about what has been made a complete mess of here , as a result of sloppiness and mismanagement , and I would like to make that point emphatically here .
We want to help those people , we want to cooperate with them , and that is why we are approving this report .
However , this method of working , and this report , and everything that has happened in connection with it - without going into details here - give rise to certain questions in my mind , and not only in my mind , but also in the minds of the other members of my group .
First there is the question of why the Commission is still making the same mistakes .
Why is it that programmes are again and again set in motion , when nobody is in a position to administrate them ?
When will the Commission learn , and how will that be demonstrated ?
Then again , we believe that there is another question . We are drafting a report about the report of the Court of Auditors , admittedly .
But the Court of Auditors is criticizing the Commission and private organizations .
The Commission has , for a long time now , had to justify its actions by means of a strictly defined procedure : it does so orally , its answers are published in writing in the Official Journal , and it is able to justify its actions in committee .
But why do we never hear what the others have to say ?
I admit , naturally , that we have not always worked in this way , but does that mean that this was right ?
Must it be right ?
Does only one party have the opportunity to explain what happened , while the others do not ?
This is a question that we shall not solve today , but I wanted to raise it , nevertheless .
We shall not let other people tell us how to manage things ; that is one thing .
We shall consider carefully what we are doing , why we are doing it and how we are doing it .
We shall emerge from this whole process much more careful and very much more critical .
We have been sensitized , and not only as regards the dependence or independence of UCLAF .
This debate has shown us that we must reflect our own role .
We must perhaps be more self-aware , and we must be more critical of our own work .
One thing , however , is clear : the discussion has not ended , because we shall take it up again , and not only with regard to the MED programmes .
They are only one example , and there will be many others .
The price that will have to be paid for the fact that we give the go-ahead for these programmes today or tomorrow will be a very intensive investigation of how the Commission handles these things .
I should just like to make one final point . The Commission has acted very rapidly in relation to outside parties .
I should be delighted if the Commission were to act equally rapidly when it is a matter of disciplinary measures within the Commission itself , if it were not simply a matter of just transferring people somewhere else or offering them early retirement , but rather of acting equally rapidly and effectively when there are grounds for suspicion among its own staff .
That would have a crucial effect in raising the level of the Commission 's credibility !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , two minutes ' speaking time is not a lot , and therefore I should just like to examine two points with regard to this important report by Mr Fabra Vallés , whom I should like , moreover , to congratulate most warmly on his hard work .
I should also , however , like to thank Mrs Wemheuer for the discussion that took place in our committee on this whole series of problems , a discussion that will have to be continued .
I support here views on the subject .
Now for the points I wish to raise : firstly , does this report , based on the special report by the Court of Auditors , mean that the Commission is now in a position to examine carefully the serious irregularities that have emerged in the decentralized administration of the MED programmes , and in particular to put a stop to the conflicts of interest that have been shown to exist ?
Community resources that have been wrongly paid out must be put back into the EU coffers .
However , we also believe , at the same time , that the current suspension of these programmes , ordered by the Commission , subject to certain conditions in line with budget organization and the relevant provisions , can now be lifted .
It is therefore important that we should approve this report by Mr Fabra , because in six months ' time the Commission is due to report to us again on the measures it has introduced - and that includes disciplinary measures as well .
The second aspect that I should like to emphasize is what Mr Fabra Vallés says in Point 10 of his motion for a resolution , in which the Committee on Budgetary Control demands that the EU should have its own independent anti-fraud unit .
The emphasis is on the word ' independent ' , because we already have an anti-fraud unit .
This antifraud unit , UCLAF , does some good and successful work .
I would just remind you of the exposure of the recent deceptions that were practised with regard to BSE meat .
However , it is almost inevitable that it will be accused of being biased , because it is part of the Commission .
It is also exposed to the risk that it will be accused either of playing down the whole affair in order to damage the Commission 's reputation as little as possible , or , above all , of arguing against and introducing measures to the detriment of the external advisers .
Therefore we need independence here , as well as the possibility of introducing measures under criminal law , which can then be implemented by the national courts , in order to put an end , finally to the misuse of , and fraudulent practices involving , the EU 's financial resources .
Once again I should like to thank the rapporteur for his hard work within the committee , and I should also like to thank the secretariat of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Mr President , here we are once again talking about fraud , while we await the important debate planned for next September on the Commission 's annual report and working programme for the campaign against fraud .
This time , assisted by Mr Fabra Vallés 's report , we are looking at the management , or rather the nonmanagement , of the MED programmes .
One of the peculiarities of this situation is that its excesses border on the absurd . I freely admit that the complexity of Community legislation and the scattering of responsibilities for spending over the numerous public and private bodies responsible for implementing the programmes make fraud very much easier .
Well , unfortunately , that is what is happening with a programme in which our group has a keen interest , a programme which really should never have made the headlines for this kind of reason .
Because there are things that are acceptable and things that are not .
Something that is not acceptable , ladies and gentlemen , is that after it had become aware of a devastating report by the Court of Auditors on the management of the MED programmes , highlighting numerous irregularities and serious deficiencies , the Commission failed to decide on the immediate institution of an administrative inquiry , and that the judicial authorities in the Member States have hitherto not taken any steps at all .
And yet , out of sixteen technical assistance contracts that have been awarded , ten were not the subject of an invitation to tender , which has resulted in an excess cost of ECU 170 , 000 .
And yet the Commission delegated powers to the agency for the trans-Mediterranean networks in the absence of any clear legal basis , and in the absence of any decision of principle .
That was tantamount to giving a blank cheque to external advisors who were sitting in judgement on their own case .
It is not my intention to deliver an indictment against the Commission , which is often unjustly - and , let 's face it , very conveniently - made the scapegoat for distortions within the Community for which others must also bear some of the responsibility .
It is true that the Commission did not , and still does not , have the resources for the correct management of the financing of the MED operations initiated in July 1992 .
But the Commission , at the time the MED programmes were adopted , was entitled to ask , if not demand , that the Council should provide the necessary human and financial resources to implement those programmes satisfactorily ; and , if the Council refused that demand , the Commission had the option of refusing the heavy responsibility of a management that was inevitably doomed to failure .
Why did the Commission not demonstrate the courage and lucidity that the public had a right to expect from it since , I would remind you , we are talking about public funds ?
And what can be done now ?
Of course we must adopt Mr Fabra Valles 's report which , as he says himself , is a textbook case .
But it seems to me that we need to do more than talk - we need to demand action and penalties .
It is a matter for the Commission , and a matter of urgency , to draw up proposals for reform to get the MED programmes back on the right road , and it will be a matter for us to judge the Commission by its acts .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , who I believe has done an excellent job .
This is another of those typical cases where Parliament can take a good deal of credit , because it is indeed up to the European Parliament to get to the bottom of this kind of issue .
On behalf of the Liberal Group , I should like to make it clear that this sort of incident must not cast a shadow over any kind of aid programmes .
These aid programmes are needed in the Mediterranean and elsewhere in the world .
When we talk about decentralization - which is not a bad thing in itself , and it needs to happen - it is also always important for there to be a separation of powers .
Those responsible for implementation must not monitor themselves : it must be done by an independent bureau .
I would also support the idea of a black list of consultants with the many changes of name that take place , often meaning that bureaux which carry out the study prior to the invitation to tender for a project are also able to submit a tender .
To my mind , all such lack of transparency must be avoided in the future .
I therefore look forward with great interest to the report which the Commission is to present within six months , so that we can finally approve the Commission 's policy .
Commissioner Marín , I believe that we are discussing here not only an exemplary case but also a tragic one .
It is tragic because the projects have usually been well run .
For example , in Cologne there is a filmmaker who is working on a television and film station in Palestine , in other words , a super project .
Yet that project has been placed at risk , and I must say , quite clearly , that it is you and the Commission as a whole who are responsible for that .
In Committee , I asked you several times how it could happen that the Commission could allow a bourse-bypassing transaction to run for three years , without there being any possibility of exposing it .
The answer that you gave to me was , ' I can do nothing about it if an employee who makes an administrative mistake does not come to me voluntarily and reveal the mistake to me himself ' .
I think that you are technically right , but it does make me wonder to think that you at the Commission have absolutely no idea of how a control system can be built into your own administration , so that such methods of procedure can be discovered .
How is it possible , then , to carry out checks on how resources are used , if you do not have any mechanisms within the Commission for uncovering such horrendous mistakes ?
As far as I am concerned , that is still the crucial question , regardless of who has what responsibility in detail .
You are responsible for that , and it must be put right !
Mr President , Commissioner Marín , ladies and gentlemen , this undoubtedly important report marks the conclusion of a long investigation which has at last brought the shortcomings in the implementation of the MEDA programmes to light .
I should not , however , want it to be forgotten in the excitement that the same rigorous approach and the same acute analysis are needed in order to establish whether it is the system as a whole which is not working .
I have always insisted that the Commission should not take on a single official more than necessary , that it should be rigorous , that even the engagement of category C officials should be monitored . But all these programmes , PHARE , TACIS , and so on , on the other hand , which the Commission is always asked to take on , are , in actual fact , delegated to external consultants .
The particular case with which we are concerned today is not , therefore , an isolated one .
So I wonder whether the time has not come to say ' enough ' !
Let us see this example as a manifestation of a practice which has been spreading , with the Commission now increasingly having to farm out , subcontract and assign to outside firms not only the implementation , but even the drafting of a given White Paper or Green Paper , or the like .
Disciplinary action should indeed be taken against officials who have committed irregularities , and any irregularities downstream should be sanctioned , but if , according to a basic principle enshrined in internal rules and customary standards even at the level of the Financial Regulation , the official or officials in charge of implementation of these programmes believed they were acting correctly when they placed managers from large consultancy firms or external fund managers in the body which then had to take decisions on projects , regarding this practice as absolutely normal in the case of projects with non-member countries , it is then clear that the problem lies further upstream and it is right to tackle it .
I think , however , that these just criticisms of individuals should in some way prompt us to examine our consciences .
In so doing , we will be able to determine whether the course we have followed in this or other projects is right , not least because , in my view , we do not give the Commission sufficient in-house staff to tackle this kind of programme themselves .
Mr President , the report before us today is an important one , important because the facts it sets out , linked to the use made by the Commission of the budgetary appropriations for the MED programmes , are particularly serious .
I fear that the rapporteur , Mr Fabra Vallés , in his efforts to find excuses for the Commission at any cost , may ultimately be suggesting that we should in part abandon the fundamental role of Parliament - a role which I would prefer to see strengthened - by which I mean monitoring the proper use of Community funds .
The facts are relatively straightforward .
The Court of Auditors reported them .
The Commission elected to subcontract the management of the MED programmes to the Agency for Trans-Mediterranean Networks , the ARTM , an association set up by the Commission itself .
Two of the four directors of that association were also directors of two technical assistance bureaux responsible for the monitoring of the MED programmes .
As such , therefore , they were able to obtain more than 60 % of the technical assistance appropriations .
As a result of their dual status , those directors were also able to participate in the negotiating of contracts concluded with themselves , and in the preparation of projects which they were then instructed to implement by the Commission , and to have access to documents which they should never have been able to obtain .
Out of sixteen technical assistance contracts , ten were awarded without any prior invitation to tender , while in the case of the other six the awarding procedures were highly irregular in the advantage they gave the two technical assistance bureaux in question .
So what we have here is nothing less than the de facto delegation of the Commission 's powers to an external body , and not just services contracts ; a delegation of powers that took place quite openly , and this is what is particularly worrying , without anyone finding any fault with an outrageous sequence of irregularities .
The Commission , which was aware of the situation from 6 October 1995 , did not even undertake a systematic review of all the contracts concluded with the two technical assistance bureaux on which doubt was being cast .
Indeed , it has not begun to do so until today , more than 18 months after these deplorable facts became public knowledge , although no disciplinary action has been taken by the Commission , nor have these matters been referred to the competent criminal courts .
So , Mr Fabra Vallés , we must on this occasion denounce the Commission 's management methods in the matter of decentralized co-operation .
We must mention the personal enrichment of Commission officials , which may have taken place either directly or indirectly .
We must declare that it is not only the credibility of the Commission that is at stake but the whole of its working methods with regard to the delegation of powers , to the awarding of contracts and the placing of public works contracts .
What is at stake today is the role of Parliament .
Are we once again going to refuse to do our duty , as we did with the 1992 discharge of the Commission and as we did in the BSE affair , or are we going to set up a commission of inquiry to shed some definitive light on this business ?
Mr President , the report by Mr Fabra Vallés reveals , penetratingly and unambiguously , how European tax-payers ' money has been used irresponsibly in connection with the MED programmes .
We must be grateful to the rapporteur for his plain speaking and his clear demonstration of the irregularities that have occurred at all levels .
It is particularly regrettable that in this case the crucial error happened in Brussels , and the fact that the competent Commission department was under a great deal of pressure , as regards both time and expectations , is absolutely unacceptable as an excuse .
If such an excuse was acceptable , then irregularities in practically all private and public management activities would remain completely hidden , because pressures of time and expectations are an everyday feature of the global market .
It is simply incomprehensible that such a complex programme , which was intended to set in motion intensive cooperation throughout the Mediterranean , and which accounts for financial resources totalling ECU 78 million , could be introduced in such a dilettantish and non-serious way .
A system was set up which had built into it a conflict of interests which has led to what we now know to be extremely serious results .
As a result of blatant irregularities , this programme , in itself a sensible one , has now been devalued in the eyes of the public .
For many small European tax-payers , however , whose lives are being made intolerable by economy measures , the question is bound to arise as to whether they are even a step in the right direction .
In my opinion , the resumption of the decentralized programmes cannot be approved until all the irregularities from the first phase have been cleared up , without leaving any loose ends , and until the public prosecutor 's offices and courts have done their work .
Mr President , I should like to begin by pointing out that I really must disagree strongly with the comment made by Mr Azzolini , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy , when he said that the Court of Auditors should not deal publicly with this kind of matter , and that it should be settled internally with the Commission .
If we go down that road , there will of course never be any end to such problems .
They can only be resolved through openness and the pressure that results from it , and I would also not underestimate the preventive effect of this kind of report by the Court of Auditors .
I shall not dwell on the facts of the matter , which have been set out in the Fabra Vallés report .
I think that this is an excellent report which demands a follow-up , as Mrs Wemheuer has already indicated , quite simply because our troubles are still far from over in this respect .
However , I should like to take up one point which has already been raised by other speakers , especially Mr Dell 'Alba , and that is whether the Commission is capable of executing its own budget ?
How should the Commission do this ?
With what intermediaries is the Commission allowed to work ?
Can we be assured that this is happening in a proper way ?
In short , this is the whole problem , from PHARE through TACIS to the Structural Funds , since when I look at Agenda 2000 once again , I can see that the Commission is putting more and more emphasis on decentralized implementation .
I can understand why , but at the same time the question is becoming more and more obvious : can the Commission still take responsibility for its own areas of competence ?
And I do have some very serious doubts in that respect .
It would appear , as Mrs Müller has just said , that Commissioners no longer have any overview - as they should do - of their own officials within the structure of the Directorates-General .
So communications have broken down there - let alone those between the Directorates-General in Brussels and the field , whether inside or outside the European Union .
I think the problem is comparable to those which many Member States have with the implementation of development cooperation , which can also generally be described as poor , simply because the Member States do not have their own people or their own mechanisms in the countries where development cooperation is applied , but are dependent on cooperation with others .
And if you then also pass on this cooperation with others to third parties and no longer take part in it yourself , things just become more complicated .
I believe that this whole problem - which has never really been resolved in the European Union , but is becoming more and more significant because of the take-up of external aid and the scale of the Structural Funds - is one which deserves greater attention .
The Commission was set up in the past as a machine for enacting legislation , not as one for managing .
And this management problem is becoming an increasingly large and serious issue in the European Union .
In my view , we in Parliament also need to investigate it seriously and in greater depth .
Mr President , this debate could have descended into criticizing the very existence of the MED policy .
It is good to see that it has not .
What did happen was that the Court of Auditors brought to VicePresident Marín very serious allegations and he saw there was a case to answer and stopped policies right away .
If some of the contractors feel he acted too precipitately , then they have their civil court rights .
This all goes back , to my mind , to what Mr Santer said on taking office .
He said that the Commission should do less but do it better .
I am fully aware that the MED programme began before he took office .
But what happened ?
The money was voted for an extensive programme and it looked on the face of it as if the Commission was doing a good thing by dividing it into many contracts .
It could say : ' This is highly transparent , you can see where the money is going ' .
But there was not sufficient management skill and management numbers in the Commission to carry these contracts through .
There were too many Directorate-Generals involved , too many contracts themselves , and it was delegated control gone mad .
In fact , the MED programme became the ' MAD ' programme .
I would suggest that the way forward for the Commission is for Vice-President Marín , to show a little humility and to accept the recommendations contained in Mr Fabra Vallés ' excellent report .
There are answers to the problems which have come forward , and I believe he can find them in this report .
The problem is that it is an interim report to allow programmes to go forward from now on ; but there are still further investigations which must be carried out .
I am pleased to see that there is a gap in the agenda in the autumn for a further report from Mr Fabra Vallés .
I look forward to further good work from him .
Mr President , Commissioner , colleagues , first I should like to compliment Mr Fabra on his excellent report , and , I must add , the Court of Auditors on its excellent auditing work , which I hope will be carried out in the same way , just as rigorously , in the other sectors as well , particularly as regards work contracted out : frankly , I find it difficult to believe that it is only in the MED programmes that intrigues and irregularities occur .
Having said that , I am anxious to stress that the comments and criticisms absolutely must not mean the scrapping of decentralized cooperation , which is the basis of the new Euro-Mediterranean policy .
Indeed , this idea of setting up networks putting civil societies and individual operators in contact horizontally , without passing through the red tape of vertical cooperation , has represented a fundamental change , and as such it should be safeguarded .
I should also like to say that I hope that this debate will provide an opportunity to confirm decisively the need to reach a turning-point in Euro-Mediterranean policy , which , what with the disappointing outcome of the Malta Conference , the start-up difficulties with the MEDA programmes , and the freezing of the MED programmes for almost two years , has , in practice , been in a state of gentle hibernation .
Commissioner Marín was right to freeze the programmes , but I hope that , after this long period of time , he has resolved the organizational problems , so as to ensure transparent and efficient management .
It is now time to get started again , because the public is beginning to suspect that this Euro-Mediterranean policy exists in word rather than in deed .
Mr President , owing to the importance of this debate and because the Commission believes it has collaborated in an exemplary manner with the European Parliament and with the Committee on Budgetary Control , I will require a certain amount of time because I would also like to announce a number of new ideas at this part-session .
Firstly , to refer to the most recent intervention by Mr Viola , I would like to make the following correction .
I have done so a number of times but it seems that there is still some misunderstanding .
There appears to be some confusion - whether deliberate or not - between the decentralized MED cooperation programmes and the MEDA programme approved at the Barcelona Conference .
We are discussing a matter connected with a regulation , approved by the Council of Ministers on 29 June 1992 , whilst the MEDA Regulation was approved in July 1996 .
Consequently , Parliament cannot continue to confuse events connected with a policy , the MEDA programmes of the earlier protocols , and the result of the Barcelona Conference and the MEDA programme .
The MEDA programme has absolutely nothing to do with this type of cooperation .
Secondly , Mr Fabra Vallés , I feel that your report is indeed exemplary for a number of reasons .
In the first place , because it highlights dysfunctions in the management of the various companies to whom we entrusted application of the decentralized cooperation programmes in the Mediterranean and of the European Commission 's own services .
Secondly , because it reveals shortcomings in Community legal mechanisms relating to legal protection of the European Community 's financial interests .
Thirdly , because it shows how much internal effort the European Commission still has to put in to devising and perfecting an early warning system and the mechanisms which would enable it to prevent the dysfunctions observed in one expenditure sector - in this case , the MED programmes - being able to arise elsewhere in other expenditure sectors , as has been the case .
Lastly , because it demonstrates that cooperation between and the combined efforts of the institutions - Court of Auditors , Parliament , Commission and Council - indeed permit progress and considerably help towards the solving of such programmes , because I feel that what we are all seeking is a solution to these problems .
With regard to the first point - the dysfunctions observed by the Court of Auditors - you will be aware - because I have had the opportunity to explain this on many occasions and I regret the fact that the speakers have not mentioned it -that , within two weeks of the Court of Auditors advising me , through their auditors on 6 October 1995 , that they had detected irregularities , I decided to suspend and cancel all contracts as a precautionary measure .
My first decision , as soon as I saw that something was wrong , was to suspend the contracts , with all that that entailed in terms of political consequences , as I will explain in a moment .
Throughout this operation , the innocent have often paid for the guilty , because , on the one hand , there have been technical assistance bureaux which have abused the system but , on the other hand , technical assistance bureaux - NGOs , institutions which are doing excellent work , the example you mention is one of them - which have acted in a completely proper manner , and I was indeed aware of that fact .
However , two years ago - and I regret that some of those involved have left the chamber without hearing this discussion - I decided to suspend the contracts .
I had nothing to hide .
I would go further : it is totally incorrect , Mr Kellett-Bowman , to say that the Court of Auditors took the decision to cancel the programmes .
The Court of Auditors adopted its decision in May 1996 and almost a year earlier we had decided to suspend the programmes and cancel all the current contracts with the companies involved .
At the same time , I asked the UCLAF and the Commission 's Financial Control - as you know - to launch an investigation into the entire network , in order to ascertain , once and for all , precisely what was going on .
I would like to reply to Mr Dankert , who made some basic observations .
It is correct to say that , with current administrative resources , the Commission , or we , the Commissioners , are not in a position to implement specific control of decentralized cooperation - that is no secret .
I have already said that , at this precise moment , I am not in a position to tell you what is going on concerning the petits projets which may currently be being implemented in Peru , Guatemala , Tunisia , Egypt , Cambodia , the Philippines , India or Pakistan .
Perhaps one of you would be able to do so .
By definition , whether or not this is my responsibility is not at issue .
If we wish to collaborate , we will have to find the correct solution .
There is another point I should like to mention again in this Chamber .
In view of what had happened , on 17 July 1996 , i.e. precisely one year ago today , I presented , at the Commission , four new types of contract which have protected the MEDA contracts .
We did this one year ago , so , Mr Müller , Mrs Wemheuer , we are coming towards the end .
I have a leading interest in the matter .
I have nothing to apologise for , since I have come to this partsession fully able to demonstrate to Parliament that a large percentage of the matters Mr Fabra Vallés quite rightly refers to have now been resolved .
Others still remain , but I am in a position to inform you that , with regard to Mr Fabra Vallés 's report as a whole , 80 % are decisions which have already been made .
We have yet to finish the administrative inquiry .
And if you were to ask me ' what problem does the Commissioner have , having decided two years ago to suspend the programmes , in getting to the end ? ' , I would reply that I have no problem , that we are indeed getting to the end of the matter , with all the consequences that that entails and in all areas .
What has the Commission done ?
Firstly , not one single ecu will be lost .
On my initiative , the Commission decided to suspend and cancel all the programmes - the 14 we discovered - and I am grateful to Mr Fabra Vallés for his having mentioned how great a task it was for the Commission to uncover the entire network , sometimes with names inserted ; how much work was involved in finally tracking down all the DGs which had contracts - unknowingly - because some of the technical assistance bureaux were adept at changing their names .
However , we tracked them down and they have all now been suspended , frozen .
Absolutely every one of them .
We are coming to the end and , at this point , Mrs Theato , I am somewhat perplexed .
You know me well ; I was asked by a number of you privately to be strict , to act with total discipline , to suspend the contracts and to demand repayment .
Those requirements have been complied with , and now we are approaching the end .
I therefore find it difficult to understand at this point - hence my confusion - how the Commission can be accused of having acted precipitately , when we made our decisions .
At the same time , we demanded repayment of all the sums owed . I will give you a list of all we discovered , company by company .
I want to accept my responsibilities because , in that way , I will undoubtedly have grounds in the future for requiring certain approaches to be explained to me .
The following technical assistance bureaux have been ordered to pay back sums of money :
' Cité Unie Développement ' . ' Cité Unie Développement ' has now paid back the amount owed .
Case closed .
' Córdoba City Hold ' was awarded two projects .
This organization has queried the figures and is prepared to pay 70 % .
The Commission is currently investigating whether its figures or our figures are correct , but Córdoba has also been asked to repay the money in connection with this project .
As regards the ' Conseil des Communes et des Régions de l 'Europe ' , we have also asked for the money to be returned .
The deadline for a reply runs out this week .
Finally , ARTM , ISMERI and FERE have either failed to reply before the deadline or are rejecting the Commission 's claims .
I can in fact confirm that last week , in accordance with the General Secretariat of the Commission , following up Mr Fabra Vallés 's recommendations , we have issued a formal demand for payment in connection with these companies ' contracts .
If they do not pay , the Commission will automatically pay compensation regarding the other fourteen current contracts , which , according to our Legal Service , is permitted under current legislation .
Secondly , you spoke of criminal accountability .
The Commission - I said this privately and I am now saying it in public , to avoid confusion in the future - took the decision in the past to take a company to court in its own country so that that country 's legal system could examine whether there were grounds for a criminal prosecution .
Lastly - once again I am addressing Mrs Müller - the Commission decided to open an administrative inquiry once the UCLAF report had been completed .
That report - as I stated privately and now repeat in public - establishes that there was no personal enrichment on the part of any Community employee .
You may feel that this is right or that this is wrong , but I have to work with objective information . In the same way that , on the basis of objective information , I decided to take certain companies to court , as a Commissioner , I cannot allow myself to accuse anyone of embezzlement without reliable data .
I have explained this on a number of occasions and am hiding nothing .
The administrative inquiry is ongoing .
The Community mechanism is not in doubt .
There were internal lacunae ; what has been our reaction to these , Mr Fabra Vallés ?
Firstly , the Secretary-General instructed all DGs to adopt horizontal standards and precautions throughout the Commission with a view to preventing a recurrence of this type of incident .
In practical terms , what we are going to do is to extend the shielded type of contract of the Barcelona MEDA programme - note - to the rest of the DGs , so that , if an abuse should arise on the part of a technical assistance bureau , payments will immediately be stopped , the company will be sanctioned and the money recovered .
At least , here , we are guaranteed that the former MED projects will not result in the loss of a single ecu .
Secondly , the Commission 's General Inspectorate of Services is offering replies - and these will be presented to you before October - regarding the general mechanisms your report calls for .
This is one of the matters outstanding - I accept that - in this 20 % of things which are still pending .
Next , the Commission has already taken on board the establishment of an early warning system so that , from now on , when any anomaly is detected in any external-network programme , all the DGs will suspend programming as a precautionary measure .
This is a radical step to take , but it is our response to what Mr Dankert so rightly said .
We cannot act in any other way : when information reaches the politician responsible , the decision must be taken to suspend , as a precaution .
It will then be time for verification .
This system is a hard one , undoubtedly , perhaps a very hard one , but an inevitable one .
Lastly , I would like to inform you of the following .
The Commission , admittedly , has blocked all payments in connection with current contracts established with other DGs in the case of all those companies which are refusing to repay the money owed .
I therefore repeat that not one single ecu will be lost .
Orders have been issued for all contracts to be suspended .
Mr President , I would like it to be placed clearly on record that the Commission will get to the bottom of the matter .
I can also confirm to you that the Commission has cancelled the direct contracts which had been concluded with FERE and ISMERI .
Together with these two contracts , we discovered three more , in association with other technical assistance bureaux and under another name .
Under this name , there were technical assistance bureaux working completely properly and we could not harm them and , consequently , what we did in such cases also , was to suspend the contracts , with all that that entailed .
Lastly , I would like to offer the following assessment .
You may rest assured , Mr Fabra Vallés , Mrs Theato , that we are going to get to the bottom of this matter .
Even before Parliament itself requested action , the Commission had already acted .
Even before the Court of Auditors issued its final decision , the Commission had acted .
Because the Commission , more than anyone else , has an interest in this matter being resolved .
I am aware of one thing : I am not concerned about being able to defend the decisions we have taken .
What does concern me is that there has been no defence of the NGOs , institutions and technical assistance bureaux which acted honestly and which have been placed in a difficult situation on account of my decision .
I was expecting interventions along the lines of : ' But , Mr Marín , you have been very hard on us ' , ' Mr Marín , your decision was very hasty and very inflexible , because this NGO , institution , technical assistance bureau , which was conducting its affairs properly , has been placed in a difficult position ' .
I have received letters from a good many NGOs and institutions , saying : ' Mr Marín , you have acted unfairly towards us , because we were operating properly , honestly , and were complying with the rules , and you have punished us ' .
And my reply has been : ' I am aware of that fact , but I needed to know what was going on ' .
I would have preferred that concern should have been expressed on behalf of the innocent parties who have suffered on account of a very harsh decision .
At any rate , let there be no doubt , before October , Mr Fabra Vallés , you will have a full answer to all your questions .
Mr President , I regret that the Vice-President of the Commission misquoted me .
He suggested that I said that the Court of Auditors stopped these contracts .
The record will show that I said that the Vice-President of the Commission , Manuel Marín , suspended the contracts and that I went on to say that if he acted too precipitately , the contractors and others would have an opportunity to assert their rights in the civil courts .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank Vice-President Marín most sincerely .
I am afraid , however , that some misunderstandings may have crept in , perhaps as a result of the interpreting .
It is not true that we demanded the suspension of the contracts .
It is the Commission 's business to implement that .
On the contrary , we found - and this is clearly stated in the report - that the Commission acted correctly and that it must now be in our joint interest to reveal the mistakes , so that we can learn from them and put a stop to the irregularities .
The programmes , however , should start running again .
I have already made that quite clear in my earlier contribution to the debate , but perhaps there has been some misunderstanding here .
In any case , we should like to say than you .
The debate was necessary , but it was not the final debate .
I think that is something that both sides can agree on .
Mr President , my apologies , there must have been a misunderstanding .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Common organization of the raw tobacco market
The next item is the report ( A4-0214 / 97 ) by Mr Rosado Fernandes , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the report from the Commission to the Council on the common organization of the market in raw tobacco ( COM ( 96 ) 0554 - C4-0057 / 97 ) .
Mr President , first of all I should like to say that I am not going to take up all of my five minutes , because the smoke made by Commissioner Marín has definitely prejudiced this debate .
I should also like to remind you - the Chair , that is - that at the meeting of Presidents in Luxembourg , it was agreed - and this is not a question of transparency but of honesty , as transparency is a term applied to glass whereas honesty is the term to be applied to humans - we must maintain that honesty and vote on this report after 12 noon .
When I took it on , I knew that this would be a report not only making smoke , like some of the speeches made here , but also made of fire , fire that could burn us .
That is why I agree to draft it , in the knowledge that I was defending the interest of 170 000 tobacco farmers - because there are 170 000 not 135 000 tobacco farmers throughout Europe , working farms of 1.5 to 2 hectares , between 1000 and 2000 hours a year .
How many other people in Europe work between 1000 and 2000 hours a year ?
They are a moral example .
It is true , according to information provided by some of the Commissioner 's emissaries and ayatollahs to the Committee on Budgets , that it costs 1000 million ECU to support the tobacco growers .
It is true ! There is no need to conceal it or be ashamed !
I am fed up with all the shame felt in Europe over spending money on people and the money not spent on fighting corruption .
I do not see the same concern with fighting fraud or the billions of ECU of unpaid VAT , or the harmonization of tax systems wallowing in a criminal system in which violators are punished but where violations are paid for at bargain basement prices in today 's Europe .
That is what is happening in Europe - there is a lack of any morals and there is only collaboration and complicity between the Commission and the Member States , many of which have not even adhered to an agreement on the harmonization of criminal legislation .
I am indignant when I see a billion of ECU for tobacco being questioned .
There are no alternatives for the 170 000 farmers and the 30 000 in primary manufacture , 84 000 in processing , and all the other workers and small businessmen protecting the environment in extremely poor areas .
If they had an alternative , they would only disturb the economies of the sectors they were converted into .
It is shameful to use the pretext used here : that of health !
May I remind my colleagues that I look after my own health and I do not ask them to ' look after my health ' - especially as in Portuguese the expression also means ' have me buried ' !
There is a growing McCarthyism , imported from America , in persecuting smokers .
It is McCarthy , the witches of Salem , the Inquisition !
When the first Spanish soldier , Rodrigo de Jerez , set foot in Spain on his return from Mexico , and rolled up an aromatic herb into a musket-shape , a priest who saw him breathe the smoke out through his nostrils said : ' You have a pact with the devil ! ' He complained to the Inquisition .
Now we have here various descendants of that way of thinking .
Smokers have a pact with the devil . Whoever spends too much to protect work also has a pact with the devil , rather than paying the unemployed .
This is my opinion , it is a moral opinion , that used to be valid in Europe but no more .
We are dropping our trousers to the Americans .
It is now worthwhile being a non-smoker and accusing smokers and companies for the harm they have done .
It is good business right now .
What is written is written and I take full responsibility and should like to say that I am very honoured to be defending those who work in the fields and grow crops , defending the environment and helping to discover varieties of tobacco that are less harmful to the health , and improving quality .
That is why the COM must be remodelled .
Mr President , I am speaking for my colleague Terry Wynn on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , and as well as on my own behalf in support of my amendments .
Unfortunately this debate started late and Terry Wynn had to leave .
Unlike the majority of members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I want to welcome the Commission 's proposals as a useful step in the right direction in reform of the tobacco COM .
However , it does not go far enough .
I disagree profoundly with its statement that tobacco farming is no different from any other agricultural activity .
Tobacco is the only agricultural product subsidized by the EU which kills its consumers when used as it is intended to be used .
In the US cigarette manufacturers are being forced by the courts to accept financial responsibility for destroying the health and causing the deaths of consumers of their products .
The EU must surely be cautious in making no commitment to phase out subsidies for tobacco in the knowledge that all research points to its harmful effects on the health of its users , passive recipients of smoke fumes from others and children whose mothers smoke during pregnancy .
The first health advice doctors give to their patients coming in with breathing or heart problems is to stop smoking .
Of course , it is unacceptable to destroy the livelihoods of thousands of tobacco farmers without assistance with restructuring .
The amendments I have tabled propose ongoing support for farmers in Objective 1 and 5b areas , switching to types of tobacco which will eventually be able to compete on the market without subsidy , and assistance for new types of agriculture or other jobs on a scale never enjoyed by the hundreds of thousands of miners , steel workers , shipbuilders , fishermen and others who have lost their jobs through restructuring over the last two decades .
This is a depth of solidarity which was not there for those other workers whose governments were and are forbidden to subsidize these jobs under EU rules .
I now move to the points being made by the Committee on Budgets .
It considers that the ECU 1 billion which is needed to support the workers in the tobacco-growing areas can be found under a number of headings , including , for example , the structural funds , EAGGF Guidance , budget lines B1 5010 to B1 5012 and a number of budget lines in Chapter B5 32 designed to stimulate small and medium-sized enterprises .
It also points out that the continuance of subsidies to the tobacco sector will put a heavier burden on the EU budget after enlargement , and that something should be done to do away with the total mismatch between health and agricultural policies within the EU .
It is very important that the EU clearly expresses at this point its intention to phase out subsidies completely for this damaging product as the long-term aim of the reform of the tobacco market .
How can our children be convinced of the real dangers of smoking when the EU devotes ECU 1 billion each year to assist the growing of its raw material ?
I ask you to support the appropriate amendments .
Mr President , when I say that Members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection did not dwell too long on their opinion on this report , it demonstrates not a lack of interest nor an absence of strongly held , informed , scientifically backed views , but rather the commendable virtue of consistency .
So without apology I therefore express , yet again today , a predictable , regularly stated and staunch opposition to EU support for tobacco production , shared by Members from virtually all groups and states .
It is regrettable that the Commission does not share that virtue when it comes to tobacco .
For while DG V strives to uphold Article 129 of the Treaty on health protection and its cancer action programme is severely over-stretched , DG VI has rejected options to remove resources from a product that kills people and whose advertisements will hopefully be banned by the Council next year .
That is such a glaring , obvious contradiction when half a million EU citizens die prematurely each year from smoking-related diseases .
That means over 1 , 000 today and over 50 while we are debating this very report .
It is a death toll which is entirely avoidable .
A major government-sponsored campaign - almost a crusade - was launched in London this very week to make smoking a thing of the past .
The EU should back it , not undermine it .
There will doubtless be numerous statistics extracted to justify the contradictory approaches .
Those massive numbers of deaths alone - equivalent to wiping out the population of Luxembourg annually - should be enough to ensure that Members vote for Amendments Nos 1 to 10 , submitted by Environment Committee Members .
But tucked away in the report is a chilling reference to annual tobacco production of 10 , 000 tonnes per year in Poland .
That could well be the sinister cigar-shape of things to come .
That is why we should act now in favour of support for farmers by rapid diversification and conversion as proposed by the Court of Auditors in 1994 .
The tobacco research and information fund should be financially strengthened and its remit extended to make environmental protection a greater priority .
At least the measures to encourage voluntary withdrawal from the sector are welcome , but there is little else in this report which will address the needs of the many rather than the few .
It is time for the EU to put its own house in order , the better to tackle the pervasive ills of tobacco consumption .
Mr President , it is not easy , in this Chamber , to argue in favour of tobacco production , but I , Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , which appointed me draftsman , have to recall certain facts and highlight others .
To begin with , I should state that we support the Executive Committee 's document and Mr Rosado Fernandes 's report .
I should recall that it is no accident that tobacco-producing regions in Europe are , in the main , Objective 1 regions .
They are regions with an income much below the Union 's average : Thrace and Macedonia in Greece ; Apulia and Campania in Italy ; Andalusia , Extremadura and the Canary Islands in Spain ; and the Azores in Portugal .
All these are amongst the poorest regions in Europe and , in many of them , tobacco is not only the main source of wealth but the only source of wealth - there is no alternative .
Such is the case , for example , of Thrace and Macedonia .
More than 80 % of European tobacco production is concentrated in these regions and it provides employment for 180 , 000 people in terms of direct agricultural work and for a further 125 , 000 in the conversion industry .
All Europe 's tobacco-producing regions suffer high levels of unemployment .
It is impossible to argue in favour of economic and social cohesion - fine words in favour of Europe 's poorest regions - whilst , at the same time , the same people , on occasion , plan sectoral policies which selectively punish these same regions .
For these and other regions , we support Mr Rosado Fernandes 's report and the position of the Executive Committee .
Mr President , our group supports the main thrust of Mr Rosado Fernandes 's report , but above all agrees with the Commission 's document .
Opinions differ within the Socialist Group , but we do agree on the fact that the Commission is giving good advice in this communication .
Great advances have been made since the 1992 reform , and it must be acknowledged that tobacco growers have managed to adapt to the new context and rise to the challenge confronting them .
It would be wrong not to recognise this . And to say that , as we have heard in the last few days , as far as tobacco is concerned , the debates in this Chamber have not changed in the past ten years .
The problems facing producers are not over .
Heaven forbid that our message today should be : ' Do not worry , tobacco producers , you can relax now . No one is going to bother you any more ! '
I do not think that would be very responsible . There are problems relating to quality and restructuring of the sector .
The point is whether the impetus towards a more secure future should come from the harmful nature of smoke , a problem on which we should not lower our guard , or structural reasons which concern the Common Agricultural Policy as a whole , particularly the policy for the least favoured areas , which is precisely where tobacco production is concentrated .
I do not think that attacking tobacco production is the way to resolve the scourge of nicotinism .
This would be a move in the wrong direction , targeting the weakest , perhaps only to place a huge gift in the hands of the strongest , the four tobacco multinationals which dominate the consumer market in Europe .
Producers must , however , be aware that they will only have a future if they are strongly market-orientated and have a sounder organizational capacity , and they must also appreciate that Community aid will be less and less available in the coming years because , like it or not , this is the natural trend throughout the Common Agricultural Policy .
They need to be helped to understand this and act accordingly .
But , Commissioner , I think that soon , if we have a new rural policy in the Community , the situation for tobacco , for employment and for our quality of life will improve .
Certainly , if we had a solid rural policy in the Community today , we would already have gone a long way , not least for tobacco growers .
We know , Commissioner , how much you believe in the future of the rural policy .
Let us hope that its inclusion in the EAGGF Guarantee Section , as you told us yesterday , is not a sign that rural policy is being subordinated too much to the old CAP which we want to change .
Otherwise , in spite of us , there really will be hard times ahead for our tobacco growers .
Mr President , I would like to make some very obvious observations which , precisely because they are obvious , must be taken into account by Members of this House at voting time .
We are discussing tobacco production figures which represent 5 % of world production , and the sector currently provides direct employment for 170 , 000 people and jobs for 135 , 000 in the conversion industry .
We are therefore talking about over 300 , 000 jobs which , as explained here , involves ecu 1000 million .
This is one of the Community 's cost-effective policies ; because we are not going to take away 300 , 000 jobs which already exist in order to see whether we are capable of creating them by abolishing cultivation of this crop , thereby letting in , as Mr Fantuzzi has just stressed most capably , those who are in charge of conversion .
Nor do we have other significant alternatives to offer our growers , particularly those from the poorest regions , as other Members have just pointed out .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , although I do not intend to use up my allotted time in order to enable the debate to move on , I believe we have here an acceptable Commission proposal .
We have to improve it and correct it somewhat in terms of control and modulation .
We would also like the Commission to explain to us how the research money is spent , since , although we are not against increasing that budget , we would like to know how it is spent , so that we can decide whether the extra 2 % is still needed , as may be the case .
We do not , therefore , want this proposal to punish us into creating 300 , 000 jobs which already exist and which cost the Community a respectable amount of money , an amount which I regard as sufficiently justified , in order to help - as has so rightly been stated - the four multinationals which run the business .
Mr President , I will forego more than half of my time to help ensure that the vote takes place this morning .
As I said earlier , if we do not vote today , the entire reform will slip to after 1998 , causing serious harm to the producers ; moreover , the report is very clear and Mr Fernandes , the rapporteur , has explained it well .

I should just like to add that abandoning tobacco production in Europe would really be committing economic and social harakiri , in that it would not reduce the number of smokers by as much as one , and they would consequently buy cigarettes from non-member countries , to the great joy , as has already been pointed out , of the foreign , particularly American , multinationals .

Let us consider the problem of employment : employees number not just 300 , 000 , but 1 , 420 , 000 if both direct employment and ancillary jobs are taken into account : 11 per cent in Greece , 9 per cent in Italy ; 80 per cent are women ; and all , let us remember , in areas which are regarded as less favoured .

And what about the idea of banning tobacco in order to outlaw smoking and combat cancer : it would be like banning grape growing to combat alcoholism ; abandoning pig farming because pork contains cholesterol which causes heart attacks , and , if you will permit an even more forceful analogy in conclusion , ceasing to have children in order to combat paedophilia !
Mr President , many things have already been said which I too would have liked to say .
The Liberal Group takes the view that tobacco growing is a very important agricultural activity in several countries of the European Union .
At present , there are very few alternatives to this activity .
It also creates a huge amount of employment .
So in the short term , there is no point in ending this production of tobacco - we should simply import it from other countries , which is of no benefit at all to Europe .
Broadly speaking , the Liberal Group can support the Commission 's proposals .
In particular , we feel that more emphasis should be placed on the quality of production , and of course it must be geared more to the market .
That applies to all other farming sectors , and it must apply to tobacco growing as well .
We need high-quality tobacco , with as little subsidy as possible .
There is of course also a good deal of concern within the Liberal Group as regards the effects of smoking on health .
There is no doubt that smoking is dangerous to human health .
Once again , the Commission must consider this in implementing its policy , and tobacco must be produced with emphasis on the varieties which contain less nicotine , so that from this standpoint too , farmers are producing what the market demands and doing so in the interest of public health .
Mr President , once again it seems that the chaos of persecution levelled at tobacco cultivation is continuing .
That is the spirit and mentality which govern the Commission 's proposal on the reform of the COM for raw tobacco .
Unfortunately , the report by Mr Fernandes makes only a few minor improvements and does not go as far as it should .
Mr. President , since the first measures against tobacco production in 1992 , production has fallen by 31 % and the number of growers by 7 % .
Those are job losses , jobs which cannot be replaced , because a producer who makes his workers redundant does not subsequently care what happens to them , whether they remain unemployed , hungry and socially excluded .
Besides this , Mr. President , I must tell you that every kilo by which tobacco production in Europe is reduced , is replaced by several kilos imported from third countries by multinational groups involved in the manufacture of tobacco products , so there is in fact no discouragement of smoking .
This so-called anti-smoking campaign , if not naive , is stupid .
But it is in fact neither ; it is deliberate , and aims to serve the interests of major tobacco-trading multinational monopolies which want to import cheap tobacco of appalling quality from third countries , to glut the markets and inflate their profits .
It is therefore a nonsense , a crime that is taking place for the sake of this profiteering .
There are some positive points in the report by Mr Fernandes and I accept those - besides , there are also the related amendments following the debate by the committee - , such as the creation of an agency from within the profession to monitor tobacco quality , etc .
I think it would be better for that to be run by the state , it would be more reliable , with experience and scientific expertise , as was proved by a body of the same sort in Greece .
Finally , instead of restricting the budget , it should be increased to provide resources for research on tobacco , to improve both its quality ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the EU policy on tobacco is full of double standards and , to put it plainly , hypocrisy .
While we are all aware of how many cases of cancer are caused by tobacco - the Commission itself has stated that around half a million people die annually because of tobacco - we continue to discuss the amount of subsidy to pay to the tobacco growing sector .
At the same time the EU has programmes to combat tobacco induced cancer .
This is something of a double standard !
We are talking about large amounts of aid as well , 1 000 million ECU 's per year , while the programme to prevent cancer caused by tobacco receives 10 millions ECU 's .
Is it possible that this situation has arisen because the cost of health care in the EU Member States is paid by the Member States themselves , while EU agricultural policy and the aid to tobacco growers is paid for by the EU ?
No one has a comprehensive view of the situation : aid is paid out to tobacco growers while , at the same time , hospitals are having to deal with the damage caused by tobacco and building up substantial hospital bills as a result .
Now is the time to do something about this .
The most realistic way is not to stop all subsidies immediately , but to phase them out and introduce programmes of change so that people can do other things instead .
This is not a matter of impoverishing rural areas .
We want and will continue to have a living rural economy .
Instead , we need to have a policy which is both logical and consistent .
Aid to tobacco growers does not form part of such a policy .
The Agriculture Committee , in my view , has only considered the tobacco growers and the agricultural sector , while the health aspects , as has already been pointed out by the Environment Committee , are conspicuous by their absence .
So it is our duty to vote for those proposals which will lead to a programme of change , the amendment proposal from Mrs Hardstaff , Mr Wynn and Mr Wibe is one such example .

Mr President , not wanting to get involved in the curious hybrid logic that pervades this subject , I should like a distinction to be made between those arguments that relate to public health and those that relate to production , which provides a livelihood for 150 , 000 producers in Europe .
The tobacco industry purchases its supplies from the world market , and if Europe fails to deliver the right quantity or quality , the industry will buy from outside the European Union .
I am in agreement with the idea of a planned reduction in excess consumption of tobacco , but it seems to me hypocritical , and inappropriate , to believe that stopping production in the European Union would put a stop to smoking , whereas it is ourselves as the free consumers who need to be influenced .
The growing of tobacco is a specialized activity , like market gardening , and over-hasty conversion to other products would be disastrous for the sector .
If , eventually , alternative crops were to replace tobacco , it would unquestionably be necessary to provide compensation to bring incomes , and especially employment , up to equivalent levels .
But is that conceivable with an agricultural budget that is continuously dwindling in relative terms ?
The most logical solution today is to reorganize the CMO with a view to maintaining employment and incomes , and even modulating the premiums , while always arguing on the basis of quality .
I am not a smoker , but I can appreciate that a good tobacco can be savoured like a good wine .
For all those reasons , we support Mr Rosado Fernandes 's report - and , in passing , I pay tribute to his European spirit because he , as a man of the South , has thought of the producers in the North and the need to restore their premiums to the pre-1993 level .
Mr President , I must congratulate Mr Rosado Fernandes on the quality of his report , which very clearly sets out the issues involved in tobacco growing in Europe and rightly denounces , and I quote , ' the erroneous premises ' of the Commission 's report .
We shall vote in favour of the motion for a resolution as presented by the rapporteur and adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I personally will not vote in favour of any of the amendments to that motion because , on the pretext of protecting consumer health , the majority of them have the sole real objective of weakening European tobacco production in favour of tobacco and cigarettes imported from the United States .
Our group has requested a split vote on Recital A. According to the initial text , tobacco is grown , and I quote , ' in extremely disadvantaged Objective 1 regions ' .
We would like the words ' extremely ' and ' Objective 1 ' to be deleted from that recital , since there are tobacco-producing regions which are disadvantaged regions of Objective 5B .
I therefore call upon the rapporteur to support this proposal .
The Commission 's document is based on two guiding themes that are lacking in relevant foundation .
First , the Commission suggests that reducing European tobacco production might be beneficial to public health .
I must remind the House that the European Union is a net importer of tobacco and that any reduction in European production will immediately be offset by an increase in imports from third countries .
The Commission 's second line of thought suggests a change in the way the ' tobacco ' CMO supports producers , justified , according to the Commission , by the excessively poor quality of the tobacco produced by European farmers .
In this context , I would remind the Commission that , for example , the aromatic tobaccos grown in Greece are much in demand on the international markets .
In France , tobacco of excellent quality is being produced today , thanks to the development of a dynamic joint-trade organization bringing together producers , processors and distributors , all anxious to promote low-nicotine varieties and introduce tobacco grades in line with market trends .
In order for the ' tobacco ' CMO to function properly , after all , it is important to develop a strong joint-trade structure to provide a counterbalance to the excessive power of certain major multinationals , both as regards defining the specifications that set out quality criteria and as regards price fixing , to prevent the adverse effects of hyperconcentration .
Mr President , we must preserve employment in a loss-making agricultural sector , and we could not accept any reduction in support for European tobacco production unless we had achieved a level of self-sufficiency .
Mr President , for reasons of time I will confine myself to a brief reflection on the hypocrisy of US multinationals , which claim to want to protect consumers ' health .
Rather than conducting this hypocritical campaign , the United States ought to be thinking about doing away with all those electric chairs spread around US territory !
I agree with Mr Rosado Fernandes 's report .
Mr President , very briefly , we agree with the Commission 's findings on the importance of tobacco production for certain areas , but we disagree with its proposals , which conflict with those findings .
The Commission 's proposal to buy up the quotas will result in economic hardship for large regions , increased unemployment and desertion of rural areas .
As for the Research and Information Fund , we will agree the finance involved provided that the Research Fund is extended to cover other products with undesirable and harmful effects , such as alcoholic drinks , fats , hormones and beef , especially now that encephalopathy is a direct danger for consumers .
And of course , we propose that the major tobacco industries should be included .
To those here who believe that abolishing tobacco cultivation in the Union will put a stop to smoking , we want to say that this will not happen . It would only happen if tobacco imports from cheap countries were also banned and if the manufacture of cigarettes were banned as well .
That is the only way to stop people smoking .
Mr President , I should like to go along in general with the objectives of the proposal made by the Commission to improve quality and make the management of quotas more flexible .
I should like to say three things to you , who criticize tobacco : first of all , I should like them to understand the importance of the 300 000 jobs in the sector , in a Europe with no greater tragedy than unemployment .
Secondly , I should like them to understand that tobacco consumption does not depend on the agricultural policy for the sector ; if we reduced European production , currently accounting for barely a third of consumption , that would lead to imports , possibly from the United States .
Thirdly , restructuring a farming sector like tobacco cannot be done overnight , it is very painful , very difficult and it is therefore unrealistic to think that reducing aids would speed up restructuring .
Finally , I should like to thank Mr Rosado Fernandes for his excellent work .
Mr President , three points , in much less than one minute .
The Rosado Fernandes report is along the right lines , because it covers the entire scope of the tobacco industry and does not forget the growers .
The Commission 's report - this has been said thousands of times - simply on the argument of protecting public health - , shields and protects the international tobacco trusts .
And a third point : all those even in here who talk about alternative crops everywhere , firstly do not have the problem in their own country , and secondly have never seen a tobacco plantation in their lives .
Alternative crops are not an option in every case .
Go to the north of Greece and see the hillsides and rocks on which tobacco grows .
Mr President , I , too , would like to congratulate Mr Rosado Fernandes on his report and would like to add , in connection with the tobacco crop produced in Objective 1 regions - the European Union 's poorest regions - that we should not speak demagogically of crop substitution .
What is at issue is not the substitution of tobacco crops by other crops but the provision to the workforce in an area where tobacco is grown of an alternative economic activity capable of providing it with an income precisely where it is , not on the edge of urban areas .
Mr President , I want to congratulate Mr Rosado Fernandes on his report .
It is a report that attempts to deal with the problem sincerely , from the standpoint of European citizens and European cultivators .
Unfortunately , the Commission and the Council are trying to present the issue in a different way , claiming that there is supposedly a contradiction since on the one hand we spend money on an anti-smoking campaign , while on the other hand we subsidize tobacco growers , of whom there are approximately 150 000 within the European Union .
That contradiction , however , is a false contradiction and is part of the effort , despite all that Mr Santer told us yesterday , to cut resources from the European Union and the budget for agriculture , to make that money available for enlargement .
Because if we really wanted to restrict smoking in the European Union , we ought first to close the cigarette factories .
But cigarette factories will continue to operate and tobacco bought from third countries will continue coming into the European Union .
Consequently , their concern is not to protect European citizens but to save money , money intended to serve the cause of enlargement .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am one of those who wish to see an end to the contrast between our policies on health and agriculture .
How long must we go on vainly trying to explain to our citizens how , each day , an average of 1400 Europeans die as a result of smoking and ECU 30 000 is spent campaigning against tobacco , while at the same time some ECU 2.5 million per day is pumped into European tobacco growing ?
We must now take the bull by the horns .
In the long term , aid for tobacco growing has to be eliminated .
We need to make this objective known to the growers now and , in the short term , encourage them to look for alternative crops by means of direct income support .
I do not share the pessimism of the Commission as regards the scope for reconversion .
Furthermore , I am afraid that we shall be having the same debate in ten years ' time if tobacco aid is to be used from now on to improve the quality of tobacco .
While we may have precious little say in this matter , it still remains our duty as politicians to argue for a proper use of public funds .
Mr President , the Commission has tabled a proposal concerning certain changes to tobacco growing .
In my opinion , these proposals still do not address long term policy in this sector .
In its communication to the Agricultural Committee , the Environment Committee has pointed out the long term expediency of phasing out aid for agricultural cultivation .
I share this view .
I think it is wrong to give strong support to this type of cultivation within the framework of agricultural policy .
After all , the roots of the agricultural policy lie in supplying food to the European Union ; the tobacco sector definitely does not fall within this objective .
The areas where tobacco is grown are located within regions receiving Regional Political Aid so it would be better to encourage a change to other forms of cultivation through this type of aid .
A gradual phasing out would almost certainly be of long term benefit for the economic structure in the areas where cultivation takes place as well .
I also think that the Budget Committee 's opinion deserves our total support .
Mr President , the Commission agrees that gradual disengagement would be very serious for regions experiencing major economic problems , and would not have an effect on tobacco consumption .
That is why the aim of the reform is to increase the market value of the tobacco produced in the Union .
To achieve this goal there are the three issues of modulation of the premia , flexibility on the quota and withdrawal from the sector .
On modulation : the market price is the key .
Of course , it does not always accurately reflect the quality but there is no better alternative means of achieving that objective .
On the issue of flexibility on quota transfers and withdrawal from the sector , every possibility should be given to promote transfers of quota from lowquality to high-quality varieties , and individual farmers should be given the opportunity to transfer their quotas to other farmers .
On top of that , a national reserve could be adopted to facilitate adjustment and access to production quotas .
The aim of these measures is to increase the quality of the tobacco produced .
However , we acknowledge that some farmers may not be able to achieve that , and it is for this target population that we propose a safety-net in the form of quota buy-backs or local rural development plans .
I will examine ways to prevent these measures from reducing the production of high-quality varieties - which is certainly not our objective - and to ensure that this is a last-resort solution for those farmers who cannot join in the objective of improving the quality .
Those are the main points in the thinking of the Commission behind its proposals , which I commend to the House .
Mr President , I would just like to repeat what Mr Pasty said .
This is a burning issue and all member of this House are responsible . It would be sad if my report were voted on later on or even tomorrow morning when nobody is here .
VOTES
Mr President , as you have only just taken the chair , may I remind you that at the end of the debate on Mr Raul Rosado Fernandes 's report I asked that the vote on that report , because of its importance , should be scheduled to follow the vote on Mr Argyros 's report , in other words after all the legislative reports and before the own-initiative reports .
It is another legislative report , after all .
I ask that my proposal be put to the vote .
If there are no objections , I can accept your proposal .
Are there any objections ?
( The President established that there were no objections to this proposal )

Mr President , on a point of order under Rule 9 ( 1 ) relating to Annex 1 , Article 4 , where it says : ' Members shall be subject to the obligations imposed on them by the legislation of the Member State in which they are elected , as regards the declaration of interest ' . As we are about to vote on the Tillich report , should not those Members who are in receipt of EAGGF monies ensure they are declared and refrain from voting .
If there is any confusion on that could we at least have some clarification for the future .
The question is rather difficult .
My first impression is that you are right , and I intend to look into the matter further .
( Parliament adopted the motion for a resolution )
Mr President , I should like to ask whether the rapporteur would accept a verbal amendment to this amendment .
The last sentence would then read : ' Calls on the Commission to include reference to territories as well as countries in Annex V. ' If the rapporteur can accept that amendment , then my Group will be able to vote for it .
Mr President , I am afraid I cannot accept that , because it does not actually remove the real problem .
So I would propose - and I hope the House will follow me - that we vote in favour of my amendment .
( Parliament adopted the motion for a resolution )
Mr President , as regards paragraph 8 of Amendment No 6 , I should like to ask whether the rapporteur agrees to take it as an addition to rather than a substitution for paragraph 8 .
Mr Fantuzzi , it is Mr Collins who should ask for that .
I would be nearly happy if it was taken as an addition .
It would be very gracious of the rapporteur if he would accept that .
It is a bit difficult , because we have voted already so it is too late .
I do not agree with that , but I will leave it to my colleagues to decide .
( Parliament adopted the motion for a resolution )
The ad hoc procedure occupies an important place in the budgetary process as regards agricultural spending .
It is consequently of great importance that the wishes of the Committee on Agriculture should be incorporated as far as possible into the mandate of the EP delegation for the conciliation with the Council .
It is therefore a good thing that the two amendments by Mr Mulder have been adopted .
In the end , I voted against the Tillich report , however , for the following reasons .
Firstly , I regret that the proposal from the Committee on Agriculture to reduce the burden on the 1998 budget by shifting the payments for oil seeds has not been accepted .
I anticipate great problems with the rapporteur 's proposed financing of the Council 's decision on agricultural prices .
The underspending in individual budget lines over the past three years seems to me an extremely weak basis for reducing next year 's appropriations .
I also reject the proposal to create a reserve of ECU 329 million .
It must surely be quite clear that there is no scope for an agricultural reserve within the present tight budgetary margins .
Furthermore , the continuing criticism from the EP of the Commission 's estimates of agricultural expenditure strikes me as rather curious .
It appears from the Brinkhorst and Fabra Vallés report on supplementary and amending budget No 1 for 1997 that in 1996 , the rate of utilization in the agriculture category was considerably higher than in the categories on which the EP has the final say , such as internal and external policy .
Would it not therefore be more sensible to look critically for once at the scale of the appropriations in these latter categories ?
Secondly , I am against the rapporteur 's proposal to reopen the debate on the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure .
It is often maintained that agricultural spending is immune from any form of democratic control .
That is very much open to question .
I would merely point to the scope which the European Parliament has to submit proposed modifications to the agriculture budget .
Where these do not entail an increase in the budget , the Council needs a qualified majority in order to reject them .
The Council is also under pressure from the national parliaments , which categorically reject any increase in the ceiling on own resources .
This means that the days of unchecked growth in agricultural spending really are now in the past .
on the Brinkhorst and Fabra Vallés report ( A4-0232 / 97 )
The undersigned have abstained from voting .
This is not because we are indifferent to the efforts made within the area covered by the report .
But we think that greater efforts should have been made to examine whether more personnel could have been made available through redeployment of the Commission 's existing workforce .
The three areas for which new appointments are proposed are precisely those areas where the EU system itself has contributed to the occurrence of the problem .
The need for the 35 posts in GD XXIV , for the co-ordination of the Scientific Committee 's work resulting from the BSE crisis , has arisen as a result of a fundamentally misguided agricultural policy which has meant that animals have been treated the same as basic commodities .
As for the posts intended to combat fraud , these are linked to the programmes created by the EU own hands , Phare , Tacis , Meda and Echo .
The Audit Court 's proposed new posts are due partially to the same problem .
The European Union 's inherent inconsistencies will continue to cause problems which will require action in the future to put right the Union 's own mistakes .
By simply creating new posts there is a risk that EU bureaucracy will continue to proliferate .
on the Mouskouri report ( A4-0237 / 97 )
We are all very strong supporters of the campaign to promote books and reading , which is why we welcome the Ariane programme .
Our discussions with the Commission and the Council have been numerous and sometimes difficult , but they have always been constructive , and my thanks for that go to our representatives , the rapporteur and the whole of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media .
We are coming to the end of the conciliation procedure and we are going to adopt the joint text .
However , like many other Honourable Members , I regret the paltry size of the appropriation eventually made to the programme .
It 's a start , one could say , but it could have been and should have been a more resounding start .
Let us hope that Europe 's citizens will be able to put it to good use and to convince the Council that , undoubtedly , ECU 7 million is too little !
. ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats voted for the Mouskouris report on the ARIANE programme today .
The principal aim of the ARIANE programme is to support the translation of works written in lesser known languages in the EU , for example Danish .
The Danish Social Democrats are happy that the Conciliation Committee has finally reached agreement after a long period of negotiations .
The ARIANE programme is of great importance to the dissemination of literature written in lesser known languages .
There are many literary works which seldom reach a wider audience because they are written in a language mastered by few .
The ARIANE programme opens up the possibility for Danish authors to get assistance in having their books translated into other EU languages .
The same applies to other minority languages in the EU .
The ARIANE programme can thus contribute to intercultural understanding between the peoples of the EU countries .
The Group of the European Radical Alliance voted without enthusiasm in favour of Mrs Mouskouri 's report on the Ariane programme , which is designed to sustain and promote reading , especially through translation .
We were unenthusiastic because the results of the conciliation procedure are disappointing by comparison with the objectives pursued , and we regret that the unanimous voting procedure which , pursuant to Article 128 , is standard in cultural matters once again enabled certain Member States to block the Union 's cultural policy .
We had hoped that the Amsterdam Treaty would bring greater flexibility and introduce qualified majority voting .
Those hopes were vain : the Ariane programme has been cut to two years , with its budget slashed by four-fifths .
Admittedly , the Commission is promising us a framework law which should allow cultural matters to be better programmed .
In the meantime , reading is one thing that will suffer from all this procrastination ....
The conciliation decision on Ariane is welcome , following the lengthy negotiations , with all the stages which were involved .
It is welcome even though Parliament has had to give way as regards the budget it was calling for , and although only ECU 7 million is to be allocated to the two-year programme .
The programme will now finally acquire a legal basis and actually get under way .
Ariane is mainly a programme of subsidies for translation .
Its purpose is to increase the knowledge and dissemination of works representative of the Member States ' culture .
At the same time European people 's awareness of culture and history can be directly enhanced and cultural diversity strengthened .
Projects under the programme are intended to support and supplement national and regional measures by developing cooperation through networks and partnerships .
It is intended that cooperation should be extended to third countries , especially in Central and Eastern Europe .
Important participants in the work will be international cultural organizations , especially the Council of Europe .
Existing research and education in the field should be put to effective use . Further vocational training for translators is , quite rightly , one of the priorities of the programme , and is essential in the interests of promoting a high standard of translation .
The professional status of translators should be clarified , and up-to-date guides and databases should be established to assist their work .
From the point of view of the future of European culture , I believe it is very important to target aid at small language areas and translation involving the rarer languages .
I am glad that these opinions expressed by the Committee on Culture and by Parliament as a whole have been taken into account in the conciliation decision .
The individual quality and richness of European culture lies precisely in its living diversity , which must be consciously cherished in the face of the pressures of an increasingly unified information society .
Promoting the whole field of books and reading requires far more in the way of measures and resources than those provided for by this programme .
I hope that the Ariane programme will be a successful first step in efforts to develop and renew the whole European book sector .
on the Fontaine report ( A4-0246 / 97 )
Nicole Fontaine 's report on the free movement of doctors is nearing its concluding stage .
The conciliation procedure made it possible for most of Parliament 's proposals to be adopted , and I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on that .
It means that we should soon see better harmonization of the training given to our doctors , together with an improvement in their freedom of movement within the Union .
We cannot fail to welcome this result .
Even so , I would remind the House that although the sky is brightening for the medical profession that is far from true of many other professions and many other categories of diploma .
We must reassert here that the genuine recognition of diplomas and genuine freedom of movement for professionals , are vital elements in European integration and in the development of European citizenship .
So let us rejoice with the doctors , by all means , but let us also put pressure on our governments to speed up the recognition of diplomas and so provide the kind of response for which today 's young people are waiting , with growing impatience .
The recognition of doctors ' qualifications throughout the European Union is a significant step towards the creation of a single market and with greater possibilities of success for our professionals .
These are , however , objectives requiring the safeguard of personal interests , with compliance with rules and a harmonization of criteria .
In the case of medical practice , it is vital to have a throughout knowledge of the patients ' language - or else they , especially the poorest or least well-off - would be unable to make their situation understood .
The free exercise of professional practice implies the harmonization of rules of access to education , otherwise there will be a feeling that a given country , in isolation , is determined to set a system of numerus clausus to meet the demand of its own qualified doctors , when the market is open to people from countries without the same protection .
It would make no sense , for example , to have a numerus clausus at Lisbon University and not at the other universities in the country , as qualified doctors from other universities could then have access to jobs in the Lisbon region .
For the same reason , there has to be a harmonization of the numerus clausus between the various countries in a single area which , by means of this Directive , would offer the working conditions of a national area .
on the Dybkjaer recommendation ( A4-0235 / 97 )
I welcome the Dybkjær report on the review of the Fifth Environmental Action Programme .
Along with my colleagues , I would like to thank Mrs Dybkjær for all the work she has done in producing a report which significantly improves the Commission 's original framework document .
Due to the fact that the report deals with many important issues , there have been many representations from interested parties and particularly from industry bodies .
The amendment that has caused the greatest amount of interest is Amendment No 34 to Article 11.4 , which proposes to elaborate the waste hierarchy .
The waste hierarchy has been in existence since 1989 , when the Commission first proposed it in their Waste Management Strategy Paper of that year .
I myself recommended it to Parliament in the 1990 report on that strategy .
Mrs Dybkjær has naturally added methods , such as composting and biomethanization , whose use has increased with new technology .
I think this is the right approach for the present time and I urge Parliament to support it .
Industry has tried to focus our attention on various independent reports commissioned by the Commission , which suggest that the hierarchy that Mrs Dybkjær has proposed is too rigid and therefore denies them the flexibility they feel that they require .
Without wishing to dismiss these reports out of hand , I do believe that there are question marks over some of the assumptions which form the basis of the report .
We should also remember that we are at second reading stage and that conciliation will begin soon .
This is not the right time to start changing a long-standing policy because of heavy lobbying .
There is a hearing on waste this autumn , organized by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
This and other issues will be debated vigorously then .
That will be a much better forum in which to think about fine-tuning the waste hierarchy .
Once again , I would urge colleagues to give their full support to this report .
The vote in the House today shows once again that when the time comes for the European Parliament to turn the fine words spoken in this House on the environment into real decisions , it is not able to .
The decision by the European Parliament simply means that the road to sustainable development is no longer straight and it will now take longer to complete the journey .
All those amendment proposals which really should have galvanised the Commission and the Council to make them react and take environmental issues really seriously , did not gain enough votes .
I am referring particularly to those amendment proposals which concern the need for a reduction in energy usage , for serious investment in renewable energy resources and a reduction in the average fuel consumption of petrol driven private cars to 0.5 ltrs per mile by the year 2005 at the latest and 0.3 ltrs per mile by the year 2010 .

There is a serious contradiction between the world leadership that the European Union claims to want to have in terms of environmental policy and the vagueness of the wording of the Commission proposal and the common position of the Council on the programme ' Towards sustainable development ' .
In the presentation of Agenda 2000 - defining the political guidelines for the beginning of the 21st century - the Commission stated yesterday its commitment to integrate the environment into its global strategy .
Yet political declarations and international conferences are not enough to determine lasting changes .
The Rio Agenda , the Convention on Climate and various others have yet to match up to what was promised .
The Commission 's Agenda 2000 runs a similar risk , if the will to integrate the environment into other policies is not translated into measures , with timetables and penalties for transgressors .
That is the merit of the Dybkjaer report : giving concrete shape to the vague environmental ' considerations ' hammered out in the Commission text .
Although I cannot agree with all the proposals it contains , the report makes references to risk-reduction policies , the protection of diversity , energy , taxation , public health , waste management and it refutes the Council 's refusal to agree to proposals that would guarantee citizens ' rights .
I therefore refrained from voting against certain measures even when I did not agree with them , opting instead for abstention .
Commitments without deadlines , figures or penalties do not fool anyone .
on the Jarzembowski report ( A4-0243 / 97 )
My group is obliged to vote against this report .
We have voted in favour of the amendments by the Committee on the Environment , but to no avail .
The report has in fact postponed indefinitely the internalization of the external costs of goods transport .
However , there has been enough discussion and research for this internalization now finally to be applied .
The level of the European user charge is so ridiculously low that not one tonne less will be carried by road .
The shift to rail transport consequently remains a pipe-dream , even though virtually everyone in Parliament says they think it is essential .
Lastly , the EU has a great responsibility when it comes to finding a solution for the Alpine region .
But it is behaving more like an obstacle here , with Parliament 's support .
In the negotiations with Switzerland , all that counts is our own short-sighted interest in clearing the way for 40-tonne trucks , and Austria is now being given a special arrangement for the Brenner pass .
That will not provide a lasting solution to the problems of the Alps , however , and the issue will undoubtedly reappear on our agenda until a proper solution has been found .
The report presented by Mr Jarzembowski introduces significant changes to the proposal for a Council Directive on the charging of heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructures .
This proposal for a Directive is intended to replace Directive 93 / 89 / EEC , the ' Eurovignette Directive ' , which was annulled in 1995 by the Court of Justice .
The European Parliament thus has the opportunity to review the scope of a very important text , with a view to more efficient and fine-tuned charging of heavy goods vehicles within the European Union .
This is also an opportunity to provide some kind of response , keenly awaited , to the problems created by ever-increasing heavy goods traffic : traffic congestion , environmental harm , damage to infrastructures .
The Commission 's proposal should introduce some aspects of harmonization mentioned in the Green Paper ' Towards fair and efficient pricing in transport ' , which sets out the long-term guidelines for a policy of charging on infrastructural costs and the costs of congestion in road transport .
A fundamental principle is involved here : the principle of total recovery of the costs of equipment and operation , which should be charged on to the various users in accordance with harmonized criteria .
The present system is based on all-in levies .
The proposal is that differentiation should be introduced , as a function of the degree of infrastructural damage attributable to the vehicles , and the pollution they create .
So this is an additional differentiation , based on environmental criteria , by virtue of a selective classification .
The European Parliament 's report introduces two important amendments to this text .
First , Parliament calls upon the Commission to take due account , in its proposal for a Directive on the charging of heavy goods vehicles , of the thoughts set out in the Green Paper on ' the internalization of the external costs of transport ' and the conclusions of the corresponding parliamentary resolution of 30 January 1997 .
Secondly , toll charges must be set at a level such that the revenue generated does not exceed the costs of construction , operation and development of the infrastructures on which the tolls are levied , plus a rate of return equivalent to the possible return on similar investment projects .
Consequently , I voted in favour of Mr Jarzembowski 's report , hoping that all the points to which I have referred will indeed be taken into account in the future proposal for a Directive .
The environment in the Alps is extremely sensitive .
There are narrow passes which are under considerable pressure from environmentally damaging emissions .
As much traffic as possible should go by rail .
It should be possible to transfer trailer and container loads to the railways for transport across the Alps .
The steps taken for heavy goods vehicles to pay tolls to use roads should be given our full support as it is the right way to take part in their funding and an incentive to use means of transport that are less polluting and lead to less congestion - such as rail , sea and rivers .
However , we cannot understand , therefore , the concern over not extending this to light vehicles in relation to which , in terms of their use of roads , the same reasoning is valid .
It is a financial logic - contrary to what has happened in Portugal - to be applied especially in metropolitan areas , where the infra-structure costs are highest , and it is unacceptable for them to be paid for in full by all the citizens of the country , including the poorest in the least well-off regions , whereas instead we should try to get people to use public transport which is less pollutant and leads to less congestion .
The report by the Committee on Transport has significantly amended all sections of the Commission 's proposal .
As regards motor vehicle taxes , I supported the amendments of the Committee on Transport aimed at removing the maximum rate and simplifying the proposal .
There is little point in introducing a maximum rate 30 times higher than the minimum .
My main objection to the system of taxes proposed by the Committee on Transport is that it does not distinguish between Euro I and Euro II vehicles .
Recent research in the Netherlands has shown that the use of less polluting engines has reduced emissions of nitrogen oxides and sulphur dioxide , despite an increase in the total number of kilometres travelled in road transport .
I supported the simplification of user charges proposed by the Committee on Transport .
The important point here is the differentiation of rates to allow for a reduction in European user charges for the least polluting engines .
I am opposed to the deletion of the provisions concerning external costs and sensitive routes from the Commission 's proposal .
I recognize that there are still a good many difficulties in establishing the external costs .
I also appreciate that the rules now being proposed are temporary and will apply for only three years .
However , I believe that a cautious start must be made on attributing the external costs , because even without the study which is to be produced by the Commission , it is clear that road transport , particularly in vulnerable environments , entails costs which are not adequately reflected in the current charges .
The special provision which the Committee on Transport is making for the Brenner pass does not go far enough .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of most of the amendments tabled by the Green Group .
I have abstained from voting on this report .
I think that vehicle taxation and road tolls ought to be determined by the Member States .
The report proposal is better than the Commission 's proposal as the report rejects the proposal that a maximum level be set for vehicle taxation .
But I still cannot support it .
on the Berger report ( A4-0238 / 97 )
I cannot support the proposed increase in the minimum financial requirement that a road haulage operator must possess in order to remain in business .
The Commission proposes increasing the present minimum financial requirement , in terms of capital and reserves , of ECU 3 , 000 per vehicle to ECU 9 , 000 for the first vehicle , with a further increase of ECU 5 , 000 for each goods vehicle over 6 tonnes or for passenger vehicles seating more than 20 people .
I will oppose these proposals because it would inevitably make it more difficult for individuals to start up new businesses in the transport sector .
This would have the following consequences : reduce the opportunities for small and medium enterprises with limited resources to establish themselves in the transport sector ; favour larger , wellestablished operators with greater capital reserves , thereby reducing competition in this area ; discourage increased enterprise and initiative in the transport sector .
on the Virgin report ( A4-0241 / 97 )
What are we to do with our wastes ?
That is a major issue of the present time , and will be a focus of our future industrial development .
Hitherto , contemporary society has achieved nothing but the mass production of waste without ever worrying about how to dispose of it or process it .
Should we export these wastes , trade in them ?
Should we , in certain circumstances , threaten third countries that refuse our wastes ?
The Commission 's proposal is unacceptable and the report presented by Mr Virgin admirably explains why .
The European Union must not adopt a didactic stance , and would do itself credit by adopting a more constructive one .
We need to deploy all the resources , financial and otherwise , of a genuine policy for the treatment of wastes of all kinds .
We can no longer avert our eyes and shirk our responsibilities .
The protection of our environment comes at a price , and that price must not be human !
The Commission must adopt an attitude worthy of its ambitions .
The European Parliament can assist the Commission here , and that assistance can include bringing pressure to bear on egotistical States .
. ( DA ) In connection with the export of non-hazardous waste to non-OECD countries for recycling , the Commission is required to ask each individual non-OECD country whether it wants to receive waste for recycling , what type of waste it may want to accept and , finally , what control procedures are to be applied .
In 1993-94 , the Commission wrote to several non-OECD countries .
The authorities of several countries replied that they did not want to receive any or only certain forms of non-hazardous waste , while other non-OECD countries chose not to respond to the Commission 's inquiry .
Both types of response must be fully accepted , and the European Union must prohibit the export of non-hazardous waste to the countries approached .
According to the Commission proposal it should continue to be possible to export non-hazardous waste to the countries approached ( both to those countries which replied that they did not want to receive any or only certain forms of non-hazardous waste for recycling and to those countries which did not reply ) , using a cumbersome authorization procedure .
The Commission 's justification that the countries in question may not be fully aware of the significance of their response for their industrial sector is unacceptable .
I therefore support the rapporteur 's move to incorporate the ' precautionary principle ' into the Commission proposal for a Council Regulation .
The countries approached must of course be free to change their minds , so that the export of non-hazardous waste to the country may be permitted , in which case the comitology procedure would apply in respect of the Annex to the Regulation .
. ( DA ) I would have liked the Commission proposal to have been rejected in its entirety , because it is quite simply unacceptable to disregard the judgments and decisions of independent countries .
But , as Mr Virgin corrects the Commission 's errors in his report , I gladly vote for his report and the excellent amendments from the Environment Committee .
The EU may be the world 's biggest trading bloc , but that does not give it the right - rather the contrary - to act in the way the Commission proposes here .
It is disgraceful and embarrassing for the Commission to take such an arrogant and patronizing attitude .
How can the Commission bring itself to say that countries which have replied that they do not want to receive ' green ' list waste may not be fully aware of the significance of their response for those of their industries that may be able to use waste from the ' green ' list for recovery or further processing ?
It is quite unacceptable for the Commission to try to force countries , which have expressly or tacitly indicated that they do not want to receive certain types of waste , to accept it anyway .
If a country has indicated that it is not willing to receive any or only certain forms of ' green ' list waste , its wishes must be respected .
The shipment of waste must be prohibited and not merely regarded as ' red ' list waste , subject to stricter authorization procedures .
The shipment should not take place under any circumstances !
The shipment of waste to countries which did not reply to the Commission 's letter should also be prohibited , because this can only be taken as a signal that they are not interested in receiving such waste .
The shipment must be prohibited and not just reassigned to the stricter procedure for ' red ' list waste !
A further reason why these shipments should not take place is that there are doubts about the ' green ' list .
Although most of the waste included on the ' green ' list is not hazardous , there are some types of waste on this list which have been found to have hazardous properties .
Is it the intention just to force through the shipment of this waste to non-OECD countries even when they do not want it ?
The EU cannot , like the mammoth it has turned into , simply trample over other independent countries .
That is the kind of behaviour the Commission is seeking to legitimize through its proposal , which is disrespectful and deeply offensive .
on the W.G. van Velzen report ( A4-0215 / 97 )
We have several times had occasion to mention the importance of the concept of universal service in the context of the opening-up of the telecommunications markets to competition .
Parliament has several times restated its interest in this concept of universal service as a guarantee of equality and freedom of access to the telecommunications services for Europe 's citizens .
I can only regret , once again , the fact that the Commission refuses to regard the universal service as sufficiently important to be the subject of a Directive .
Today , too , I must also express my surprise at the fact that a mere communication should be thought sufficient to cover this difficult subject of evaluating the costing and financing of this universal service .
The impact of communications , as we well know , is constantly being reduced , and this communication - which is highly dirigistic in some respects - is singularly lacking in legal weight , as the members of the competent committee have very rightly pointed out .
I therefore deplore the piecemeal approach adopted by the Commission to the universal service and call upon it , at long last , to prepare a strong , all-embracing Directive on a subject that is essential for the future .
The European Union , and all its Member States , need strong signals to demonstrate the commitment of the Community 's institutions to the concept of universal service which , if we really want it to , can destroy the ultraliberal image that has done so much damage to Europe .
The undersigned have voted against the report for the following main reasons :
1.The report is a clear example of the technical and bureaucratic problems which arise when an important public infrastructure is handed over to commercial interests.2.There will be complications which will affect consumers when a fragmented system , such as the one currently proposed for telecommunications , comes into operation.3.Infrastructures such as this should be maintained as national entities .
National systems should be publicly owned and subject to transparency and control .
It is easier to establish connections between national systems.4.The use of private operators will deprive the people of their constitutional protection for telephone privacy which is a central civil and democratic right.- on the Argyros report ( A4-0213 / 97 )
We are trying to find something here which in such a thematically limited form is going to be difficult to achieve , an ' effective framework of regulations for the European telecommunications framework ' .
This will not be achieved by an increasing number of detailed regulations dealing with the technical - or in this case legal - aspects .
Mr Argyros ' report , particularly now that it has been supplemented , by consensus , by the rapporteur and Mrs Read , retrieves from this situation as much practical detail as it is possible to retrieve from it .
We therefore agree with it .
What is needed , however , and very much overdue , is a thorough reorientation in the philosophy that lies behind this scheme , for example with regard to the scope of the solutions that we are seeking . It is high time that we learned to make a distinction between making it more flexible , opening it up to new user needs , liberalizing it , individualizing it and privatizing it , and we in this Parliament must ensure that the EU institutions finally tackle the problem of an industrial policy for the internal market , a democratic planning task which is made necessary by the challenge of the transition towards the information society .
on the W.G. van Velzen ( A4-0215 / 97 ) , Argyros ( A4-0213 / 97 ) and Herman ( A4-0240 / 97 ) reports
. ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats today voted for the three reports indicated .
The legislation on Open Network Provisions is at present spread over various directives .
As an argument for collecting them into a single directive , the Argyros report states that the legislation , as it is now , is fragmented and difficult to find one 's way around .
The Danish Social Democrats do not believe that collecting the legislation into one directive would ease access to the relevant law .
A combined , consolidated text would create an inflexible situation .
The directive would need frequent revision and there would be a risk of often ending up in a situation where the complex of laws is obsolete before it has even come into force .
The Danish Social Democrats think that the establishment of a European regulatory authority for telecommunications , as referred to in the Herman and Van Velzen reports , is a good idea .
It is inconsistent to harmonize an area of law and at the same time maintain fifteen separate national systems .
But the tasks of the authority would have to be clearly defined .
The Danish Social Democrats favour the idea that any such authority should contribute to effective standardization and harmonization and that it should address the need for coordination between the EU countries with respect to third countries .
On the other hand , the Danish Social Democrats oppose the idea that the authority should function as an appeal body for cross-frontier tendering procedures and that it should be given powers to issue harmonized codes .
on the Rosado Fernandes report ( A4-0214 / 97 )
Mr President , I am giving this explanation of vote not on behalf of the group , but for myself personally .
As seems to be the case in other groups too , in relation to tobacco there are different views in our group , though not fundamentally different , but people vote differently according to the way they feel .
One view was that if we are in favour of restricting the cultivation of tobacco , then we must offer those regions and businesses who depend on tobacco growing some alternatives , by means of compensatory payments and subsidies , so that jobs are maintained in these rural areas and so that businesses are not destroyed .
A simple policy of cutting resources , which is then made out to be a health policy , must not lead to the destruction of these existences .
From that point of view , we should not make such a direct and hasty combination of health policy and tobacco support .
If we want to live a healthy life , we can do so , even if tobacco goes on being grown , and if we want to live an unhealthy life , then we can do that too , even if tobacco is no longer grown .
It is a question of regulating the market for tobacco , and deciding how it should be organized , and the EU 's health policy is a different issue altogether .
in writing . ( SV ) We think it is fundamentally wrong for the European Union to give aid for the cultivation of a substance which has such a damaging effect on human health .
It is absurd to subsidise a product by up to 80 percent or more in order to give the producers a minimum income .
The commodity has an insignificant market value as well .
To pay out 1 billion ECUs per annum for a crop which , in total , gives employment to only 135 000 tobacco growers is a high price if you calculate the amount per capita .
We are talking about approximately 75 0-100 000 Swedish Crowns per person in direct income support .
A future enlargement of the EU will make this organisation even more expensive if , for example , Poland becomes a Member of the EU and is given the right to receive aid on the same conditions .
We think that direct income support for the cultivation of tobacco should be phased out as soon as possible .
Strategic local development plans should be drawn up which allow for a change to other crops , the planting of forests , opportunities for voluntarily giving up tobacco cultivation and income guarantees restricted by time limits .
We think that we must set a specific date as a target by which time aid will have been completely abolished .
It is perfectly sensible to make a decision that all EU aid for tobacco growing should be phased out during the next programme period and will cease completely by the year 2005 .
It is important to set a final date otherwise there will be no compelling reason to change .
Although tobacco production is the target of strong opposition from the anti-smoking public , it has proved positive in preventing the desertification of some European regions .
The Commission 's analysis is positive as it recognizes the social importance of tobacco production in the Union and the fact that it is a non-surplus-producing activity .
We would emphasize most strongly and denounce the fact that this analysis does not make reference to the price stability of Community products . This contrasts with the price fluctuations which occur on the uncontrolled free market , which profit the multinationals .
We must stress that a ban on growing tobacco , advocated in the name of public health issues through the buying back of farmers ' quotas , would lead to the permanent disappearance of tobacco growing in Europe , with two serious consequences : loss of a whole range of knowledge and know-how built up over the centuries in all the Mediterranean countries of the Union , and the relocation of first-processing factory units , with financial and political costs deriving from the loss of tens of thousands of jobs .
The link between a drop in European production and beneficial effects on public health is not a true one : the drop in production benefits only the cigarette multinationals which would dominate the world market .
The Commission bears responsibility for never having laid down quality criteria : it has been left to the large processing companies to define these .
Today the Committee on Agriculture is proposing the adoption of the following quality promotion measures :
1.modulation of premia should be 20-25 per cent at the outside ; 2. the rebate of approximately 2 per cent from premia should fund research into improving the quality of known varieties ; 3. specific measures need to be taken towards defining the concept of quality through the setting up of an independent body.Any attempt to persuade tobacco farmers to leave the business should , therefore , be rejected , as there are no surpluses , and the transfer of individual quotas to young farmers , while keeping them linked with the least favoured zones , should be facilitated .
I abstained from voting as I oppose all continued EU aid for tobacco growing .
Tobacco - particularly for many young people - leads to damage to health which is far too serious to be able to justify any form of state aid for its cultivation .
There may be serious consequences for those farmers who currently earn their living by growing tobacco which is why it is important that these farmers are given aid to change to other types of crops .
But we will not bring about the necessary restructuring through continued subsidies .
This well balanced report offers a degree of comfort to tobacco producers whose farms , let me remind the House , are generally located in the poorest southern regions of Europe .
It is unrealistic to believe that smoking in Europe can be stopped by stopping tobacco production in Europe .
Too many multinationals have interests in tobacco consumption : they would simply take their custom elsewhere , and only the American groups would benefit from our complacent other-worldliness if we were to follow the opinion of the Greens in this House .
I also support the use of research funds to try to find a better quality product , and particularly research geared to reducing the nicotine content , a harmful product of tobacco .
I am glad this House is supporting this report , the economic repercussions of which are so important .
The principal problem for Europeans is unemployment and it was not in vain that the Amsterdam European Council decided to concentrate on the unemployment / employment issue , placing it , as it put it , at the top of the list .
Should it , therefore , not be demanded that maintenance of employment be the basic premise and the unambiguous condition for any actions and measures included in the new regulations ?
However , Mr Commissioner , some of the measures contained in its proposals actually destroy jobs .
In Granada , Extremadura and other Objective 1 zones , thousands of families depend on tobacco-growing for their livelihood .
If the Commission 's statement that it wishes to promote employment for women and farmers is true , it cannot later cynically pad out its proposals with all-purpose words , such as quality , which it does not define , which conceal hypocritical policies which destroy jobs .
Disengagement from the sector would be one more disaster leading to an increase in the drift towards the towns and cities .
How is it possible to speak rhetorically of rural development and in this manner dismantle a sector , involving a product such as tobacco , which has a market ?
The Commission has not responded to my request for facts and figures about the social impact of its proposals on employment , but it should be aware that we will be quantifying all the aspects of this reform which might have a retrogressive effect .
We will not be voting for amendment 6 , not even as an addition , because its effect will be harmful .
Last-minute deals between anti-smoking lobbyists cannot conceal the fact that abandonment of the sector in favour of extraCommunity interests and markets is not an option for the future which improves the present situation . A new COM in raw tobacco is justified only if it is capable of improving the current situation for European citizens .
I would also draw attention to modulation of the premium as a function of quality because , in certain Member States , this could give rise to detrimental effects which would even go against the desired objective of quality .
EU agricultural policy should be environment , health and consumer friendly and should include a gradual reduction of aid for agriculture .
EU aid for tobacco growing cannot be justified while the EU is also supporting projects to reduce the use of tobacco for health reasons .
An immediate , overnight abolition of subsidies would lead to high unemployment among growers and breeders and would have a serious negative impact on rural areas .
It is our view that we should gradually abolish giving aid and cease completely by the year 2005 .
We must concentrate our efforts vigorously on research and support for the development of alternative crops , via the Structural Funds for example .
The EU 's model of using approximately 9 billion Swedish Crowns to support the production of a product such as tobacco , which is damaging to health , while using 0.1 billion Swedish Crowns for the fight against cancer is both wrong and awash with contradictions .
The reform of the raw tobacco sector has led to a number of movements to protect public health , often with good intentions , but unclear in most cases .
If certain aspects of the Commission 's proposal and many of the amendments in this report were put into practice , tobacco production in the European Union would vanish and be replaced by cheaper imports from non-Community countries .
Contrary to what some people think , consumption would not go down , public health would not be protected , only the profits of the multinational processing companies would go up .
We are certain that that is not the aim of the many authors or supporters of the amendments rejected by the European Parliament .
On the other hand , we should not forget that tobacco production is concentrated in the South , in Objective 1 regions , that this is a labour-intensive sector , that there are no viable alternative crops and that , being on the agenda of the future of the CAP , it makes huge contributions to environmental protection and maintaining the population of certain regions , some of them mountainous .
Nor should we forget that , without jobs ( supposedly a priority , according to a good deal of rhetoric ) , without incomes , without alternatives and without prospects for a dignified way of life , the mental and physical health of far more than 150 000 people employed in this sector would be far worse than the harm done by the smoke of a cigarette that would undoubtedly continue to be produced any way .
Investment obviously has to be increased into ways of avoiding tobacco consumption and boosting research into the treatment of related diseases .
However , it is obvious that tobacco consumption will not be cut or avoided by means of measures taken against tobacco farming , in poor regions , as that would only increase unemployment ; reducing tobacco consumption can only be achieved by educating people , by prevention and by limiting the enormous power and profits of the transnational processing companies , which would only have their powers increased by some of the amendments that were tabled .
As they were rejected , the report is now a basis for alternatives to be found to the Commission 's proposal on reforming the tobacco COM , which merits our overall agreement and has even included amendments that we tabled during the debate in the Committee on Agriculture .
First of all I should like to congratulate Mr Fernandes , the rapporteur , for the excellent work he has done and for the approach taken by the report .
We fully agree with its contents and shall support it in the vote .
The positions of those who would like to withdraw all support for tobacco producers clearly reflect a kind of fundamentalism with regard to smokers , and I have the suspicion that , rather than protecting consumers ' health , they are fighting to protect the health of the budgets of tobacco multinationals .
Indeed , where is the sense in maintaining that the health of European consumers is directly linked to the production of tobacco in Europe , unless at the same time provision were made for a strict limitation of tobacco imports from outside Europe ?
Or maybe these health ideologists are planning a return to pre-common market policies , or indeed to the autarchic states of the pre-war period ?
The Alleanza Nazionale group in the European Parliament considers , therefore , that production premia must not be reduced and that support for high-quality production must be strengthened , and agrees with the rapporteur as regards the setting up of an independent body involving producers , which , in supervising quality or arbitrating on doubts with regard to classifications , would prevent the current fragmentation among producers ' associations and promote tobacco quality , concentrating not only on greater variety in tobacco , but also on the relationship between quality and health .
The common organization of the tobacco market should , therefore , provide an incentive not to abandon existing activities and support the transfer of individual quotas to young farmers , while keeping them linked with the least favoured areas .
I welcome the massive vote just cast by this House in favour of the Rosado Fernandes report .
I was surprised to note , however , that the wildest opponents of our tobacco producers were in many cases the very people who endlessly and enthusiastically argue in favour of liberalizing the selling of drugs in Europe .
Quite apart from theological quibbles , which have no part to play in this debate , what we wanted to do was to support the economic and social part played by the 150 , 000 tobacco producers in the Member States of the Union , and also to support the joint-trade organizations , hoping to encourage their efforts to produce quality European products .
In a sector of production that makes a loss for the Union it is our duty , and it is in our interests , to encourage initiatives by our own producers .
That was the strategy that underlay the creation of the Common Agricultural Policy , and we should stand by it .
We must at all costs avoid a situation where European policy enables the big multinationals to flood our countries with the surplus tobacco production from Florida or Virginia or any other third country , otherwise the Community would be working against the very interests which it is supposed to defend and protect .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.50 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Topical and urgent debate
The next item is topical and urgent debate .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
( B4-0632 / 97 ) by Mr Hory , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the situation in Cambodia ; - ( B4-0635 / 97 ) by Mr Pasty and Mr Azzolini , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the situation in Cambodia ; - ( B4-0637 / 97 ) by Mr Goerens and Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Cambodia ; - ( B4-0641 / 97 ) by Mr Pettinari , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the political situation in Cambodia ; - ( B4-0666 / 97 ) by Mr Schwaiger and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the situation in Cambodia ; - ( B4-0675 / 97 ) by Mrs Junker and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Cambodia ; - ( B4-0676 / 97 ) by Mr Titley and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Cambodia ; - ( B4-0693 / 97 ) by Mr Telkämper and Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the V Group , on Cambodia .
Mr President , four or five years ago the European States made enormous efforts to enable the entire Cambodian population to register on electoral rolls and vote to determine their own future .
We believed at the time that we had finally reached the end of a chapter : a chapter of genocide , assassination , ambush , arbitrary arrest and summary execution .
We were wrong .
Today , people are being shot on sight in the streets of Phnom Penh and Siem Reap .
People are being arrested , members of the Funcinpec or the PDLB are being executed , and anyone failing to declare explicit allegiance to Hun Sen is being persecuted .
So what are we to do ?
First , we must exert pressure for a return to the spirit and letter of the Paris agreements .
Next , we must unreservedly support the action of the United Nations and the ICRC .
Finally , we must freeze the 450 million dollars that were promised by the World Bank and postpone the adoption of the report on the cooperation agreements .
Mr President , it is not surprising that a country in which genocide has occurred , such as Cambodia , should take a long time to reach a balance .
The military coup which has now taken place is threatening to plunge the country into chaos once again .
It seems as if the moral and material support which we have given from outside in the past has been for nothing .
Democracy is being violated , opposition leaders murdered , and journalists and lawyers are having to go into hiding .
Has the prospect of stability in Cambodia now disappeared for good ?
I do not think so .
There are one or two positive signs .
Firstly , ASEAN has spoken in very critical terms about Cambodia 's proposed accession .
So the region itself is taking stock of its position .
And then there is the promise of elections .
We need to seize on that : we must insist on being able to send observers who can ensure basic human rights .
This message is set out very clearly in the resolution , which is strongly supported by my group .
Mr President , recent events in Cambodia once again cast doubt on the ability of that country to pursue the process of democratization and reconstruction .
What is more , Cambodia has lost all credibility with the international community as regards respecting its commitments , especially those entered into in the Paris agreements .
We are not alone in being so harsh in our judgement of Cambodia . ASEAN , too , seems to have come to the end of its tether , so much so that it has postponed Cambodia 's accession to that organization , which is unusual to say the least .
It is sad indeed that things should have reached this stage , because unless Cambodia once again begins to behave in a way that is compatible with the international agreements , and especially the Paris agreements , it will be cutting itself off from all support - support which , however , it desperately needs .
Mr President , I think that we ought now to be reflecting on the appointment , only yesterday evening , of a new Prime Minister in Cambodia .
Ung Huot has been appointed to replace Norodom Ranariddh .
This also demonstrates the complexity of the situation in Cambodia and shows that Cambodia has not yet completed its process of political stabilization .
I think that it is the European Union 's task to support every effort to prevent the country from plunging into civil war .
One must obviously deplore the constitutional upheaval brought about by the forces of Hun Sen and above all condemn the fact that human lives were lost .
And I do not believe that a government including the Khmer Rouge , who were responsible for the tragic genocide , is something to be desired .
For this reason I consider that the Council should bring every necessary pressure to bear on the Cambodian authorities to revive the 1991 Paris Accords , and I am also convinced that the Commission must take on the task of ensuring that the election date of May 1998 is respected , which , we all hope , should bring this tragic situation to an end .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . In principle , negotiation is always the right way to seek to resolve a conflict .
However , one cannot just sit down at a table with a murderer and aggressor who has just seized power by force .
It is not enough for the Council of Ministers , in the case of Cambodia , to make a lukewarm demand for a cease-fire and for the United Nations Security Council to urge us to sit down at the negotiating table in order to resolve the crisis .
The international community of states has been called upon to condemn , roundly and unambiguously , the bloody attacks in Cambodia , and to put Hun Sen in his place .
It must be made clear that a regime that has come to power by means of a military coup cannot support the power that has been seized illegally , by force of arms , by means of aid payments from the international donor community .
Therefore the Cooperation Agreement which the European Union has already signed sith Cambodia must be suspended until democratic conditions have been restored .
The international community of states must insist that , in May 1998 , the planned free and democratic elections are able to take place and that we are able to see them take place with our own eyes .
Mr President , two years ago I participated in the EP delegation to Cambodia .
We were optimistic that , following the 1993 elections , a political accommodation had been reached between Funcinpec and Hun Sen 's Cambodian People 's Party .
We hoped these elections would bestow some political stability on a poverty-stricken country whose recent history had been so tragic .
But that optimism was ill-founded and chaos has come again .
Prime Minister Hun Sen 's outrageous and cynical seizure of power spits in the face of the 1991 Paris Accord , as well as undermining the efforts of the international community which supported the 1993 elections to the tune of billions of US dollars .
The deaths of some 58 people with a further 200 wounded is a sorry postscript to the coup and presages future upheaval and mayhem .
And , of course , democracy is the loser .
Only yesterday I learned of Hun Sen 's proposals to reduce Funcinpec 's supporters by eliminating parliamentary candidates who hold dual nationality - in other words , genuine Funcinpec supporters .
Understandably , ASEAN decided on 10 July to postpone Cambodia 's accession to the family of ASEAN nations in view of its internal strife .
What should happen next ?
What should be the European Parliament 's approach ?
First we must do all in our power to insist on an end to violence .
Second , we must cut off financial aid , which goes directly into the government 's coffers and is then used to fund war chests .
Third , we must continue with humanitarian aid : the rainy season will soon be upon Cambodia and the poor and the destitute must not be victims .
Fourth , we must find political solutions .
We must revive the Paris Accord , using co-presidents France and Indonesia to put pressure on Hun Sen to respect the Paris Agreement , and finally , of course , we must defer ratification of the EU-Cambodia development agreement until political stability is restored in Cambodia .
That is the view of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
Mr President , following the military coup in Cambodia on 4 July , we were all very shocked .
We had hoped that after the blood-bath in Cambodia , which had been going on for such a long time , peace had finally been achieved with the Paris Agreement in 1991 .
We know that since the elections in 1993 corruption has been increasing in Cambodia .
We have also discussed , many times , the fact that during the period immediately after a war there is still a certain amount of potential for violence among the population , or aggression between certain groups within the population , various social groups , and we have also discussed the question of how this could perhaps be reduced by means of a decent foreign policy .
We should also use this as an opportunity to develop new concepts and measures for countries which have experienced violence .
We should not , however , in any way accept this military coup .
The question is , what can we do ?
More news keeps on coming in , for example the news that members of FUNCINPEC are still being oppressed .
We have hundreds of victims to mourn , and I believe that it would be the right thing to do , first of all , to freeze the EU 's Cooperation Agreement , and to support those ASEAN States who have asked for accession to be postponed .
I believe that this military government must be made to see that it will not make any progress in Cambodia if it continues to use force .
Mr President , the Commission wholeheartedly endorses honourable Members ' condemnation of the breach of constitutional law and the ousting of the senior prime minister , Prince Ranariddh .
It would draw attention to the terms of the statement issued by the presidency of the European Union in response to the fighting on 5 and 6 July , calling for what a number of Members who have spoken have done , namely an immediate and unconditional ceasefire , a return to normal government and the holding of the promised elections on schedule in May 1998 .
The UN Security Council issued a statement on 11 July again calling for dialogue between the parties and an end to confrontation .
As some speakers such as Mrs van Bladel and Mr Harrison have indicated , it is of considerable significance that ASEAN has registered its displeasure by suspending Cambodia 's membership application and has also made diplomatic representations through King Sihanouk , calling on those concerned to seek a peaceful solution , uphold the law and refrain from persecution of political opponents .
The Commission has sent a note verbale to the authorities expressing concern for the safety of its aid workers but has not ordered their evacuation .
Any plans for long-term aid measures will be closely coordinated with Member States ' representatives on the spot and here in Europe .
NGO facilities for channelling emergency and humanitarian aid are intact and ready to operate as required .
This is a shifting situation which can change from day to day and we will certainly watch it very carefully and be ready to respond to further developments .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the debate on the motion for a resolution ( B4-0638 / 97 ) by Mr De Vries and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the arrest of war criminals in former Yugoslavia .
Mr President , the International War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague has not been able to fulfil its duty , which is to prosecute suspected war criminals .
But this failure is not the fault of the Tribunal .
The reason is that it has only been possible to bring a few of the 75 people who have been indicted for war crimes in connection with the war in the former Yugoslavia to trial .
What makes this even worse is that some of the most evil of the suspected perpetrators are still at large and are thus still able to exercise political influence in their countries .
As long as this situation continues the war will not be over .
Tensions still remain which could jeopardise security in several places in the former Yugoslavia .
Security in the former Yugoslavia requires that the criminals are punished .
This is also the only chance that the survivors have of acknowledging those who were exposed to the war 's most manifestly gruesome atrocities .
Every day that passes with the suspected perpetrators still at large undermines the credibility of the War Crimes Tribunal in the Hague .
The World at large must now ensure that these suspected criminals are bought to trial .
We must demonstrate that war crimes will not be tolerated and that they will never be acceptable in law .
If the governments in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina continue to ignore their commitments under Dayton , the SFOR forces must be given the task and the necessary power to arrest the suspects , using force if necessary , and bring them to trial .
Only then can the wounds begin to heal and the future brighten for the people of the former Yugoslavia .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the application on the table now is an application that we are fully able to support .
It is a positive step , and yet at the same time a sad one too .
The sad aspect is that there are very many war criminals still at large .
Also sad , perhaps , is the fact that that a death has occurred in connection with an arrest .
However sad that may be , I believe that it is clearly necessary for the international community , including via its military representatives in former Yugoslavia , to make it clear that it cannot and must not happen that war criminals are allowed to run around at liberty , whatever side they may have fought on in the war .
There are no grounds that can justify the crimes that now have to be judged by the tribunal in The Hague .
If there has been a war , if there have been quarrels , especially between different ethnic groups , then we need reconciliation , we need cooperation , but we also need justice .
On all sides we are fully agreed on the need for such justice .
This does not mean that at the same time we do not need to build up new structures , or provide help and support , or create a feeling of trust .
In places where minor mistakes have been made , there must also be forgiveness .
There must be cooperation between the various groups , as we saw just recently on our trip to Croatia . There , steps are being taken , incomplete , hesitant steps , but nevertheless steps towards reconciliation , and this is also happening in Bosnia .
I hope that it will soon be a matter of course in the Serbian Republic too .
It is right that the international community should act , albeit rather late in the day , and we must give this action our full support , because there are only two things that can help : the pursuit of the war criminals , and assistance and support for the community concerned .
Mr President , I should like , above all , to thank the Liberal Group for proposing this resolution .
I used to take a rather critical attitude towards the idea of such a court , but now that we have that court , we must use it if we are to retain any credibility .
In the past , I have to say , it was not so much the fault of the various governments of former Yugoslavia - with the exception of the Serbs - that the war criminals were not delivered up to justice , but it was due rather to a weakness on the part of the West .
We could have arrested certain war criminals perfectly easily , but we did not do so .
I shall not go into details , because time is short , but it is a fact well-known to everyone on the spot that men such as Karadzic and Mladic , for example , were not arrested because of orders issued by higher authority .
I should like to thank Mr Swoboda very much for proposing this resolution , and also for emphasizing at the same time that there are various responsibilities involved there , and that in general we make the mistake of repeatedly attributing responsibility evenly .
Anyone who has been to Croatia and Serbia knows who the aggressor was , because in Croatia the houses and churches have been destroyed , but in Serbia not a single shot was fired .
There are major differences here , and if we throw everything together in the same pot , we shall not be creating the justice that is so absolutely necessary .
Mr President , I wonder why we are not beginning with the prime culprit of this sorry affair , which is none other than the European Union itself , which imposed the dismembering of Yugoslavia .
It is the European Union , which after the dismembering of Yugoslavia could see that war was coming and did nothing to prevent it .
It is the European Union , all of us in other words , who watched the war take its course while we just sat in the European Parliament debating and passing resolutions , while we waited for America to come along and provide some sort of solution , which is in essence not a solution for peace , but simply a cessation of armed conflict .
And when we were signing and backing the Dayton solution , we all knew as much .
Apart from that of course the culprits are any who are guilty of war crimes .
And I would be the last person to say that those guilty of such crimes should not be brought to justice .
But we must not search out the guilty on one side only. there may be more of them on one side and less on another , but there are guilty on both side and it strikes me as strange that we look for them only on one side and not on the other .
And I call attention to this : actions such as those of last week , when one person was being sought , an attempt was made to arrest another , and a third was finally murdered - because it was in fact murder - not only do nothing to help consolidate peace in the area , which we all want , but I very much fear , rekindle the fuse of the flames of war .
We must be very careful indeed .
Mr President , SFOR has finally moved into action and started picking up war criminals .
But only just afterwards , it appears once again that a country such as France is at odds with this , and we really do have to ask ourselves : does France not want the ' bad guys ' to be dealt with , or is it just concerned with polishing up its own importance and showing the world that it will not allow itself to be pushed around by the United States ?
If we want peace to exist in Bosnia after the withdrawal of the SFOR troops , then a great deal more needs to be done .
There are still far too many people going about freely who ought to be appearing before the tribunal in The Hague .
There is no need for me to mention names here - we all know who they are .
The donors are meeting again next week , and it seems a good idea to me for us to call on them now to follow the example of the European Union and stop aid to the Republika Srpska , because I honestly do not think that it is possible to continue with this aid .
Mr President , I too should like to thank our friends the liberals for this initiative .
I think that it is very important to keep up the pressure on the international community to allow this tribunal to function .
It is important to allow the peace process to progress ; it is important for the credibility of the ad hoc tribunal itself , but it is also important in relation to another major project : the constitution of a permanent international Court .
This is undoubtedly another small signal that we can give .
I should like to say to Mrs Van Dijk that , until the European Union has the instruments it needs to go on peace missions , and therefore also - as in this case - to arrest war criminals , we will always be trying to find fault with one State or another : today it has been France , tomorrow it could be Italy or the United Kingdom .
So it is important for the European Union to equip itself with a European peace-keeping and peace-making body immediately .
Mr President , I am among those who are particularly pleased at what has been done by SFOR troops in arresting criminals in Bosnia .
It was of course becoming high time that we ourselves took Dayton seriously .
Up to now , this important aspect - arresting war criminals , trying them before the International Tribunal and cooperating with the Tribunal - has not really been properly observed by SFOR or ourselves .
Finally it is happening , and I am also especially pleased that we can always rely on the Commission , because it too has a policy which really comes across as robust , to the extent that this lies within its powers .
I also sincerely welcome the fact that the Commission is taking a very tough stance towards the Republika Srpska , where things are going so extremely badly at the moment , not just because a rabble is in power there , but because you can see the results of that all around you .
The situation of the people there is much worse than in the Federation territory , let alone Serbia or Croatia .
Particularly with a view to the welfare of the population , we must continue to cultivate the rule of law , because without the rule of law , the refugees cannot return in dignity and safety , industries cannot start up properly , and railways which run through non-Serbian territory - such as through Tuzla - cannot be used by the Serbs .
There are all kinds of particularly serious constraints which they are imposing on themselves .
I therefore think it is quite right that the Commission has drawn the proper conclusions from this .
In fact , I should also like the Commission to help us gain a rather better insight into the scale of obstruction which is being practised in various quarters , and of the extent of cooperation .
I am always hearing that the Bosnian Government is cooperating with the Tribunal , the Croats distinctly less so , and the Republika Srpska and Serbia very little indeed .
We need to be assured of this cooperation , however , so that we can refute with facts the nonsense which has just been talked by the Austrian SDP .
It is nothing less than a scandal that people there are content to have criminals walking about calmly and simply pointing the finger at others .
In general terms , we should be helping the Tribunal in Serbia , the Republika Srpska and Croatia .
The greatest possible cooperation is called for , so that the rule of law is finally restored in the area .
Mr President , I do not want to spend too much time on this point , but one of Mr Oostlander 's comments , when translated into German , came out to the effect that the lowest type of scum is involved in government there .
With all due respect to Mr Oostlander , we should not , here in this Parliament , be using words like that to describe other people , assuming , of course , that the translation was correct .
I do not know whether it was or not .
Mr President , the interpretation was not entirely correct , but I did meet some mayors there whom we would both have to place in the category of what in Dutch is called ' rabble ' ; the meeting was an extremely surprising one , something I have hardly ever experienced before , but in that territory I am afraid it was the case .
The Commission welcomes the recent arrest by S-FOR of a suspected war criminal .
It underlines the importance of a verdict pronounced by the International Criminal Tribunal in the case against Mr Tadic .
We have taken from the outset the position that there cannot be peace without justice and every action which is aimed at bringing about the enforcement of justice should be strongly supported .
No justice would imply a continuous threat to long-lasting peace and stability , thereby undermining the political and economic recovery of Bosnia-Herzegovina and hampering the return of refugees .
The Commission considers that the arrest of war criminals in former Yugoslavia is an essential element of the conditionality attached to the development of relations between the European Community and the signatory parties to the Dayton Peace Agreement .
Last week the Commission decided to suspend its non-humanitarian assistance to Republika Srbska as long as indicted war criminals like Mr Karadzic are not brought before the ICT in The Hague .
Products with a nonhumanitarian character , with a total of ECU 35m , have been suspended .
The failure to arrest Mr Karadzic is a clear violation of the Dayton Peace Agreement , the implementation of which is a condition for assistance for reconstruction .
In addition it is clear that Mr Karadzic is still heavily influencing political developments in Republika Srbska thereby hampering the peace process which is also a violation of the peace agreements .
Furthermore , his well-publicized so-called economic activities are such that it cannot be excluded that he would directly or indirectly benefit from reconstruction assistance to Republika Srbska .
Under these conditions the continuation of reconstruction assistance cannot be justified .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Death sentence in the United States - ( B4-0609 / 97 ) by Mr Imbeni and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the death sentence passed on Joseph O 'Dell in the United States ; - ( B4-0630 / 97 ) by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the death sentence passed on Joseph O 'Dell in the United States ; - ( B4-0653 / 97 ) by Mr Manisco and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the death penalty in the United States - the O 'Dell case ; - ( B4-0678 / 97 ) by Mrs Aglietta and Mr Orlando , on behalf of the V Group , on the death sentence passed on Joseph O 'Dell in the United States ;
Kenya - ( B4-0599 / 97 ) by Mr Fassa and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Kenya ; - ( B4-0644 / 97 ) by Mr Pettinari and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on human rights and the situation in Kenya ; - ( B4-0650 / 97 ) by Mr Hory and Mr Macartney , on behalf of the ARE Group , on violations of human rights in Kenya ; - ( B4-0667 / 97 ) by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and Mr Schwaiger , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the violation of human rights in Kenya ; - ( B4-0692 / 97 ) by Mr Telkämper and others , on behalf of the V Group , on Kenya ;
Peru - ( B4-0598 / 97 ) by Mr Bertens and Mrs André-Léonard , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on human rights abuses in Peru ; - ( B4-0615 / 97 ) by Mr Howitt , on behalf of the PSE Group , on human rights in Peru ; - ( B4-0656 / 97 ) by Mr Puerta and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the human rights situation in Peru ; - ( B4-0664 / 97 ) by Mrs Lenz and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group , on Peru ; - ( B4-0679 / 97 ) by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , on behalf of the V Group , on the human rights situation in Peru ;
Sexual mutilations in Egypt - ( B4-0655 / 97 ) by Mrs Sornosa Martínez and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on female genital mutilation in Egypt ; - ( B4-0672 / 97 ) by Mrs Terrón i Cusí and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on female circumcision in Egypt ; - ( B4-0673 / 97 ) by Mrs Kokkola , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the judicial approval of female genital mutilation in Egypt ; - ( B4-0689 / 97 ) by Mrs Hautala and Mrs Van Dijk , on behalf of the V Group , on sexual mutilation ;
Tunisia - ( B4-0594 / 97 ) by Mr Bertens and Mr Fassa , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on human rights in Tunisia ; - ( B4-0618 / 97 ) by Mr Roubatis and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on human rights in Tunisia ; - ( B4-0626 / 97 ) by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the situation in Tunisia and the reactions of the Tunisian Government following the Strasbourg colloquy on the human rights situation ; - ( B4-0688 / 97 ) by Mrs Aglietta and others , on behalf of the V Group , on human rights in Tunisia ;
Philippines - ( B4-0601 / 97 ) by Mr Apolinario , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the ongoing peace negotiations between the Government of the Republic of the Philippines ( GRP ) and the National Democratic Front of the Philippines ( NDFP ) ; - ( B4-0645 / 97 ) by Mr Vinci , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the ongoing peace negotiations between the Government of the Republic of the Philippines ( GRP ) and the National Democratic Front of the Philippines ( NDFP ) ; - ( B4-0686 / 97 ) by Mr Telkämper and Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the V Group , on integration of the respect for human rights and humanitarian law into the peace negotiations between the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and the National Democratic Front of the Philippines ;
Death sentence in the United States
Mr President , I think that this resolution is important because it censures the numerous executions of hundreds and hundreds of people every year .
I do not think that this is to the credit of a country which many , including myself , regard as an example of democracy .
I am convinced that these are manifestations of revenge by the State which , as in the case of Joseph O 'Dell , involve the repetition of judicial errors which are fatal to so many people .
Our Parliament is rightly telling the United States that this is unacceptable .
Mr President , this House claims to a beacon of reason and compassion in today 's brutish world , but it seems to have a blind spot when it comes to violations of human rights in the United States of America .
Conversely , Americans select leaders who believe the honourable Members of the House to be too dumb to see the truth , too morally deaf to hear it , too cowardly to raise their voices in dissent .
The case of Joseph O 'Dell , a presumably innocent man condemned to the gallows in the sovereign State of Virginia , offers us the chance to prove they are wrong , the hope that our voice will be heard to save his life , the dream that our common resolution may begin to reverse the savage trend towards the judicial assassination of thousands .
What we are looking at is an extraordinary phase of routine horror , a pervasive lethargy about the rights of men .
Never before in a western democracy have we known such a silence , such an emptiness .
The debate on capital punishment - whenever they have one in the USA - is about what form is more humane : gas , hanging , injection or electrocution .
Enough is enough .
We should try to bring back our American friends into the family of men through some practical means , maybe inviting millions of European tourists to visit only those few States without the death penalty : the snows of Vermont instead of the rolling hills of Virginia , the beaches of New England instead of the palm trees of Florida .
We should try anything to remind Americans of the immortal words of the poet : ' Any man 's death diminishes me because I am involved in mankind and therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls .
It tolls for thee . '
Madam President , one of these days , one of these hours , in Richmond , in the Governor 's Office in Virginia , one man , by a gesture of the hand , by a stroke of the pen , is going to determine whether another man is to live or die .
This is one of the dramatic and barbarous aspects of the dramatic , barbarous ritual of the death penalty .
This ritual is reminiscent of the dramatic , barbarous ritual of circuses in ancient times , when , in the Colosseum , one man , by a gesture of the hand , pointing his thumb upwards or downwards , determined whether another man was to live or die .
Then it was the applause of the circus audience that decided ; today it is opinion polls , forecasts of electoral consensus .
I still believe and still ask that these barbarous games should stop once and for all , and that the death penalty should be abolished , because it is inhuman and completely ineffective as a deterrent against crime .
Life is sacred and no-one , not even a State , may kill .
Not even Cain deserved to be slain , and this is true of all those condemned to death .
To express this belief , on the recommendation of Amnesty International , people condemned to death are granted honorary citizenship of my city , Palermo , which for too long has been a city of death , affirming a culture of life .
In the case of Joseph O 'Dell , an honorary citizen of Palermo , the situation is even more barbarous .
Even though there are doubts regarding his guilt , Governor Allen is refusing to order DNA tests .
Until such time as these games with the life or death of a human being cease , and the death penalty is abolished , we ask that tests should be carried out so that , at least , definite guilt , and not the dumb roar of the opinion polls , determines whether or not Joseph O 'Dell will live .
If this appeal is not accepted , Joseph O 'Dell will be killed on 23 July on death row in a Virginia jail , taking with him the doubts about his guilt and leaving not only Virginia but all of us with the shame of a murder on our hands .
I think that we must draw a very strong conclusion from these facts : the time has come for abolition of the death penalty to be included in the human rights clauses of European Union financial agreements .
Madam President , I should like to thank you for giving me the opportunity , anticipating your presidency , to speak on an issue which has stirred up a great deal of emotion in my country and throughout the European Union .
It is not , to be sure , the first time ; we hope that , if not the last , then at least it will be one of the last times in which , in extremis , the actual legal situation of a person condemned to death is prevented from being verified .
Here we have a person declaring his innocence and asking to undergo DNA testing .
I think that , if only because of the appeals from such eminent quarters which have been lodged in this case , the Governor of the State of Virginia and the other authorities concerned cannot fail to be at least shaken in their certainty ; within less than a week , a person , albeit innocent , could be killed .
In the European Union we regard it as a crime even for a guilty person to be killed by a State ; when an innocent person is killed the crime is undoubtedly even more serious .
Let us hope that the Governor of the State of Virginia will at least take into account the appeal from the Pope , if not the appeals which have been made by individuals and Parliaments , Governments and moral authorities .
Why not make a very simple gesture to avert the risk of discovering later , in ten days ' time , that an innocent man has been killed ?
We are not asking to take the place of the judges of the United States of America : we are simply asking for a gesture of wisdom , clemency and respect for human life .
Madam President , honourable colleagues , on 23 July - as we have been reminded - in the State of Virginia , an innocent man may be put to death .
What it is difficult to understand is that the condemned man has been denied the chance to have a DNA test carried out , a test he has been requesting for 12 years , in order to prove his innocence and allow the case to be clarified - the case , it would appear from the evidence , is a highly confused one .
We should bear in mind that one of the principal witnesses admitted having made up a statement and that the Supreme Court confirmed Joseph O 'Dell 's sentencing to death by a single vote .
By means of this resolution , we are not attempting solely to have the death penalty rejected and to have this House , in accordance with its repeated declarations , make a pronouncement , requesting that Joseph O 'Dell 's death sentence and that of four other citizens sentenced to death be commuted , but , first and foremost , we should like Joseph O 'Dell to be given the opportunity to prove his innocence .
Our notion of the value of human life , all human life , moves us to join with all those who have stood up to ask for clemency for Joseph O 'Dell and to formulate this solemn call to the Governor of the State of Virginia and the government of the United States not to commit yet another irreparable act .
Madam President , the case of Joseph O 'Dell can be seen in two ways : first , as my colleagues have said , Joseph O 'Dell may die an innocent man because American justice is making a point of not allowing a reassessment of the DNA evidence which would probably exculpate him ; second , we see the O 'Dell case as a symbol of what the death penalty in the United States and elsewhere in the world stands for today : the death penalty as revenge of the State , a State crime , an outrage , as exercise of authority and arrogance with regard to a human life .
We believe that this is a disgrace for the model of democracy and freedom which the United States represents today throughout the world , but above all we regard the O 'Dell case - and this is why we must save him - as a symbol for all the death sentences which are pronounced every day , with no word from public opinion , in countries such as China , Iran , Sudan and many others .
That is why we must stop this State crime : it is a question of civilization !
Madam President , the USA is a model of democracy for the world and has long been seen as such .
But a repulsive form of punishment is still applied in the world 's greatest democracy .
The death penalty is irrevocable .
Even so , discovering that the executed person was not guilty after the event is not such a rare occurrence .
The death penalty does not reduce the incidence of crime .
But it does lead to a brutalising of society .
The death penalty follows an old fashioned principle : an eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth .
But we do not punish a rapist with rape !
We here in Parliament are disturbed by the increasing number of executions in the USA .
We think that executions cast a shadow over President Clinton .
The O 'Dell case is one that we find particularly disturbing .
The American judicial system has failed to inform him of the rights which he in fact has .
Parliament wants the USA to refrain from executing O 'Dell - and all the others .
Madam President , colleagues , if there is one thing the European Parliament can be proud of , it is its resolute , unshakable conviction that the death penalty must be abolished worldwide , and that it must fight to ensure that the death penalty is not carried out where it exists under the legislation .
This is the case of the United States , the case of Joseph O 'Dell , who at this time is of particular concern to us : a case in which , in addition to the feelings common in relation to all other executions which we seek to prevent , we have a well-founded certainty that the evidence of guilt is far from having been verified and that another DNA test is necessary and could exonerate the accused .
For all these reasons the will of Parliament which we are going to express is very important .
If this message , in addition to the Pope 's , in addition to those of many men and women of good will , can reach the Governor of Virginia , I hope that there will be a chance of saving the life , on 23 July , of Joseph O 'Dell , and with him of so many other prisoners under sentence of death on death row in American jails .
Madam President , the subject of the death penalty for those who commit serious crimes in the United States comes up in these topical and urgent debates with clockwork regularity , and today is no exception .
I have to admit that I cannot speak with any knowledge of the facts of this particular case - and I wonder who in this Chamber can actually do so .
I do not know of what horrific crime or crimes Mr O 'Dell has been found guilty .
I do not even wish to express an opinion about the gratuitous statements in the resolution , which make it seem that the condemned man has not been given a fair trial , though I have to say that these statements about the lack of a fair trial appear in all the resolutions on the death penalty in the United States , which leads me to question their foundation .
I am not a blind admirer of the political or judicial system in the USA , but I refuse to accept that the courts there - the appeal courts and even the Supreme Court - would deal so lightly with death sentences and human lives .
Nor do I wish to express an opinion about the equally gratuitous statement in the resolution that the death penalty is ineffective as a deterrent , a means of preventing crime .
I know that criminologists are debating this .
But one could certainly just as well argue that the death penalty has saved the lives of a great many innocent people - the victims of multiple repeat offenders , many of whom are walking around freely .
Basically , I simply wish to say that I come from a country where , to our horror , we learnt last year that convicted paedophile sadists , pathological child rapists and child murderers , were being released again after just a few months - at most a few years - and let loose upon society , even though any psychiatrist knows that these monsters cannot be cured and will create new victims .
Furthermore , I come from a country where the convicted child rapist and multiple repeat offender Dutroux was not only released after a few years , but was also given social benefits of 80 000 francs a month , benefits which he used - as was to be expected - to build dungeons in which fresh victims were tortured and murdered .
When I consider all this , I cannot honestly and in conscience approve this resolution , even though I personally am not a supporter of the death penalty .
However , I shall only be willing to hand out moral lessons to America when I am persuaded that in our country and on our own continent , the weak and the victims are properly protected against criminals , and at present that is not the case .
Madam President , we are voting for this resolution not only to confirm - as we always have - our opposition to the death penalty , a choice in favour of civilization which Parliament has made so many times , and out of the deep moral conviction we hold - the Pope recently , referring to this case , said that God alone is the master of Man 's life and death - but because , in this case , we feel it our duty as Members of the European Parliament to add our own initiative to avert the risk of a miscarriage of justice .
We are indeed faced with the definite risk of judicial error , which has prompted so many reactions worldwide .
We know that , at this very time , an American judge , Judge Spencer , is about to take a final decision .
Only yesterday he said that much of the evidence against O 'Dell was debatable and its authenticity unverified .
So , faced with these risks , we feel the duty , as Members of the European Parliament , to add our own initiative to ask the Governor of Virginia not to proceed with this execution before allowing further verification of the evidence , in particular the DNA evidence .
Everything that can be done to save the life of a single person must be done .
This is the spirit in which we are voting in favour of this resolution today .
Madam President , the macabre liturgy of State revenge is to be repeated for the nth time on 23 July .
On that date O 'Dell will have ceased to be a problem for the justice of his country , but the problem for the human conscience of the ' legal ' possibility of killing one 's own kind will be aggravated .
I do not want to know whether O 'Dell is innocent or guilty , just as I am not interested in establishing the innocence or guilt of all those who openly , semi-clandestinely or clandestinely have been put to death in the last twenty-four hours - with no intervention from the Pope , no intervention from the European Parliament , and no outcry from public opinion .
O 'Dell must constitute a precedent , the nth precedent for modifying the still violent culture of a great country such as the United States .
The United States had the first democratic Constitution and , in many people 's eyes , this country is an example to be followed in many fields . Precisely because many , too many , of its states apply the death penalty , the US provides yet another excuse for those far less democratic communist countries which justify the existence of the death penalty in their more or less legal systems .
Kenya
Madam President , a few days ago a number of citizens who were peacefully demanding minimal institutional reforms for Kenya , necessary for the proper conduct of the forthcoming elections , were subjected to police brutality , resulting in the death of as many as seventeen people .
The destabilization of Kenya would constitute a most serious blow to human rights and could destabilize the whole region .
At least two things are therefore necessary .
Firstly , for everyone , and particularly the European Parliament , to condemn firmly the savage conduct of the Kenyan police , and , secondly , for us to give Kenya every possible assistance to enable free and fair elections to be held in that country .
Madam President , like Mr Fassa , I too believe that the inadmissible police repression of opposition demonstrations in Nairobi shows that the Kenyan regime is based on violence and the denial of human rights and civil and political rights .
I think that it is also right to ask for thorough constitutional reforms to be implemented in Kenya before the forthcoming presidential and administrative elections .
Without these reforms the elections will be a farce , and yet another enforced legitimization of the personal power of Arap Moi .
I ask the Council and the Commission to remind the Kenyan Government of Article 5 of the Lomé Convention , and at the same time to notify it of Europe 's intention to suspend economic cooperation with Kenya if the regime continues to put down every request for political democratization with bloodshed .
It is quite clear that Kenya is suffering from a lack of democracy and that , through this week 's demonstrations , the Kenyan people are asking for radical reforms .
I think that it is the European Union 's responsibility to support this process ; otherwise , our cooperation with that country may be useless .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the reports that reach us from Kenya are really far from satisfactory .
However , I should just like to make three points , and to put three questions to the opposition . Firstly , I have the impression that to some extent we are now achieving changes in the third world which did not occur in Central European states until the beginning of the ' nineties , in other words a shift in the blocks and regimes which were firmly established there and whose democratic legitimacy no one dared to shake or call into question .
These are now being examined .
Secondly , an opposition is not necessarily a protector of democracy .
Let us hope that the situation in Kenya is not similar to the one in Zaire .
Thirdly , we must take care to ensure that street fighting and demonstrations do not take on a momentum of their own , so that later , when what they are demanding has been introduced , they can no longer be halted .
Now I come to my three questions .
Firstly , the government accuses the opposition of not giving notice of rallies which were possible under the old law , which originated from the British colonial period , in order to give the impression , abroad , that they continue to be obstructed in their freedom of assembly .
Is that true , or has the Commission any information on this point ?
Secondly , what is the opposition 's position regarding their willingness to refrain from using force when the constitutional changes that have been announced come into force ?
Thirdly , what does the Commission intend to do in order to ensure that President Moi really does introduce the constitutional changes that he has announced ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we have heard so many reports from Africa about violence , wars , or violent quarrels erupting during demonstrations , and now these reports are coming from Kenya too .
After a long period of colonial rule , and the transitional period that followed the period of colonial rule , it now seems necessary that we should offer these countries plans or support , whether financial in nature , or in the educational field , so that they really can find their way to democracy .
At the moment , the Lomé Convention is being renegotiated .
It should be our objective to lay down , in the new Lomé Convention , the precepts of democracy , and we should also make instruments available for that purpose .
For example , in these countries , people could be trained , and perhaps they could even come here and receive training in matters concerning administrative reforms or constitutional matters .
As far as Kenya is concerned , of course , it is not acceptable that demonstrations should be put down by force , regardless of whether the correct notification has been given or not .
I believe that what we have here are human rights that should be safeguarded .
We should be making it clear to Kenya , via the ACP Agreement and via existing cooperation with the EU , that in this area it must proceed by peaceful means .
Madam President , Article 5 of the Lomé Convention provides the essential framework for the characteristics required of every country for full accession to the Convention .
In signing it , all the ACP countries undertook to respect human rights and to set out on the road to democratization and good government .
The events of the last few days in Kenya show that this country and its regime are still a long way away from the minimum standards needed to qualify any country as democratic .
The popular drive for democracy and freedom of the individual is now being manifested forcefully throughout the African continent .
This has been the most important and positive new aspect of the situation in Africa for many years now , and could allow the whole continent to base its civil , social and economic development on a solid , agreed basis .
That is what was trying to emerge in Kenya , where opponents of the Arap Moi regime , in large demonstrations , called for legislative and constitutional reforms to allow the coming elections to be truly free and fair .
The brutal suppression of the demonstrations , which claimed many victims and was followed by a repressive wave of arrests , showed once more that the Kenyan regime appears to have no intention of accepting either freedom of expression or true democratization of the country .
Our Parliament must , therefore , strongly condemn the action by the Kenyan police , and all means of bringing pressure to bear must be implemented so that Kenya can turn a new page in its history .
For once we can express our support for the initiative of the international community , which , through the ambassadors of 19 countries in Nairobi , strongly condemned the tragic events and demanded that a process of democratic reforms be launched .
Developments in the Kenyan situation will , moreover , be of fundamental importance for the whole region , the region of East Africa and the Great Lakes , where more than ever there is a need to establish conditions of stability , democracy and development .
Peru
Madam President , it is the twentieth anniversary of Peru 's last national strike , and today strikers are taking part across the country in mass marches for the economic , social and legal rights which are denied to them .
Following this Parliament 's delegation to Peru last September and the very serious reports given to us by Congressman Canseco in Brussels earlier this month , it is right that the European Parliament should today join with the protesters in expressing our concern about continuing and systematic human rights abuses in Peru .
Mr Conseco 's testimony was made more poignant by the reports on Peruvian television last Sunday morning of an elaborate system of telephone-tapping by Peruvian security forces against opposition leaders and senior civil servants , including the government 's own foreign minister , who I understand has now resigned .
It is in this context that we call for the reinstatement of the three judges removed from Peru 's constitutional tribunal .
The failure to do so will be a clear signal that repeated international calls for judicial independence and respect for democratic norms in Peru have once again been ignored .
It is in this context , too , that we must today condemn the pattern of threats and attacks against the media in Peru , which seek only to report freely and fairly on the abuses that have taken place .
The bomb attack on the Global Television station in Puno last October , the physical assaults against three journalists from the En Persona television programme at Naña on 25 June , the ferocious attack against the political editor of the newspaper Ojo at San Miguel on 1 July , and this week 's removal of Peruvian nationality from Baruch Ivcher , owner of Peru 's TV Channel Two , represent an attack on independent journalism which should be prevented by constitutional safeguards .
Today , Europe adds its condemnation of the systematic use of brutal , physical torture by Peruvian security forces .
Whilst welcoming the extension of the work of the ad hoc commission advising on pardons for prisoners unjustly convicted of terrorism offences , we call for full judicial review of these cases , and for full compensation to be paid in accordance with international human rights laws .
Today we express our deep concern at Peru 's long-standing failure to heed international protests against so-called faceless courts , which remain totally unacceptable to the international community .
Europe has its role to play in working with Peru to heal the divisions created by the mass poverty suffered in that country , not least with the aid for resettlement of internally displaced persons with which I am personally associated , but we can do so only on the basis of human rights guarantees from the government , which our debate today exposes as fundamentally lacking .
Madam President , at the time , we came out clearly against the kidnapping of a very important group of people in the Japanese Embassy .
However , we also condemned - we proposed a resolution , but this did not go forward - the way in which President Fujimori entered the Japanese Embassy and murdered - we should not mince words , here - those persons who were inside , giving them no opportunity for legal remedy .
This was , I believe , quickly forgotten and was not discussed further .
However , unfortunately , those of an antidemocratic tendency , such as President Fujimori , demonstrate how the acts they committed at that time have their correlation in the threats made against journalists - as comrade Howitt has told us - against the Diario de la República , and against television and radio stations .
What is more , there have been unambiguous threats made against opposition leaders , such as Mr Díez Canseco , who was actually in Brussels for discussions with all political groups .
The reason behind the kidnapping has also been forgotten . The reason was , in fact , the inhuman situation in Peru 's prisons of more than five thousand political prisoners .
The European Union should look again at its relations both with Peru in this case and also with other countries in Latin America and examine how it should apply pressure to prevent a recurrence .
Mr Commissioner , I always look forward to your answers , but today I have to attend another meeting and must be on my way .
I look forward to reading your answer in the Minutes of the sitting .
Madam President , Peru has always been one of our problem children in Latin America .
First it was the economy , but that is doing rather better now .
It has always been terrorism , and this has now clearly reared its ugly head again .
Yet not everyone who attacks the government should be suspected of terrorist intrigues .
And now we are actually concerned about democracy in Peru .
In May , at the inter-parliamentary conference in Caracas , we had plenty of opportunity to talk to our colleagues from Peru .
Freedom of opinion is under threat , the independence of the judiciary is threatened by the current government , and we should like to call upon that government , as a matter of urgency , at least to respect the rules that are enshrined in the Peruvian constitution .
Only then can a balance be restored in that country between economic stability , the fight against terrorism , freedom of opinion and a renaissance of political life .
There is no doubt that the current president does not want to know about political parties , and the parties themselves are also very weak .
I believe , however , precisely because all our parties have links with Peru , that we should help and give warnings here .
With this in mind , my group will support the resolution .
Madam President , a few days ago , Baruch Ivcher was stripped of his Peruvian citizenship .
His crime ? On his television channel , ' frecuencia latina ' , he had reported on the tapping of telephones belonging to human rights activists and intellectuals .
In Peru at the present time there is neither freedom of the press nor freedom of opinion .
Anyone who expresses criticism of President Fujimori is putting his life in danger .
A female secret service agent was quartered because she denounced government attacks on the press .
Her lawyers were afraid for their own lives .
Justice in Peru is muzzled . Three judges who considered a third re-election of President Fujimori to be unconstitutional were promptly prohibited from practising their profession .
The Supreme Constitutional Court is about to be dissolved .
The Peruvian system is increasingly coming to resemble a military dictatorship .
A presidential advisor called Montesinos , but known internationally as Narco-General , is firmly in control .
Courageous members of parliament , such as Xavier Diez Canseco , who visited us here in Parliament two weeks ago , have been and still are the victims of assassination attempts planned by people like Montesinos , and this has been proven .
Thousands of political prisoners are vegetating , without trial , in prisons that are an affront to human dignity .
Not even the Red Cross is allowed to visit them .
At the same time , an amnesty law protects the military personnel by giving them immunity from prosecution for their acts of violence and atrocities .
We had an opportunity last year , when we were there , of holding discussions with President Fujimori .
I can only say one thing : I have never experienced such an ice-cold , inflexible politician as him .
Even if he can point to economic successes , a system that is so undemocratic that it forces the population to be quiet in order not to be murdered can in no way be tolerated by us .
I expect the European Union to make any further cooperation with Peru conditional upon substantial improvements in the human rights situation and in democratization . Otherwise , we cannot continue to maintain our high expectations here .
Madam President , very unwillingly I cannot share the opinion of my friends Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and Mr Bertens . I have a rather different opinion on this subject .
When we talk about Peru today , we should never lose sight of what Peru looked like even as little as 10 years ago , and in what condition the country stood , when the acts of violence committed by criminal , terrorist organizations cost over 20 , 000 innocent people their lives , and did incalculable damage both to society and to the economy .
If we look at Peru today , we see a country that is very probably making great efforts to institutionalize a system , which is putting a stop to terrorism , and which is trying to give back to its citizens a broad measure of confidence in their own country .
We should not forget that the government of Peru has , for example , set up a commission to examine all the judgments that have been given in connection with terrorism . In recent months , this commission has revised over 500 judgments .
We should also not forget that a military court has just convicted four officers for abusing their powers .
Peru is making enormous efforts to shake off the bad reputation that originated in its terroristovershadowed past , and I believe that at the present time we would be well advised not only to criticise - sometimes that is necessary - but also to encourage and to support .
Sexual mutilations in Egypt
Mr President , I am pleased that , finally , after a number of fruitless attempts to bring this subject before this House , we finally have a common resolution on female sexual mutilation .
Firstly , I wish vigorously to deplore and condemn the practice of sexual mutilation of women , both in Egypt and anywhere else that this execrable practice takes place .
Secondly , I would like to place on record that this practice , originating in Africa and connected with old and archaic traditions , is not objectively embraced by any religious doctrine or belief and therefore the clumsy manipulations which attempt to justify a totally unacceptable practice are to be condemned .
And , thirdly , I would vigorously ask the European Parliament and the European Union , via the relevant channels , to force those countries which carry on this practice to scrupulously respect human rights in general and the undeniable rights of women , on the basis of absolute equality .
Respect for the rights and dignity of women must be a firm and urgent requirement .
By fulfilling this resolution , we will be helping to improve the quality of life of many women and will be helping society in general and those people who carry on this practice to become more aware of what it genuinely represents .
I would therefore insist that it be fully upheld .
Madam President , after many struggles all that has been achieved so far must count as aquis , if we take into account the 1989 United National Convention on the Rights of Children , the 1995 Peking Conference on Womens ' Rights , Article 4 of the Declaration on the Abolition of Violence against Women , the results of the International Conference in Cairo , and others .
And now , the Administrative court in Cairo proposes to allow public hospitals to carry out excisions in women , so reversing a decision of the Minister for Health which banned that operation .
What , then , was the point of all the conferences , declarations , conventions and decisions , when there is not even a rudimentary intervention to prevent extreme violations of human rights ?
We consider it unacceptable to use religion and custom as excuses for acts of violence against women , and much more so , against under-age girls who do not have the right of choice. what right does an Administrative Court have to go against human nature and human dignity ?
The European Union has a duty to oppose such retrogression , which is being attempted mainly by Islamic fundamentalists once more against women , and should raise its voice to defend womens ' rights which are after all human rights too .
The imposition of sexual excision in women supposedly for religious reasons is an act of barbarism , a violation against the laws of nature , it is the deprivation of a right with which nature has endowed women .
Besides , who can foresee the bodily and psychological consequences of so violent and unnatural an operation on the woman 's organism ?
The European Union must undertake information campaigns in countries with which it is associated in any way , and has a duty of care to ensure that Member States ban the operation of excision within their domain .
Madam President , it is sad that we in Parliament have to speak out once again - and that there is reason for us to do so - against the genital mutilation which is still taking place across the world , and not just in Africa , as it is convenient for us to think .
This kind of practice is also taking place in Europe .
It is in fact a violation of women 's rights and their control over their own bodies , and it simply cannot be tolerated .
We were therefore shocked when the Cairo Administrative Court set aside the ban which the Egyptian Government had imposed on genital mutilation .
I think it is right that Parliament should speak out against this , while saying at the same time that we must do everything to banish and take legal action against this genital mutilation , not least in our own Member States .
Madam President , I support many of the things that the previous speakers have said .
For women , this is one of the most serious violations imaginable , and it is not justified on either religious or medical grounds .
Unfortunately , in many areas of the world - not only in Europe , but also , to some extent , in Asia - it is regarded as a tradition , which we can deal with only by enlightenment .
It is one of the most delicate problems , when one is speaking to African women or women from these countries , because , basically , resistance must come from among the women themselves , with our help , so as to break with these traditions .
Therefore we really should do everything in order to contribute to this enlightenment .
We can only appeal to the Egyptian Government .
Egypt wants to be seen to be a modern country , a major , leading country in the region .
It is helpful to bring enlightenment and to challenge this tradition , which unfortunately the women in these countries also want to maintain .
Here too , we should see to it that , via our own channels , we do more to fight it than is already being done by the United Nations and UNICEF .
I condemn genital mutilation , Madam President , and as rapporteur on the association agreement with Egypt , I am disturbed by this court judgment .
However , the fact that the government is appealing against it is a good sign .
In my view , this illustrates the difficult campaign which President Mubarak is waging to keep his country out of the clutches of a fanatical orthodox religious group .
Confusing information - for example that chewing gum from Israel contained a sexually stimulating adrenalin substance - forms part of the continuing pattern of attempts by fanatics to gain control of the government .
It was reported recently in the ' Financial Times ' that one militant Islamic organization was announcing a cease-fire after five years .
Egypt suffers from overpopulation and all the development problems which go with it .
It is part of the Middle East and an important country in terms of the peace process .
I would therefore draw a political conclusion : it is important for the EU to adopt and conclude the association agreement as quickly as possible , so that we can include Egypt permanently in our Mediterranean policy activities .
Madam President , female circumcision in Egypt poses an interesting legal problem for Parliament .
In countries with a western legal tradition , the administrative courts and Councils of State , where they exist , have the fundamental function of protecting citizens from abuses by the public authorities and Governments .
In Egypt precisely the opposite has occurred .
For that very reason it is absolutely essential for the European Parliament firmly to oppose this appalling practice , which is merely derived from case law , to protect both civilized legal culture not only in the West , but also worldwide , and all those resident in the European Union , bearing in mind - as some of our colleagues have been saying - that female circumcision is , I am sorry to say , also practised within some Member States of the Union .
We strenuously condemn the decisions by the Administrative Court of Cairo and the Egyptian Council of State , which bear witness once again to the further advance of fundamentalism in many countries - in the present case , through female circumcision , and elsewhere through the family code or acts of terrorism .
In condemning female circumcision , which is sometimes fatal and always causes lifelong disablement in terms of fully developed sexuality , a sexuality that allows and gives full value to pleasure and enjoyment - why not raise it to the status of a human right ? - we shall be aiding the Egyptian Government and all Muslims who oppose the fundamentalists .
We must clearly show that these physical tortures entail a symbolic violence , as the anthropologist Maurice Godelier put it , alienating women and inducing them to re-enact these barbarous practices , as a way of justifying what some people refer to as ' cultural practices ' since , they say , they are accepted and practised by women themselves .
Let us finally denounce the hypocrisy and cowardice , or at best the ignorance and thoughtlessness , of those who - even here - sometimes on a pretext of pseudo-tolerance take refuge behind respect for cultures and cultural practices and so cast doubt on the universality of human rights and respect for the physical integrity of any human being .
The judgement of the Administrative Court of Cairo , annulling the decision by the Egyptian Minister of Health to forbid the practice of female circumcision in Egypt 's public hospitals , marks a step backwards in the struggle to prevent the sexual mutilation practised upon women in Egypt and elsewhere .
The Egyptian Government had reached a just decision , in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the proceedings of the international conferences on women held - in case we had forgotten - in Cairo and Peking .
We should , therefore , encourage the Egyptian Government to continue its efforts by lodging an appeal from a judgement that is at odds with the most fundamental human dignity .
But , quite apart from the problem now confronting the Egyptians , we must bear in mind that circumcision practised on women is far from having been eradicated from the world .
In the 1980s UNICEF launched a campaign against it , but the struggle is , sadly , still continuing .
Even within our own Member States , this practice , although prohibited , has many followers who are very often shown culpable leniency .
Because , I say again , respect for bodily integrity is a fundamental right of a human being and , ladies and gentlemen , no tradition and no religion can justify a violation of that right .
Tunisia
Madam President , Tunisia is officially a democracy , but it certainly is not yet one in reality .
The economic modernization of this country has indeed improved living conditions for Tunisians , but not their opportunities for actually exercising their political and civil rights .
A peculiar form of persecution has grown up in this country : any person not identifying him or herself with the dominant party is actually prevented by the authorities and even by individuals from exercising such fundamental rights as freedom of movement and freedom of expression , although in theory these rights are recognized .
This is demonstrated by the case of Mr Chamari , who certainly cannot be prevented from returning to his country just because he took part in a meeting with representatives of the European Parliament .
So not only the exercise of democracy in Tunisia , but also , and above all , the dignity of this Parliament and of the European Union as a whole are at stake .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , though we are dealing with the resolution on Tunisia today , that is not because the situation in Tunisia is particularly bad .
There are many countries in which human rights abuses are altogether worse and more extensive .
But we regard Tunisia as our neighbour , our friend , and we are particularly critical towards our neighbours in North Africa who find themselves in a difficult and precarious position .
We are convinced that the economic and social development of every country , including Tunisia , is crucially dependent on the parallel development of human rights .
And on this point I should like to say quite clearly that in the past there have been very positive developments in this area .
I should also , however , like to say equally clearly that in recent times we have experienced certain events which we are not exactly overjoyed about .
Amongst other things , a member of a political organization who took part in a colloquium in Brussels was treated very roughly , to put it mildly , on his return home , and in this as in other cases , differing accounts are given as to what happened .
We believe that Tunisia should in fact be a symbol , a test case for free , democratic development in North Africa .
If there is one means of opposing extremism , one means of opposing radical fundamentalism , one means of opposing tendencies towards isolation and dictatorship , then that means is the safeguarding of human rights , and the positive development of human rights , and this seems to us , particularly in Tunisia , to be possible , achievable and very necessary .
Madam President , I believe that Parliament is finally living up to the declarations of friendship it has made towards Tunisia .
For the first time , it is telling things the way they are , and I believe that is important , and that it should be emphasized .
There is in fact a paradox in Tunisia .
On the one hand we have genuine economic and social progress , and the very specific declarations made by President Ben Ali , but on the other hand we have a deteriorating situation with regard to human rights and lack of progress towards democracy .
So I believe it is important that , as a sign of genuine friendship , Parliament should say these things to the Tunisian Government and authorities , so that our dialogue can be based on reality and not on imaginary situations or pious hopes .
I think that if we take that as our starting point , we can develop more constructive relations with Tunisia .
A lot of hard work will be needed .
We are going to have to be very firm with our Tunisian friends , with the authorities , and we should not hesitate to take every opportunity to remind them that what happened to Mr Chamari and what happened to Mr Moada are certainly not encouraging signs for the purposes of closer relations with the European Union .

Madam President , I too subscribe to what my colleagues have said and I am astonished that , in a country like Tunisia , where there has been economic progress and an improvement in the living conditions of the population , proper democratization of the country has not developed at the same time .
On the contrary , in addition to the acts of intimidation and aggression that have already been mentioned , there have been other acts of intimidation , such as persistent recourse to the death penalty , indiscriminate restriction of the possibility of leaving the country , and even the threat of being banned from return to one 's own country , as in the case of Mr Chamari .
For all these reasons , and also because we want Tunisia to be a reference point in an area like the Mediterranean , which is particularly at risk , we think that it should constantly be borne in mind that the cooperation which the Union has entered into with the countries of the area is subject to respect for human rights , and is impossible without a proper process of democratization .
Madam President , as a member of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I would like to point out that use of this urgent parliamentary procedure in connection with a partner country such as Tunisia is inappropriate and counter-productive - a parliamentary dialogue should have taken place first .
If we proceed in this manner , we could easily give rise to a lack of understanding and we are well aware that mutual lack of understanding is the worst enemy of partnership .
There is a risk of provoking a confrontation between institutions , between parliaments , and this is contrary to and harms the spirit of mutual agreement of the Euro / Mediterranean partnership .
The European Union Tunisia Association Agreement must develop over a specific period of time .
It has not yet been ratified .
Is it not , then , premature for us to be expecting results ?
The period of time set is twelve years .
We cannot prematurely demand all the results before the agreement has seen the light of day and entered into force .
So , when taking stock , we also have to take stock of the progress that has been achieved .
It is worth mentioning that , just a few days ago , approval was given to a law reinforcing popular sovereignty and , also , progress is being made in the area of representation of women and young people .
This is also significant and I would therefore stress that , if we are seeking a fruitful dialogue , we have to use the appropriate procedure through parliamentary channels .
Early parliamentary dialogue , before any of the institutions - the European Parliament or the Tunisian Assembly - is able to make a unilateral pronouncement .
This is the normal way for partners to behave .
Madam President , I am going to put a different point of view .
The European People 's Party will not be voting in favour of this motion .
Our group is just as interested in human rights as all other Honourable Members , and does not deny that breaches of human rights are a serious matter ; but we must not take the edge off the strong message we want to send by blanket condemnation of absolutely everything that is at all dubious .
As far as Tunisia is concerned , the pretexts put forward in the motion for a resolution are flimsy and the evidence slight .
The Tunisian Government is said to have created obstacles and obstructed freedom to come and go and to attend a meeting - not an institutional meeting - in Brussels .
Admittedly , there were fears that one of those who did attend - meaning all those not prevented from doing so -might have been unable to return home .
Once again , we need proof !
Finally , it is said that a Tunisian citizen was intimidated .
That in itself would be enough to prevent us voting for this motion , but also , and more importantly , our refusal to join in the criticism of Tunisia is inspired by the fact that there are many other charges that could be laid or condemnations uttered against a certain neighbouring country in the Maghreb , the tragic destiny of which is causing us such concern today .
In terms of proportion , how can possible obstacles to freedom of movement or even intimidation compare with the thousands of appallingly mutilated bodies littering the soil of Algeria ?
Who says anything about it ?
Why do we have nothing to say about this tragedy ?
We might have expected Algeria to be the subject of debate , and here we are finding fault with Tunisia , which is not a source of any instability and is not and will not be a threat to security in Europe or in the African continent .
That is why we call upon this House to refuse to condemn Tunisia today .
Madam President , Tunisia was one of the first countries with which an association agreement was concluded and for years has set an example of moderate policy .
The country lies sandwiched between the dictatorship of Libya and Algeria , a country where there is terrorism .
I too am concerned at the growing number of events which have no place in a state based on the rule of law .
However , like Mrs Izquierdo Rojo and Mr Soulier , I believe that precisely because of our good relations with Tunisia , we should have discussed this with all the authorities there at a different level , a parliamentary one .
My group is therefore completely unable to support the resolution as it stands at present .
The country is now being stigmatized and thereby also gaining an undeserved image which plays into the hands of the fanatical orthodox Islamic groups , and that is exactly what we do not want .
Unfortunately , Madam President , my group cannot support this resolution .
Madam President , I should like to respond immediately to Mr Soulier and Mrs van Bladel .
I am quite dumbfounded .
The aim of this resolution is to send some positive ideas to the Tunisian Government , and not just to express condemnation .
However , when Mr Soulier - as chairman of the Subcommittee on Human Rights and representative of a large group of Christian Democrats which has just argued against us finally discussing Algeria once again here in the House - dares to say that we should not be talking about Tunisia but Algeria , then I am quite staggered .
I can imagine that some of my French colleagues here are rather cautious as regards their former colony .
Madam President , by adopting a resolution on 22 May 1996 on human rights violations in Tunisia , this House helped to bring about certain positive results .
The two MDS MPs , Mr Moada and Mr Chamari , have been freed , as have various opposition members and trade unionists .
Unfortunately , those concessions have been limited and specific , and the violations of human rights have continued .
Deprived of passports - this is what actually happened , Mr Soulier - or under pressure , the persons invited by those who set up the meeting of 11 June at the European Parliament were unable to attend .
They were also targeted by a violent media campaign , which actually went so far as to demand that some of our guests should be stripped of their Tunisian nationality .
Mr Moada , the former MDS MP , who has been under house arrest since his release - and this is what actually happened - was recently molested by the police officers responsible for his surveillance .
He is currently in hospital , and I for my part do not recognize any hierarchy when it comes to respect for human rights .
The information and communication media are still under high-level surveillance , prompting the World Press Association to vote to exclude the Tunisian Press Association for its failure to defend the freedom of the press .
This House has no intention of becoming a court of law , nor of adopting a didactic stance , but we would call the attention of the Tunisian Government to its failure to comply with the commitments it entered into in the association agreement with the European Union , which are based on respect for democratic principles and human rights .
That is the essential subject of this debate and of the compromise motion for a resolution of which I am a joint signatory , in the hope that the Tunisian Government will put an end to its policy of harassment and restriction of liberty against defenders of human rights and will respect freedom of opinion , expression and association .
Dealing first of all with the question of the death penalty on Joseph O 'Dell in the United States , anybody who heard the debate will have great respect for the strength of feeling expressed by so many Members of the House and the force of the arguments put forward .
The text of the resolution does not actually ask the Commission any questions and so the Commission should not take a position on the precise terms of the resolution .
It is normally its practice not to comment on specific cases of this kind .
But the Commission would like to stress that it is very sensitive to the issue of the death penalty and takes the view that the guarantees laid down in the international pact of civil and political rights and other international instruments should be properly respected .
That international pact forbids the arbitrary application of the death penalty .
With regard to Kenya , the European Commission participated in the framework of the Donors ' Democratic Development Group in Kenya in the drafting of a joint declaration on free and fair elections later this year in Kenya .
This declaration emphasizes the importance of access to the ballot , access to the electorate , access to information and freedom of assembly .
It is those four points which amount to an irreducible set of conditions to arrive at free and fair elections in Kenya .
We were asked what have we done about it .
The declaration was handed over to President Moi on 6 May .
It was agreed that the Donors ' Democratic Development Group would meet regularly with the highest Kenyan authorities to have a dialogue on basic questions relating to the forthcoming elections in Kenya .
That resulted in another meeting with the President on 1 July .
Currently the group is working out recommendations with regard to election monitoring and an expert financed by the European Commission as part of the technical team assisting the Donors Democratic Development Group .
The events which took place last week in Kenya , which reference has been made to in the debate , prove that the situation is deteriorating and that the need for dialogue between the government , the opposition and the donor community is all the more important .
It is in that context that the statement of the European Union Member States and the Commission , made public on 9 July in Nairobi must be seen .
The European Union underlined its concern about the escalation of political violence and reiterated its earlier statements that Kenyans must be able to exercise their democratic rights in a peaceful environment .
The European Union renewed its call to all parties concerned - government and those advocating reform - to refrain from violence and to resort to peaceful means to settle political issues .
Turning to the question of Peru , the Commission shares the concerns relating to the resignation of the three judges of the constitutional court and takes note of the points made with regard to human rights and press freedom in Peru .
The situation in Peru is monitored closely by the Commission which , in accordance with the positive approach adopted by the European Union , is doing everything in its power to support efforts to promote and safeguard human rights in the country .
It is only fair to take account of what Mr Habsburg-Lothringen said , namely that whatever the problems may be , the situation in Peru is very different from what it was some years ago .
Nonetheless the Commission hopes that the current state of affairs will not pose a threat to the independence of the judiciary and shares Parliament 's concern for freedom of expression and the hopes that the Peruvian Government will take steps to ensure freedom of expression and of the press .
It is important to continue to support action , to consolidate institutional independence and to ensure genuine democracy .
With regard to the situation in Egypt , the Commission fully agrees with the outright condemnation of the practice of female genital mutilation in Egypt and , for that matter , in any other country .
In order to help eradicate this practice the Commission is considering a number of ways to exercise a positive influence such as information and publicity campaigns , seminars , training of councillors and medical personnel and education campaigns , especially in rural areas .
This issue should be tackled by means of an extensive long-term campaign for which the support of political and religious leaders and health authorities is necessary in order to make it effective .
The Commission will encourage actions with that goal in mind including the very important work of UNICEF against this practice .
The debate on Tunisia was somewhat different from some of the earlier debates in this section of the afternoon 's proceedings in this sense : as far as Tunisia was concerned , the House was not united in its view .
Three speakers spoke against the criticism of the Tunisian Government .
The Commission is closely monitoring the statements concerning measures taken against opposition members of parliament or members of civil society in Tunisia .
It is of the opinion that all means , including diplomacy , should be used to ensure that there is nothing done to prejudice the observance of human rights and democratic principles .
The Commission welcomes the assent given by Parliament to the European Union Tunisia Association Agreement which the Commission negotiated with Tunisia , which was signed in July 1995 and which will enter into force after the forthcoming ratification by the remaining three Member States of the European Union .
This agreement contains two major innovations : on the one hand , respect for human rights and democratic principles becomes a central element of the accord ; on the other , a political dialogue on subjects of common interest is instituted .
This agreement should be seen in the light of the political and security components of the Barcelona Conference which launched the Euro / Mediterranean partnership in November 1995 .
It is relevant also to point out that we are not just a passive spectator of the scene .
In 1996 the Commission funded sixty-two projects to promote democracy and human rights benefitting all the partners in the southern and eastern Mediterranean , including Tunisia .
I know there have been no speakers with regard to the Philippines , but there is a resolution .
I would say in response that the Commission welcomes the negotiations between the National Democratic Front and the Philippines Government to settle their long-standing dispute .
The talks are currently stalled .
Personally , and on behalf of the Commission I would suggest the inclusion of a paragraph in the present resolution encouraging both parties to resume the talks as soon as possible . We have been providing assistance in some of the areas where the NDF has been active .
All our rural development projects in the Philippines are in the poorest parts of the country , seeking specifically to help those who are worst off .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on motions for resolutions by the following Members :
Bertens , André-Léonard , Fassa and Frischenschlager , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on anti-personnel mines ( B4-0596 / 97 ) ; - Dupuis , Dell 'Alba and Macartney , on behalf of the ARE Group , on anti-personnel mines ( B4-0625 / 97 ) ; - Moreau , Alavanos , Manisco and Puerta , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on anti-personnel mines ( B40648 / 97 ) ; - Günther , Fabra Vallés and Cushnahan , on behalf of the PPE Group , on a convention completely banning anti-personnel mines ( B4-0660 / 97 ) ; - Swoboda and Vecchi , on behalf of the PSE Group , on anti-personnel mines ( B4-0677 / 97 ) ; - Telkämper , Hautala and McKenna , on behalf of the V Group , on anti-personnel mines ( B4-0691 / 97 ) .
Madam President , I would first like to raise a point of order .
You said that there were no speakers on the Philippines , but I have checked and I was in fact down to speak for one minute to say what has indeed now been said by Sir Leon Brittan .
So matters are in hand in that respect .
During this debate on anti-personnel mines , 25 people are likely to be killed by such a weapon .
Meanwhile , the demand from us as a society for the banning of anti-personnel mines and the trade in them has grown into a debate .
I too am pleased that the Canadian Government has taken the Ottawa initiative , which has been followed up by the Brussels Declaration .
In Oslo , the final touches are now being put to a fully fledged convention , which is likely to be signed by more than 100 countries in December .
I am also delighted that the Council and the Commission have shown that , as far as they are concerned , their heart is in the right place .
In the short time which I have as an author to speak about the banning of anti-personnel mines , I should like to take the opportunity to say that my group will vote in large numbers for the amendment to the resolution saying that we regret that Finland and Greece , two European Union countries , have not signed the Brussels Declaration for their various reasons .
We think that is wrong , and so we are supporting this amendment .
Mr President , we are all aware of the importance of this convention , which could be signed in Oslo at the end of this year .
There is one fly in the ointment , as Mr Bertens has just said - there may be some confusion in the minds of our Finnish friends , who seem to be confusing anti-tank and anti-personnel mines .
It might be as well for the Commission to send a few experts to explain to them that , on their Russian border , the problem of Russian tanks cannot be solved with anti-personnel land mines .
Similarly , someone could explain to our Greek friends that there is a difference between anti-personnel land mines and naval mines , and again it might be appropriate to send a few experts to explain the details .
Having said that , I believe it is important to be unanimous , in other words that Finland and Greece should join with the other thirteen States of the Union , so that it will be the Union as such that unanimously defends this position on a convention which is really of the greatest importance .
Madam President , the Brussels conference on landmines , which has already been mentioned , impressed all those who were able to attend it .
We were also able , at that conference , to record a small success , inasmuch as the disarmament conference on conventional weapons , which was happening in Geneva at the same time , finally agreed to appoint a coordinator for landmine clearance , something that had been on the agenda for a long time .
On the question that has been raised regarding Greece / Finland , I should just like to say one thing . What we say should be true , but we do not always have to say everything that is true .
With this in mind , I should like to argue that we should not agree to this amendment .
Instead , we should seek to persuade these two countries to overcome their reservations and join the other 13 countries - and this is something that I would welcome very much - in signing the Brussels declaration .
I do not think , however , that on this account they should now be given special mention in the resolution .
Mr Bertens , at the press conference in Brussels , gave a clear indication that this would be the case .
A second point , which is very dear to my heart , is the clearance of mines , because one thing is connected with another .
Here we are looking , above all , at the possibilities offered by mechanical landmine clearance .
However , I would ask the Commission to ensure that the funds earmarked from the Community budget for mine clearance should again be set at the same level as in the 1997 budget , so that we can continue our work .
It is not only a matter of mines in Africa and Asia , but in the meantime we have also seen this scourge on the EU 's own doorstep , in Eastern Slavonia , and we cannot send refugees back to an area where mines have been laid .
Therefore I would earnestly entreat the Commission to take action on this issue .
Madam President , not least thanks to the constant , courageous initiative of the European Parliament , the campaign for a total ban on anti-personnel landmines is gaining ground and could lead to significant results .
Anti-personnel landmines are , we would like to stress , probably the most dangerous and deadly weapons in existence today , because they no longer have any real military purpose , but they strike civilian populations indiscriminately , leaving thousands dead and disabled every year , and rendering whole regions unusable for decades .
In many countries of the world , even if the political conditions can be achieved to bring conflicts to a close , the presence of thousands of landmines prevents the return to conditions of security and development for millions of people .
Despite the opposition of certain large countries outside the European Union , the negotiating process to conclude an international treaty for a total ban on landmines is already under way , and the European Union and all its Member States must support it effectively and take a very active role in it .
The Council Decision of 1 October 1996 provided an initial political basis for a European initiative in this matter , but today this needs both to be given concrete form internally , through the assumption of binding commitments to abolish anti-personnel landmines in all European States , and to be updated in international terms , through the adoption of a strong political initiative .
Ninety-seven countries have already signed the Brussels Declaration , and in September in Oslo a major milestone in the negotiation process will be reached within the framework of the Ottawa process .
Now all Member States , without exception , must join and support this process , by signing the Brussels Declaration , and the Council must adopt a joint initiative along those lines .
It is necessary to foster the broad participation in Oslo of governmental and non-governmental representatives and to support the draft treaty for a total ban on antipersonnel mines , and strengthen its scope as regards assistance to victims of these devices .
We ask the Commission and the Council to intensify their action to ensure that the blocking of the trade in landmines is scrupulously adhered to and that mine-clearing operations and action in support of populations affected by the consequences of landmines are strengthened .
Madam President , it has already been mentioned here that Finland and Greece have not signed the Brussels agreement or declaration on a complete ban on landmines .
In my opinion it will be a very good thing if the European Parliament deplores this .
As you know , my Group supports the idea of mentioning Finland and Greece explicitly in this resolution , and has in fact proposed this .
Unfortunately , Mrs Günther , even in this house there are undoubtedly Finns who think that whatever is left unsaid is simply not true ; you have said yourself that not everything which is so needs to be said .
Many Finns believe that Finland 's eastern border cannot be defended without landmines .
Commissioner , may I ask you whether you think there is any aspect of the use of landmines to defend Finland 's eastern border which concerns the European Union ?
It is , after all , an external border of the European Union .
I know that this is a very sensitive issue , but nonetheless I should like to ask you about it .
The Commission has used its influence and resources on a very considerable scale to help overcome the anti-personnel landmine tragedy .
The forthcoming Oslo conference is the opportunity for states to negotiate a convention on the prohibition of the use , stockpiling , production and transfer of anti-personnel landmines .
It is the opportunity to transform the political support expressed by 97 states at the Brussels conference into an international legally-binding treaty to be signed in Ottawa in December .
The European Union is fully committed to the goal of the total elimination of anti-personnel landmines and all Member States will be represented , either as full participants or as observers , at Oslo .
Of course it is a matter of regret that two members of the Union do not currently feel able to subscribe to the total ban .
But this should not obscure the enormous contribution that the European Union has made on this issue .
We are the largest single contributors to the UN voluntary trust fund - over ECU 10m in the last three years .
Apart from the UN 's effort we are the world 's largest sponsor of mine actions in all the most afflicted countries - ECU 75m in the last three years .
We have programmes for the development of new technologies for mine detection and we have responded to the call for more assistance to the victims of mines with a pledge of ECU 1.4m to the International Committee of the Red Cross .
We will continue our major contribution to the financing of actions relating to anti-personnel mines , taking account of the overall limitations on the Community budget .
The conclusion of the banning treaty in Ottawa will be a great achievement .
I hope that all the mine-afflicted countries will be signatories .
But that will not be the end of the process .
Our work will not be completed until there is an effective global ban implemented by all states ; until all mines are cleared from areas of habitation and economic use ; until all victims of mines are properly cared for .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on motions for resolutions by the following Members :
Papakyriazis and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on forest fires and the disaster in the forest of Thessaloniki ( B4-0611 / 97 ) ; - Papkyriazis , Theonas and Alavanos , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the fires in Greece ( B40647 / 97 ) ; - Trakatellis and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on disasters and fires in Greece ( B4-0663 / 97 ) ; - Daskalaki and Kaklamanis , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the fires in Greece ( B4-0695 / 97 ) ; - Ewing and Macartney , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the floods in Scotland ( B4-0623 / 97 ) ; - Habsburg-Lothringen and Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the recent environmental disaster in Austria ( B4-0658 / 97 ) ; - Robles Piquer and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the damage caused by the violent storms in Chile ( B4-0659 / 97 ) ; - Kristoffersen , Habsburg-Lothringen and Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the disastrous floods in Poland and the Czech Republic ( B4-0665 / 97 ) .
Madam President , the motion we have tabled says it all and I do not have anything to add .
We support it .
I would just like to ask the Commissioner three questions :
First , does he not think it is time to get on with something we have been talking about for a long time , namely Community coordination of efforts to prevent and fight forest fires ?
Possibly by means of the much-discussed Centre for Fire Protection , which we have talked about for so long and which we would very much like to see established in Greece .
Secondly , can the Commission guarantee that it will finance any supposed or actual development plans based directly or indirectly on areas previously occupied by forests that have been burned ?
Thirdly , our motion makes frequent mention of Regulation 308 / 97 . Commissioner , has the Greek Government submitted plans for the prevention of fires up to next November , as it should , so that it can be helped by the Community to implement them ?
Madam President , every year , in Greece and other Mediterranean countries in the Community as well , vast areas of forest are destroyed by fire .
The fires in the last few days in Greece were particularly devastating , especially the one near Thessaloniki , Europe 's cultural capital , which destroyed more than half of the beautiful cedar-covered hill which was the city 's only lung .
For that reason we ask the Commission :
Firstly , to provide immediate economic aid to help those affected and restore the damage .
Secondly , to make full use of every option available within the scope of the relevant programmes , such as INTEREG II C and Regulation 308 / 97 , for preventive action and more effective fire-fighting measures in the Community 's high-risk areas .

Thirdly , to provide in future the possibility of funding from the Cohesion Fund for activities and programmes of reforestation in previously forested areas that have been burned .
Fourthly , to realise that protection of the environment and of our forests is exceedingly important , and that the Community ought at last to strive for an overall forest protection and reforestation policy , granted that forest fires are disasters which cost a great deal in both economic and ecological terms .
Fifthly and lastly , to go ahead with the creation of a European Centre for Fire Protection for the systematic study and application of new technical methods of forest protection and fire-fighting , which could have its headquarters in Greece .
Madam President , as has already been said , in recent years the South of Europe burns every summer and is flooded every winter .
And we come back here and say the same things every time .
In Greece , as we heard at the beginning of July , the forest around Thessaloniki was burned , and very many cultivated areas in the Peloponnese and elsewhere were also burned .
So what is to be done ?
First of all , there must be assistance and economic aid for those who sustained great damage , but that is not enough .
The Member States should of course adopt the necessary measures , but what has happened so far about all that the European Parliament has proposed and the Commission has supposedly approved ?
What happened to our resolutions of September 1994 and September 1995 , in which we called for joint action , a European Centre for Forestry Policy , and means for the training of those responsible at local level for fire-fighting ?
A campaign is needed to inform citizens , but the Commission should also monitor the efficacy of the measures adopted .
Some things were said by Mr Papayannakis , and I will not repeat them .
In the context of its effort to protect Europe 's environment , the Commission should do whatever is needed to prevent and ban building on burned-out forest areas and to prevent the related profiteering and criminal activities .
The Mediterranean is a high-risk area , especially in the summer , and in the resolution we call for integrated fire protection plans for forests .
We also call on the Commission , at last , to develop a global prevention strategy , working along with the Member States but also supervising them in some way .
We also ask it to develop mechanisms to make that strategy effective .
Madam President , it is not just in the south of Europe but also in the north that we have climatic problems .
People do not usually think of Scotland as being dry but the north-east corner , where I was brought up , is very dry and so the impact of having one-tenth of the annual rainfall in two days was just far too much for them to cope with .
So I am joining in the plea for some European assistance for this area .
It is very important that Europe has a disaster fund so that it can respond and make the Union popular with its citizens .
In the county of Moray we are talking about a disaster costing well over £ 50m at the first estimate .
So the plea is for assistance from Europe .
We do not want to hear : ' we gave you assistance for Objective 1 and 5b , use some of that money ' .
Resist that temptation .
Give us some extra .
Then you will find that the European Union is even more popular in those areas than it is now .
So I am very happy to support my Greek colleagues in this plea .
Madam President , Commissioner , as you know , in the last few days there has been a great wave of bad weather sweeping over Europe , which has left flooding and devastation in its wake , and in some cases , as we have learned from the news , is still doing so , for example along the German-Polish border .
One of the countries most seriously affected by this disaster is Austria .
In Lower Austria and Styria , whole rows of valleys and regions were cut off from their surroundings for days on end , huge areas of crops have been destroyed , thousands of homes have been flooded , and the infrastructure , such the telephone service etc . , is in some cases still not working .
The damage in Lower Austria alone is currently estimated at over one billion Austrian schillings .
I am convinced that now is the time to show European solidarity with those affected .
I very much hope that the Commission in particular is now exploring every possibility of providing , where possible , rapid and nonbureaucratic assistance .
Madam President , natural disasters do not only happen in the Old World .
We should spare a thought for other people .
After a long period of drought in Chile - a country which one of its writers described as a geographical aberration - there has been terrible flooding , high winds and snowfalls .
Seven regions in the centre of the country , almost two thirds of the country 's area , have been affected : 60 , 000 people have been made homeless ; about thirty people have been killed and many hundreds of people cut off .
Logically , a state of emergency has been declared .
I believe that we , given that we have a specific cooperation agreement with Chile - a country which has always set a good example in terms of political and economic life in recent years - should demonstrate our sympathy for that country 's tragic circumstances and that the Commission should - it has certainly already done so or will be doing so - attempt to coordinate aid from the various European governments , contribute its own aid and thereby improve a situation which , if we were to look beyond our own borders , cannot fail to move us .
Madam President , the various disasters in Austria , which have just been mentioned , also affected the Czech Republic and Poland , particularly at the beginning , and these two countries are still suffering as a result .
We often adopt solidarity resolutions , but we should remember that we have an obligation , in the first place , to European countries , which share our culture and history , particularly when those countries have suffered so much in recent decades .
For it is , in particular , those nations that lay under Soviet occupation who have paid the real price of the Second World War .
In such cases we should express our solidarity clearly , and in as non-bureaucratic a manner as possible .
Bureaucratic assistance is never as good as spontaneous , active assistance .
Madam President , with regard to the tight economic situation in Poland and the Czech Republic , it is a very heavy burden , in terms of social equilibrium , that these two countries should now have to cope , in addition , with the consequences of this environmental disaster .
It is particularly hard on people who have lost what they toiled so hard for .
Environmental disasters do not have purely natural causes .
It is not enough to bewail such disasters ; it is also up to us in the West to take preventive measures on behalf of the East and the South .
I am referring here to Rio + 5 , and the unfortunate fact that it was still not possible to agree on CO2 consumption , which of course needed to be reduced , by a definite figure , in order to prevent environmental disasters from happening in future .
I should also like to ask the Commissioner why the Commission has still not taken any steps , within INTERREG , which is used , for example for cooperation on the ' renaturing ' of rivers , in order to seek to obtain a joint fund .
There is still the difficulty of financing joint projects in a manner which really is uncomplicated .
I should like to ask you to give us an answer on that point .
All I can say is , hands off the concreting of river banks !
It should not happen , because that is what leads to such disasters , and therefore the Commission should not pay out a penny for concreting river banks , for example the R. Havel in Brandenburg , in the context of the trans-European river network scheme .
Madam President , firstly on behalf of the Commission , I should like to extend our sympathy to the victims of the storms which have hit regions of the United Kingdom , of Austria , Poland , the Czech Republic and the forest fires in Greece , and also extend our sympathy to those affected by the recent floods in Chile .
Turning first to the European Union Member States concerned , the 1997 budget does not carry any appropriations for emergency aid for disaster victims in the Community as the item B 43400 was given only a token entry for the second year running .
As regards the damage caused to agricultural production potential and to economic and productive structures , we are able , under the existing procedures , to examine any proposal that may be made by the authorities of the Member State concerned for a structural fund assistance within the financial allocations set and by redeployment of these allocations .
But it is not the purpose of the structural funds to provide compensation for damage caused by natural disasters .
Their support can be no more than indirect .
That means that it is up to the competent authorities in the Member States to take an imaginative view of things and to put proposals forward that priority should be given to the disaster areas in the allocation of general aid for economic development .
That really is what I can offer for countries such as Austria .
They have to take the initiative in that way .
With regard more specifically to protection of forests against fires , the Council earlier this year extended the Community fire prevention action for five years .
Its purpose is to help Member States improve their fire protection system by financing studies into the causes of fires and prevention , monitoring and personnel training measures , provided that these measures are part of a comprehensive plan to protect forests against fires .
Under this Community action ECU 12.8m was granted to 54 projects presented by the Greek authorities for the period 1992 to 1996 and in addition on 9 July last the Commission approved the assistance of ECU 2.35m for five Greek projects , all of which came under the Greek national forest fire protection plan .
The entire Greek territory was classified as a high fire risk area by the Commission in 1993 .
The Commission is responsible for the coordination of this action in close collaboration with the Standing Forestry Commission .
That involves the application of the Community information system which is becoming an excellent instrument for evaluation protection arrangements and exchanging information .
It should also be added that the regional development and operational programmes adopted for Greece for 1994-1999 also provide for forestry protection measures and reafforestation measures .
It is up to the national authorities to re-order their priorities if necessary in the light of the needs that have been expressed .
With regard to the torrential rainfalls in the Moray region of Scotland , the structural funds do not contain a reserve allowing for an additional financial allocation to the area affected .
But the area is eligible for structural funds assistance .
Neither of the programmes covering the Moray area mention any such assistance for the construction of suitable flood prevention infrastructures .
But both of these programmes contain a priority targeted on the enhancement and protection of the natural environment which is one of the area 's major assets .
Should the Scottish authorities consider assistance to the area to be a top priority , the Commission along with the local partners is ready to take into consideration any type of environmental management scheme which would minimize the adverse impact of these rainfalls and ensure long-term sustainability while supporting economic development .
I very warmly welcome the interest shown by Parliament and share its concern with regard to the grave consequences of the floods affecting mainly Poland and the Czech Republic .
For my part I fully share the sentiment that has been expressed as to what we should do and why we should do it .
It therefore gives me particular pleasure to tell the European Parliament that we have reacted to this crisis by adopting on 14 July , three days ago , a decision to provide humanitarian assistance worth ECU 500 , 000 to the groups worst affected by the floods in Poland , the Czech Republic , Slovakia and Hungary .
The aid , managed by the European Community Humanitarian Office ( ECHO ) is being made available in response to an appeal from the International Federation of Red Cross Societies and it will enable them to organize emergency aid operations immediately and without bureaucracy .
The Commission grant will provide funding for food aid , drinking water and essential relief supplies such as bedding and hygiene items .
This decision covers funding for a relief operation to take place over the next three months .
So I hope it will be immediate and practical .
In close coordination with the authorities of the countries concerned , we are prepared to consider requests for providing further assistance from other Community resources , notably through the PHARE programme and some high-level contacts are currently taking place in that context .
With regard to Chile , which Mr Robles Piquer mentioned , we have been following the situation closely and were prepared to provide funding for an emergency operation but , in the absence of appeals from either the Chilean authorities , the international organizations or the European non-governmental organizations and having received assurances from the Chilean authorities that they were in control of the situation , we have not intervened .
But we have released funds available under an ongoing project in Chile co-financed by the government of Chile .
A total of 60 million Chilean pesos was thus made available to meet the immediate needs of the flood victims and that was done at the request of the Chilean authorities and after consultation with the embassies of the Member States in Santiago .
Thank you , Sir Leon Brittan .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
Madam President , the Commissioner has not given us any answer on the subject of INTERREG 2c .
The question was , whether the Commission would be willing to use INTERREG 2c as one fund in future , and not to let it carry on as two separate funds , INTERREG and PHARE , so as to make it easier for joint projects to be funded .
Madam President , that would involve a change in policy .
I am not in a position to announce that today but I will draw your suggestion to the attention of my colleagues who are specifically responsible for these projects .
Madam President , I should just like to refer briefly to the question of human rights and the death penalty in the United States .
I feel that I must tell you that a few minutes ago I received a telephone call from Joseph O 'Dell , a prisoner under sentence of death , from death row in a Virginia jail .
Using the few minutes of telephone time allowed to him by the prison authorities , Mr O 'Dell asked me to convey his sincere gratitude to the European Parliament for the interest which the House has taken and is still taking in his right to demonstrate his innocence .
The topical and urgent debate is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.23 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m. )

We now come to the vote on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Votes ( continuation )
Mr President , concerning this split vote on paragraph 13 , I know Parliament was very pleased that this report was deferred from the last session so the rapporteur could be here and not in the British House of Commons .
If she is here at this point , could she clarify that she is in favour of all parts of this split vote .
We are not actually voting on paragraph 13 .
Because of the adoption of Amendment No 1 there is no vote on paragraph 13 : it falls .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I should like to inform those Members who have not , perhaps , examined the motions carefully , but have merely followed the voting lists , that we have adopted one motion in which the Commission is asked to bring civil law into line with criminal law .
That would look very strange to any lawyer , and I feel that it is regrettable that Parliament is not more accurate when it comes to legal matters .
Mr President , when a rapporteur tells us something , it has to correspond to what is in the amendment , and those two words are not used here .
I would therefore like to point that out .
Well , let us not have a theological debate .
Mr President , having consulted the majority of members of the Commission and the Committee on Budgetary Control , and the response of those members having been positive , I would like to present an oral amendment to recital FF in which the three words ' the ISMERI company ' should be replaced by the words ' one of the companies ' .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
That concludes the vote .
Mr President , I think some of this applause should also be directed at the interpreters , who have managed to keep up with the frantic pace at which you taken these votes .
I am always very grateful to the interpreters .
The European Union must be able to defend itself against the airlines of third countries that refuse to observe the safety standards laid down by the Union .
We need to be able to penalize them in one way or another .
All of us can remember a number of air crashes in which inadequate safety precautions caused the deaths of several hundred people .
The Union must do everything possible to minimize these risks .
I should therefore like to pay tribute to the rapporteur for his safety proposals , regarding both the aircraft themselves and the level of training of cabin and ground crew .
We must aim at common training rules to guarantee equivalent safety levels for all Europe 's citizens .
All steps in that direction are to be encouraged .
The report presented by Mrs McIntosh is of great importance , because it deals in depth with factors capable of improving security and safety in air transport .
I voted in favour of this text .
The recent tragedies that have taken place both in the United States and in Europe do indeed call upon us to do everything possible to enhance the safety of this form of transport , all the more so since demand for air transport is increasing constantly .
Most accidents and incidents that occur in air transport occur because of human error .
This report therefore stresses the need to improve the training of air crew .
Furthermore , the report stresses the need for improved harmonization of European aviation products , not only in the interests of safety but also to help reduce various costs and constraints that are burdening the European industry .
There is one essential point that must be stressed : the European Commission has initiated negotiations with a view to setting up a European organization responsible for civil aviation safety .
We should welcome the creation of this kind of body , which would lay down mandatory technical rules to be applied throughout Europe .
In particular , I hope that one of my proposals that is included in the report will swiftly be implemented by the Commission .
I should like to see the European Union actively involved in programmes intended to detect any shortcomings in the way in which the authorities in certain third countries apply the standards of the International Civil Aviation Organization ( ICAO ) and in programmes enabling us to work together with those authorities , where such shortcomings are detected , to enable them to reinstate compliance with international safety standards .
We are deeply concerned at the increasing number of air accidents recently .
From that standpoint additional measures must be adopted immediately at European Union level , mainly aimed at accident avoidance .
In particular , account should be taken of the fact that the increased risk is largely due to the continuing attempt to cut costs by using non-specialized seasonal personnel and by reducing maintenance and operation costs .
In our opinion , the frequency and scope of technical inspections of aircraft should be increased .
The European Union should contribute to the establishment of international standards for aeronautical products .
Special attention should be paid to the banning and suppression of imitation spare parts .
Incentives should be provided for increasing sums spent on technical support to maximize the safety of flights and to prevent accidents .
Attention should be paid to a uniform interpretation of the standards of the International Civil Aviation Organization ( ICAO ) , to avoid circumventions .
In our opinion there can be no competitive race in the safety sector .
All the Community 's air carriers must be subject to a single standard safety cost .
In parallel , very strict sanctions must be imposed on those who infringe , even going as far as the revocation of their operators ' licence .
We also agree with the rapporteur 's view that landing or take-off permission should not be given to aircraft from third countries which do not conform with the safety standards .
The human factor is of prime importance in preventing accidents .
Consequently , any view governed by the rationale of cutting labour costs in the sector is to be condemned .
The personnel used must be permanent , specialized , and continually trained .
The use of seasonal temporary workers should be banned .
The trend towards reducing aircrew numbers should also be reversed .
There should be uniform criteria on aircrew composition , both on the flight deck and in the passenger areas .
We agree with many of the rapporteur 's observations .
We await specific initiatives from the Commission within the framework of the European Union and the ICAO , towards implementing the above provisions .
We also call for the establishment of an annual conference on flight safety , involving representatives from all the European air carriers , the European Union , and the workers .
The safety of flights , passengers and those who work in the industry is a matter that does not brook delay .
On the Graenitz report
The Commission 's communication on environmental agreements is an important contribution in the context of the Fifth Environmental Action Programme .
We know that in trying to bring about sustainable development , implementing environmental legislation effectively is essential .
To achieve this , we need to look at whether , besides laying down rules , there are any other suitable policy instruments to secure this implementation .
Replacing rules by other policy instruments is one of the main objectives of the Fifth Action Programme .
Clear environmental agreements drawn up between industry and the authorities can certainly be an alternative instrument .
In various Member States , agreements have been applied for some years now , with good results .
The Commission 's initiative in producing this communication must therefore be strongly supported by the European Parliament , and we in Parliament must not be too hesitant in our response .
Through an agreement , appropriate measures are taken which mean that legal and administrative measures can be reduced , and I have tabled an amendment to the report to this effect .
This also makes it possible to anticipate legislation .
Likewise , agreements can be used to supplement legislation and , possibly , as a means of implementation .
Agreements offer three important benefits : a proactive attitude on the part of industry ; the possibility of costeffective or tailor-made solutions ; and the possibility of achieving environmental objectives faster and more simply .
Naturally , some degree of caution is required , and this needs to be defined further .
But we must not adopt a negative attitude in advance .
For example , it must be clearly stated when an environmental agreement is concluded what the sanctions are in the event of non-compliance , and I have also tabled an amendment on this point .
Agreements must also meet various criteria , with a number of items having to be guaranteed .
If we use the checklist here which is set out in detail in the Commission 's communication , that should be done satisfactorily .
If the criteria are not met , then the relevant legislative body must be able to switch promptly to binding legislation .
The Commission is also being asked to investigate the extent to which the scope for concluding agreements at European level can be extended .
A number of agreements already exist at European level , and perhaps greater use could be made of this instrument .
On the Fabra Vallés report
Mr President , I should like to explain why I voted in favour of the resolution on the Fabra Vallés report , despite the rejection of a number of amendments .
I am indeed sorry that Members failed to take this opportunity to play their full part as representatives of the various peoples of Europe - the citizens of the various Member States who are also taxpayers .
I am sorry that Honourable Members declined to face up to their responsibilities .
As in the case of the 1992 Commission discharge , and more recently in the BSE affair , we failed to follow the argument through to its logical conclusion .
The condemnation contained in the report , following the extremely detailed report by the Court of Auditors , is a radical one .
Yet we failed to draw all the logical conclusions .
We should have ensured the setting-up of a commission of inquiry .
This morning , Commissioner Marins told us that the Commission was doing a great deal .
That 's all very well : the only problem is that it is doing a great deal now that it should have done three years ago .
So I voted in favour of the report , while still regretting that it did not go far enough .
The practices of the Commission , as highlighted by the Court of Auditors and then by Mr Fabra Vallés , do not so much call into question the activities of one particular commissioner as demonstrate a totally unacceptable general style of operation by the Commission , which it is important to stop .
It is , after all , completely grotesque for this Parliament to adopt an endless series of resolutions denouncing corruption throughout the world , and in particular in those States which benefit from the MED programmes , while at the same time fraudulent practice is the rule within the Commission itself .
The Commission should , instead , be setting an example by combating corruption within its own services .
However , experience shows that self-monitoring by administrative bodies is of very limited effectiveness , and it is therefore essential that Parliament should not settle for promises from the Commissioners ( ' don 't worry , we 'll do the necessary ) but should play to the full its part as a serious and stringent observer of the Commission 's financial practices .
With its professional , authoritative and rigorous scrutiny of the BSE affair , and then the matter of the VAT fraud , thanks to the notable efforts of two Committees of Inquiry , the European Parliament has moved in the right direction .
If , instead of fastening on every conceivable subject and dealing with it superficially , often without the necessary information , our Parliament were primarily to gear its efforts to monitoring the ways in which the Commission operates , this House could certainly be doing a very useful service .
That is why our group firmly supports the proposal made by Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , during the debate , to set up a Committee of Inquiry into the use of the funds allocated to the MED programmes .
Social dialogue
The next item is the report ( A4-0226 / 97 ) by Mr Peter , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission communication concerning the development of the social dialogue at Community level ( COM ( 96 ) 0448 - C4-0526 / 96 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the creation of a structured social dialogue at European level is a consequence of the Community 's decision to complete the internal market .
In the economies of Member States , the social partners play a role which varies in its importance but which is , everywhere , a formative role .
It was merely a sensible move , when responsibility for regulating the internal market was transferred to the Community , to include the social partners as well .
In the first place , this forms part of the model of a social market economy , and in the second place , the fact that the social partners should be close to the real situation is an advantage if the regulations to be introduced are to be appropriate to their purpose , and if they are to be acceptable .
If the social dialogue is to do justice to the objectives that have been set , it must have an adequate influence on the development process of the internal market and the related social consequences .
Task-setting and organization should be oriented in this direction .
The main requirements , and the most current ones , are to review the forms of dialogue that have been developed so far , to develop a new approach , in both substance and form , and to make the criteria for the participation of organizations in the collective dialogue both helpful and likely to achieve consensus .
The Commission Communication concerning the Development of the Social Dialogue at Community Level is an invitation to discuss reforms .
By giving examples of situations , bringing up problems and inviting answers to questions , the Commission Communication is something in the nature of a Green Paper .
The European Parliament can only respond accordingly .
The Commission has made known its intention , in the second half of 1997 , of presenting its proposals for improving the social dialogue .
The European Parliament will then have to adopt a definite position .
If we examine the problems as a whole , we can see that a large number of organizational , financial and personnel measures are necessary , the significance of which , in terms of the practical functioning of the social dialogue and the increasing of its effectiveness at almost all levels , must certainly not be underestimated .
However , there are also political viewpoints , and I should just like to examine , briefly , the significance of these .
The representativeness of the organizations who participate in the social dialogue is a vital requirement .
Only organizations which meet the representativeness criteria can be involved in the social dialogue .
The criteria themselves must be clear enough to prevent any doubt arising , and they must be able to withstand scrutiny by the courts .
Drafting these criteria and monitoring their observance is a task for the Community bodies . Meeting the criteria is a task for the organizations and associations who wish to take part in the social dialogue .
The organizations involved must also be mutually acceptable to one another , particularly in cases where , over and above the level of mere hearings , it is a question of negotiations and results that are binding on third parties , where a constructive climate has to take precedence over all the different interests involved .
This is something that arises from the autonomy of the associations , and it cannot be forced upon people in a free , pluralistic society .
The social dialogue is certainly no panacea that will provide a socially just solution to all the problems that need to be dealt with , but it is an effective , formative tool , which the Community should make increasing use of .
The recognition of the principle of social dialogue must therefore not be reduced to the traditional field of socio-political problems , but should be extended to cover all regulatory intentions which are clearly of social relevance .
For the Commission , for example , this means that all Commissioners must develop a corresponding willingness to cooperate and to pass it on to their staff .
The unemployment that currently exists in the Community makes it absolutely essential that the capacities available within the social dialogue should be directly concerned in the development of aids to finding solutions .
The Commission must , above all , put some concrete proposals on the table without delay .
As a result of the inclusion of the Social Agreement in the Amsterdam Treaty , and the accession of the United Kingdom to the Social Agreement will , on the one hand , strengthen the efficacy of any future rules arising from the social dialogue . On the other hand , however , the parliamentary-democratic deficit will become further established .
If , in the future too , the Parliament is to remain entirely excluded from an EU-wide legislative process , while the Council continues to have the last word in this area , then that is and will remain a cardinal error , which cannot be compensated for by the extending of opportunities for co-decision elsewhere .
I therefore invite the Council and the Commission to enter into negotiations with Parliament regarding the conclusion of an inter-institutional agreement , so that the damage can be swiftly undone .
Mr President , subject to certain prerequisites this statement by the Commission could constitute an important opportunity to develop some serious thinking concerning the aims , content and results of the social dialogue at Community level .
All the more so , since present-day reality confirms those who claim that there is a movement to use the social dialogue , at both Community and Member State level , to act as a social throttle to damp down the agitation and reactions produced among working people by the more general economic and social policies exercised by the Union and the Member States .
One could hope that the most substantive form of social dialogue , collective negotiations and the signing of collective work agreements between the representatives of working people and employers , would be an object of support in the context of this debate , while representativeness too ought to be improved by the participation of representatives from SMEs at every level of the social dialogue .
Yet , the related amendments on the need to strengthen collective negotiations and facilitate the signing of collective labour conventions at Union level , at the level of multinational companies , and at branch or regional level , were not supported by the rapporteur and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
The same fate befell the amendments relating to participation by SMEs in the Val Duchesse social dialogue and the other levels of social dialogue .
The argument that SMEs express their views via UNICE is at the very least comical , and does not persuade anyone since it entrusts major European industry to represent small and medium-sized enterprises .
I would like to invite the Members to vote for those amendments .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent report , and indeed to thank the Commission for the fact that this communication invites us to engage in a broad debate on the social dialogue .
Because in spite of the Treaty of Amsterdam - and even in spite of this communication , I would say - the place of this social dialogue at European level , both interprofessional and sectoral , remains anything but clear .
Clarification is still urgently required .
I shall mention three important examples . Firstly , the Luxembourg presidency is organizing an extra summit on employment in November , which may finally mark the start of a European strategy on employment .
It is clear to me that it must be decided that increases in productivity will be used primarily in favour of jobs in future , to extract guarantees of work if there is wage restraint .
However , this also means that the European social partners must be involved .
I am convinced that wage and labour agreements will also have to be reached at European level in future , as part of economic and monetary union .
And the same applies to reorganization of work and the reduction of working time .
It is still particularly unclear how the social partners can now play a part in the European strategy on employment .
It is significant that the Luxembourg presidency has not put any formal questions to the social partners , for example on drawing up a European framework agreement in which they too would offer binding commitments .
Secondly , the Amsterdam Treaty does in fact leave many questions open as regards the validity or the scope of the agreements that are reached in the social dialogue .
But there is every reason to clarify the relationship with the Council .
For example , what happens if the Council does not think that an agreement which has been reached by the social partners is appropriate ?
Is it logical that the Council can then simply reject such an agreement , without any procedure being laid down for what is to happen afterwards ?
I support the rapporteur in his questions , and in his concern at the fact that the European Parliament is not involved .
I should have liked to say more , ladies and gentlemen , about the shortcomings in the sectoral dialogue , but I see that I have no more time .
However , it has become painfully clear to me , as a result of the Renault affair , that in the sectoral dialogue too , many binding agreements need to be reached , and I very much hope that the Commission will take advantage of this communication and bring forward some binding and specific proposals in the coming months .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Peter has produced an excellent and comprehensive report on the Commission Communication on the social dialogue .
I congratulate him warmly .
The discussion of both documents shows that the Maastricht Treaty has opened up a new chapter in European social policy .
The United Kingdom 's accession , in Amsterdam , to the agreement on social policy , has strengthened this development .
The most important aspects of European social policy were initially the coordinating rules for social security for migrant workers and the minimum standards for employment protection .
Both policy fields , employment protection and social insurance , also form the beginnings of national social policy .
Then came the idea that employees should be able to cooperate as partners and to help shape social policy .
It is in this phase of development that the social policy of the European Union currently finds itself .
I am referring to the Directive on European Works Councils , which , without the social dialogue , between the European Trade Union Confederation and UNICE , and the hearing in accordance with the agreement on social policy , would have come to nothing .
Moreover , under this agreement , it is possible for agreements to be made between social partners who , in some circumstances , may become partners under Community law by means of a Council Decision , as was the case , for example , with parental leave .
It is therefore , of course , extremely important to know who can take part in the social dialogue .
In 1993 , the Commission developed a catalogue of representativeness for organizations involved in the legislative process .
If European employment law is to be created in the manner described , then this will affect not least the small and medium-sized undertakings who employ the majority of employees in Europe .
With the SMUs in mind , it is essential that there should be a rapid updating of the catalogue of representative organizations .
We await a corresponding new Commission Communication , as soon as possible .
That is the background to our demand for a separate vote on Point 16 of the Peter report , and that is why we want the section that suggests that there will be a delay to be deleted .
In principle , we are in favour of the criterion of voluntary membership in the associations that are allowed to participate in the social dialogue , but we are also in favour of a special rule in favour of the model country when it comes to social partnership , in other words Austria . This means full participation by the Chamber of Business of the Austrian Republic , an organization under public law .
But my colleague Hubert Pirker will be saying something about that .
In order to explain our positions , we propose that in Amendment No 3 , Parliament should expressly refer to the Reding Report of May 1994 .
In that report , not only is the concept of representativeness clearly defined : it is also expressly demanded that the Commission should create binding structures between all representative bodies of the social partners .
The social dialogue is an expression of the principle of subsidiarity .
Therefore I would warn against trying to give the actors who are represented by it too much official advice as to what they ought to do .
In most cases they know better .
This tendency arises in some of the other amendments , which we shall be rejecting .
Subsidiarity means , in cases of doubt , giving the smaller entity preference , but also , in cases of doubt , giving preference to the arrangements of the social partners as opposed to government solutions .
It is important that the social partners should be able to use the opportunities that the Treaty on European Union offers them .
They can make use of the fact that they are closer to the reality of the situation , as compared with government and Community institutions , in order to overcome socio-political problems .
It is equally important that the Commission should be active , in issuing a new communication on the social dialogue .
With this in mind , we wish to vote in favour of the Peter Report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe can only be a citizen 's Europe if the Europeans themselves really are in a position to shape their own future .
So the Commission is absolutely right to attach the greatest importance to the development of the social dialogue .
Even so , the agreements that are reached will have to be recognized by all , and that is the essence of the problem .
In particular , ladies and gentlemen , I must remind you that in French law representivity is the only criterion which confers upon a professional organization the right to negotiate joint agreements .
However , the mutual recognition defended by Mr Peter is indicative of a Germanic concept of the social partners , and so organizes the exclusions .
So I believe that the questions raised by the Commission as to the representivity of its opposite numbers in the dialogue on the Union 's social policy are justified questions .
However , I should also say that some of those same opposite numbers dispute the influence their opinions can have on the decisions made by the Community institutions .
What about the role of small- and medium-sized enterprises or farmers ' representatives in the agreement on social policy ?
Although the representative bodies involved in the sectoral dialogue are numerous , only three organizations participate in the agreement on social policy .
Bearing that in mind , we should like the Commission to move as soon as possible to present specific proposals for improving the efficacy and objectives of the social dialogue .
The results of Amsterdam , slender though they may be , did allow the incorporation of the social protocol into the Treaty and the application of the codecision procedure to social issues .
It now remains to hope that Parliament , too , can find a place in the social dialogue .
The idea of including the social partners in those States that are candidates for accession is an interesting one , and I must thank Mr Peter for having drawn attention to it .
I also congratulate him on the quality of his report .
Mr President , the social dialogue involves a number of parties - in this instance , the European authorities and the social partners .
I believe that we should leave to the social partners those matters which they can deal with themselves .
Clearly , therefore , we in the Liberal Group cannot support a number of amendments which are based on the view that we should lay down what the social partners are able to deal with themselves through collective agreements , and as far as the Liberals are concerned , that is certainly not always necessary at European level .
This does not mean that we have no confidence in a social dialogue - we do indeed , not least in the context of the forthcoming summit on employment .
I then come to the difficulty which has already been raised here by a number of Members , namely that there are still three partners in the social dialogue and that small and medium-sized undertakings are still absent .
I had always thought that if we pressed hard enough for this as Members of the European Parliament , then it would be put right .
I have been an MEP for three years now ; for three years I have championed the cause of SMUs , but they are still not recognized as partners in the social dialogue .
This cannot continue any longer .
It is excluding both the employers and the employees working in this sector .
And it must be noted that UNICE represents a smaller and smaller group of employees , since more and more workers are now accounted for by small and medium-sized undertakings .
So let us give some thought to them for once in this dialogue , and not just to big businesses .
Mr President , in the wake of Amsterdam and on the initiative of the French Government , the debate on social and employment-related issues has been opened , and we take a particularly keen interest in it .
But the single currency and the stability pact , to which our group remains firmly opposed , are at odds with the social protocol and the chapter on employment in the Treaty .
Social dialogue is an important element of the social Europe of solidarity that we would like to build in the interests of the citizens of Europe 's States .
We are of course in favour of strengthening and enlarging it , because it has already brought positive results in many areas .
However , it must not include discrimination against certain trade union organizations .
Now , the reference to the criterion of representivity at European Union level , as the rapporteur , Mr Peter , has recalled , makes it possible de facto to exclude certain organizations , to exclude them from the negotiations and consultations provided for by the social protocol and to exclude them from the advisory bodies , because they are not members of European structures , as is the case with certain trade unions in France .
The justified desire to have a European social law must find expression through a democratic process , which is respectful of diversity and fundamental rights , and of the relevant conventions of the International Labour Organization .
Those conventions stipulate that negotiation with employers is a right of employees as far as conditions of employment and social guarantees are concerned .
They also explicitly state that the employees have absolute discretion to entrust the exercise of that right to whom they wish .
After all , how can agreements concluded within the European Union be legitimate , and accepted by the citizens whom they affect , if the representative national trade union organizations to whom the citizens have entrusted the defence of their interests are not involved as of right in the negotiations ?
That is our democratic conception of the social dialogue , which must be conducted with no discrimination and no exclusions .
At the same time , in order to defeat the attack being launched by employers and by certain governments on acquired social benefits and workers ' rights , it is necessary that all Community Directives on social affairs should guarantee respect for the International Labour Organization conventions , should explicitly provide for the retention of the most favourable provisions for the workforce currently applicable in the Member States , and should contribute to the advancement of social rights in all the Member States .
Mr President , much has changed since the social dialogue was introduced in 1985 .
Conditions now are completely different from what they were then .
On the labour market there are now approximately 20 million unemployed and in the social sector , according to the Commission , there are 50 million on the poverty line in EU countries .
It is possible to say that the EU has totally failed in its economic strategy which has been narrowly directed and focused on the fight against inflation and on price stability .
In fact this policy has probably hindered stable development in the areas of employment , wages , social security and environmental initiatives .
These areas are equally important aspects of economic and social stability .
So now it is important that we use the social dialogue and that it should concentrate on employment policy .
Deregulation and demands for flexibility and adjustment must not be allowed to lead to deregulation of employee rights and of agreements arrived at as a result of mutual understanding and collective wage agreements .
There are some good ideas in circulation such as shortened working hours , which has been implemented by the car industry in Germany , at Volkswagen , for example , and in the public sector and in companies in my homeland , Sweden .
Mutual agreements have led to a reduction in working hours without loss of wages or with only a small reduction .
Estimates from organisations such as Alternative European Economists show that shorter working hours create new jobs .
It is possible that 5-10 million new jobs could be created in EU countries , depending on the number of hours cut from the working week .
Unlike the rapporteur , I think it is necessary to broaden the social dialogue in order to rally the troops .
It should include not just small and medium sized companies , as proposed , but also other organisations such as the European Network for the Unemployed which we in the Green Group proposed in amendment 5 .
I am therefore asking for my colleagues support on this .
Mr President , the social dialogue at Community level does not always take unambiguous form .
Often , in parallel with the elementary principles and the principal elements which give it its special nature , the interprofessional and sectoral dialogues consist of committees and working groups .
Now , in the context of the Protocol on Social Policy , we find other recently established structures and procedures which have become an integral part of the process of laying down European legislation .
The report which we are debating today rightly emphasizes employment and the creation of new jobs , and the need to prevent relocation .
We feel that the social dialogue must be brought to the knowledge of organizations of social partners , with more systematic use being made of the information services of the Commission , the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions , and above all the European Centre for Industrial Relations , based in Florence .
Opening up the social and community dialogue to the most representative associations at European level and increasing the sectoral dialogue in the public sector are priorities which the Commission has clearly emphasized .
We take a favourable view of incorporation of the Protocol on Social Policy in the new treaty and extension of the co-decision procedures to social matters , depending on cooperation , but we also hope that it will be possible for the social dialogue in a broader sense to reappear in the co-decision procedures for which the Treaty provides .
Mr President , there is a long way still to go on the road to establishing genuine collective negotiation at European level .
There is still much to be done regarding the organization and even the actual definition of what is meant by social dialogue at European level , in order that its influence be seen in the development of the internal market and in its social repercussions and , generally speaking , so that implementation of all the common policies is a matter of record .
The process of transferring shared competences to the European Union has not been accompanied by developments in the leading role of the social partners .
This is a topic which raises a number of issues , some of which we have already listened to .
It poses problems : the representativeness of the partners in dialogue , the scope of sectoral dialogue , distinguishing between consultation and negotiation , the link between agreements , compatibility of dialogue and negotiation with actual legislative activity , etc .
In 1985 we saw the start of an experiment in social dialogue which should be developed further because it has not yet gone far enough .
The Treaty on European Union and its most recent review at Amsterdam pick up on the need to support such social dialogue .
What is needed - perhaps urgently - is to organize procedures in such a way that the results are the best we can possibly achieve .
Social dialogue can solve problems in certain directives under study or being debated ; social dialogue can and must solve problems regarding the regulation of different economic sectors ; social dialogue is the best instrument for regulating labour relations and for regulating working conditions .
Social dialogue is an active employment policy .
Therefore , employers and employees , through their representative organizations , have to transfer the leading role they have at national level to the European level and , from that European level be much more active in applying common actions and measures to promote employment .
I congratulate the rapporteur on a rigorous and confident report and ask you to support it . I also ask for your support regarding the position he maintains on the amendments .
Mr President , I believe that all of us taking part in the discussions here agree that the social dialogue will only work if there is representativeness , in other words , if everyone who is involved in the social dialogue at national level also has a place at European level .
This is particularly important when the European Union wants to implement Community measures at national level as well .
In order to do this , it needs a partner who is capable of implementing them , and such a partner will exist only if there is representativeness .
I should like to show you , taking Austria as an example , that this representativeness does not exist everywhere .
Mr Menrad indicated as much when he spoke , for which I should like to thank him .
In Austria , the position is this : the Chamber of Business , which in Austria represents the small and medium-sized undertakings , trade and commerce , does not have a place at European level .
At that level , the industrialists ' association , within UNICE , is the corresponding partner , in other words , the partner that determines wages in Austria is not involved at European level .
That is a dilemma , because it means that many business people do not have a place at European level and , conversely , the European Union has no opportunity of asserting its interests in Austria .
However , this can be changed .
I have tabled Amendment No 2 , with reference to Point 17 , and I would ask you to support it , because it says that we can decide here that the partner that determines pay levels , the Austrian Chamber of Business , can be involved , by way of an exception , in the social dialogue .
Mr President , the EU has spent far too much time on the economy , EMU , convergence conditions and the fulfilment of a mass of regulations instead of coming to grips with the biggest issue which must be resolved in Europe , unemployment .
So it is important that more pressure is brought to bear to prioritise this issue at all levels .
This report is a step in the right direction .
The dialogue must , first of all , be held with the labour market partners , at a national level and , of course , at European level as well .
But the greatest successes may be achieved on a small scale at local level between social partners and without the involvement of either the EU or the national governments .
This is the route we should chose .
This report also takes up the need for co-operation between the existing committees at EU level and the newly created Council committees .
This is excellent .
The creation of an ideas bank by the countries and the labour market partners before the conference in Luxembourg could prove to be a way of producing a number of good proposals to resolve our biggest problem .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I share the concerns of the rapporteur - and those of the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy - when he expresses his anxiety that social dialogue should not act as a buffer or shock absorber for Community institutions and governments against the earthquakes sometimes generated by the implementation of certain economic policies .
I also share the concern - both theirs and that of other colleagues - that small and medium-sized enterprises should be sufficiently represented in negotiations , since they create 85 % or more of jobs in the Community .
And also that negotiations should concentrate not only on job creation but also on not losing jobs .
We all remember the lack of dialogue surrounding the Renault-Vilvoorde company 's decision and the loss of three thousand jobs .
Today , even , the US multinational , Electrolux , is threatening to cut twenty thousand jobs in Europe - some of these are in Alcalá de Henares , Spain , a country with 20 % unemployment .
Focus , therefore , on negotiation for jobs and on negotiation for not losing jobs .
Perhaps this dialogue would be made easier by a satisfactory code of conduct for multinationals , preventing them from depriving Europe of twenty thousand jobs without any consequences for themselves .
It would also be necessary - and , naturally , the European Parliament 's arbitrary nature is not the only influence - to include women in any social dialogue .
Because , as we saw in the code of conduct regarding equality of salary opportunities which was approved , the lack of a female presence means that women are unable to achieve a certain level of salary - the difference , in many European Union countries , still stands at 20 to 30 % .
Account should also be taken of the proposal made by the Committee of Wise Men , chaired by Mrs Pintassilgo , to the effect that Community institutions and representatives of social players should cooperate with a view to giving practical effect to fundamental social rights .
I believe that we are currently witnessing a period of European construction .
For some , the Amsterdam Summit was a time of frustration and of failure , because it did not focus enough on social cohesion and job creation .
We know that there is going to be a summit in Luxembourg , but are very much afraid that , as Mr Juncker told us the other day in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , if there is no finance for such job creation , the summit will not be sufficiently forceful in creating the employment we all need .
Mr President , I thank Mr Peter for his hard work on this report which we in the committee know has not been without its problems .
Nonetheless , he has handled it very well and we are making a lot of progress .
Never before has the social dialogue been quite so important , at least in terms of its maintenance , and we can see that in many ways it is under threat from people who would , I think , prefer industrial anarchy .
If you look at the Renault problem , it seems as though it has been testing the idea of a social dialogue , a social dialogue which possibly has not been quite so sorely tested before .
But it seems as if , over the decades , the only true industrial , economic and social progress that has been made has been based upon the fact that there has been a relationship , a sustained - and real - relationship based upon the relationships which exist in the workplace .
Not the imaginary ones , not the ones that just seem to appear because trade units get together , but the ones that exist because trade unionists and real companies that do the bargaining in the workplace have had the relationship and can bring that experience to the table .
It is absolutely right that these economic units should still maintain their relationship at this European level ; in terms of representativeness , at least , the key organizations involved within the workplace have been involved in a long-term role and in consolidating the social dialogue that exists .
Only those organizations which meet the criteria originally laid down by the Commission can expect to be involved .
Small business organizations do have a role , and clearly they must have greater access and greater involvement , but not merely because small businesses wish to reject social legislation .
They must be true partners around the table .
With central and eastern Europe gaining enormous ground , it is also very true and quite proper that we should look for observer status for them and involvement around the table , to allow an effective process of change and adaptation .
It is also fair to say that we have had very little involvement in the UK in the social dialogue . This too has changed .
Mr Macartney has now been made a minister for the social dialogue .
It is only right and proper for me to mention that here .
Mr Peter is also right to seek reforms in the Standing Committee on Employment , and an increased role for the Parliament .
But , Commissioner , a question to you perhaps .
Since we have the social dialogue , what knowledge do we have of industrial relations throughout the European Union and what particular safeguards and institutional devices do we need to acquire to ensure the progress of industrial relations throughout the European Community .
Mr President , I welcome the fact that SMUs are given explicit and specific attention in this report , although neither the report nor the Commission 's communication goes far enough .
I do not need to repeat here how important SMUs are in socio-economic terms in Europe .
I would take it that you are now all convinced that the difference in scale between SMUs and large businesses also requires a differentiation of policy in some areas .
The needs of SMUs do not always coincide with those of large businesses , and that is why many SMUs choose to join forces amongst themselves .
That is also why we must insist on having specific representation for SMUs in the social dialogue , at least if we wish to give this dialogue the maximum degree of legitimacy .
It is not just the fact of representation which is important here , but also the extent of the input from those taking part in the dialogue .
The SMUs must be able to participate as such , and not only in consultation , but also in the negotiations leading to social agreements which can subsequently be declared binding .
Unfortunately , this need for SMUs to be involved in the negotiation of collective agreements is not mentioned in the report .
That is a pity , but it can be put right if Amendment No 4 is adopted .
My group hopes that this will happen and , above all , it hopes that we shall also see an initiative from you on this question , Commissioner .
Mr President , the Commission wishes to review the social dialogue .
Good !
This is necessary for several reasons , including the fact that we have a rapidly changing labour market , the boundaries between employee and employer are being erased and more and more people are becoming self employed .
Many , particularly the young , do not share the same sense of participation in labour market organisations which are often collectivist and hierarchical .
In order to resolve the problem of unemployment the labour market must be reformed .
A structure is required which accepts the forces of change and which allows for individual and local solutions .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in continuing our discussion of the review of the social dialogue our initial values must be effectiveness , restraint , transparency and openness and also representativeness and legitimacy .
It is important that the labour market partners do not gain a unique position in the EU 's democratic decision making process .
Furthermore , it is extremely important that elected politicians , including those at national level , do not shirk from this difficult task of recreating the right conditions for a healthy labour market .
Mr President , the social dialogue , which embraces all branches of industry and is present in various sectors of the economy , in advisory committees and at sectoral level , makes an important contribution to the finding of effective solutions in employment policy , to the creation of new jobs and to the participation of women .
Social consensus is an important advantage for Europe in terms of business location and of the investment that is so desperately needed .
With regard to the globalization of the economy , in the face of which many people seem to be paralysed , like a rabbit facing a snake , employment rules will have to be adjusted , but not thrown overboard , social reconstruction will have to be jointly agreed , and social breakdown will have to be jointly prevented .
Cooperation is the only real answer to the currently rampant conflict strategies .
The social dialogue , therefore , must be strengthened , and Helwin Peter has given us a timely reminder of this fact .
However , Commissioner , the Commission must see to it that there are effective advisory committees .
Therefore we need some early , systematic hearings and thematic coordination measures .
The social partners must open up .
This means that the circle consisting of the three major umbrella organizations must be broadened to include the representatives of small and medium-sized undertakings , whether by consultation or negotiation .
It also means that the structures in the future Member States of the European Union will have to be included .
The social dialogue must be oriented towards the future .
One important point with regard to its content is of course employment policy , but areas where there is Community responsibility will also have to be negotiated , particularly after the integration , in all fifteen Member States , of the employment chapter , the social protocol and the charter of fundamental rights for employees contained in the Treaty on European Union .
Anyone who wants to have a social market economy will set up alliances , employment alliances in the regions and in the various branches of industry , as well as a permanent dialogue with the social actors .
Madam President , I would like to thank all those who have contributed to the debate .
The social dialogue , of course , has flourished in recent years and has now reached quite a key stage in its development .
The social partners are playing an increasingly important role in developing European social policy , and the dialogue will certainly become even more important as the social partners have a key role to play in taking forward the political conclusions agreed at Amsterdam .
But the communication on the development of the social dialogue at European level , which was adopted by the Commission in September of last year , demanded a frank reappraisal of all aspects of the social dialogue from all the involved parties .
On the basis of the debate and the comments it has generated , of which your report constitutes a major element , a second communication will be drafted and will I hope be adopted by the Commission before the end of this year ; this document will define the role and ways of the future social dialogue .
Let me make two preliminary statements .
First , I want to thank you for having made the effort to present your views at this point in time so that they can be taken fully into account when work starts on drafting the second communication .
Secondly , I want to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Peter , and the whole Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , as well as the other committees involved , for the in-depth analysis they have made of the complex subject and to thank them for the support they have given to the Commission 's views on the matter .
The Intergovernmental Conference has , of course , marked further developments with regard to the social dialogue and even though I consider it a little too early just yet to discuss the outcome in depth , I would like to make a few brief observations at this time .
Firstly , the social dialogue will be incorporated into the Treaty , something that we all wanted and we now warmly welcome .
And the United Kingdom has put an end to its opt-out .
Secondly , there is an extension of co-decision in a number of important areas .
And thirdly , there is a new focus on employment , with a whole new title devoted to this area and an explicit role for the social partners .
I very much support what Mrs Van Lancker said here .
There certainly is a need to increase the productivity of the European Union , but I would say to Mrs van Lancker that that productivity should be brought about by flexibility coupled with security for the workers , and I would think that the employment strategy which was discussed at the Amsterdam summit , and which will be the subject of a summit later on in the year , will not be just another declaration , but will clearly set out the commitment to positive action to be taken at national level and at Union level in so far as creating more jobs is concerned .
I would just like to say in passing to Mrs Van Lancker as well that I expect the part-time work collective agreement proposed by the social partners to go through the college before the summer recess .
However , I would like to say as well that I realize that the European Parliament is disappointed that it has not obtained a direct say under the new Treaty on adoption of legislation based on collective agreements .
I share your disappointment as the Commission worked for the inclusion of a right for the Parliament in this respect during the summit .
However , even though we will have to apply the Treaty as it was concluded by the Member States , I am ready to discuss practical modalities for information and exchange of views on this issue with you in the future .
I think this is the key point made by Mr Peter in his submission .
I have already asked my services to start reflecting on this and I will see to it that the points made by you , Mr Peter , in introducing your report are taken into account in that process .
To turn now to the report itself , I find that it strikes a fair balance between the different interests involved by calling on the social partners to consider a broadening of the social dialogue , while expressly respecting their autonomy .
Very many members here this evening highlighted the whole question of representativeness , and the representation of small and medium-sized enterprises in the social dialogue in particular .
The Commission has always made the distinction between consultation and negotiation , and emphasized that it strives for as broad a consultation as possible whilst never deviating from the principle that negotiations have to be based on mutual recognition of the negotiating parties .
I fully support the demands expressed in the report for a more effective dialogue at all levels .
I find the following calls for action to reach that end especially interesting . The call for promotion of the importance of the social dialogue more strongly throughout the whole Commission whilst keeping the coordination in the hands of DG V. The need for more importance to be attached to the sectoral dialogue .
I fully agree with you that here there are many problems facing Europe that could be solved .
Also the need to reform the Standing Committee on Employment - I give this very high priority .
It has become even more important in my mind in the light of the elevated status given to the fight for employment in the new Treaty and the new Title .
Finally , I want to thank you once again for your report , which will allow us to identify the best ways to strengthen the social dialogue and to associate it more closely with the efforts to reach European Union objectives , particularly employment and economic growth .
Mr Skinner asked a particular question and I would like to respond to it .
He asked about our level of knowledge and information about the social dialogue in all of the Member States right across the Union .
I have to say to you that we have very considerable of information on all aspects of the social dialogue , which is gathered and updated for us by the Industrial Relations Observatory , which is located in Dublin .
It is operated by the Foundation for Living and Working Conditions .
If there is any specific information that you would like that can be got from that Industrial Relations Observatory that would be of particular interest to you , I would be very happy to make it available to you .
Sir , I have one question . Is there a definite date ?
When will the social dialogue next be on the agenda , for example in DG V ?
Before I give you an opportunity to answer , I shall let Mrs Boogerd-Quaak take the floor once again .
Perhaps we can then deal with both points together .
Madam President , the Commissioner has announced that there will be a second communication , but if that is just as vague as both the first one and that answer from the Commissioner on the involvement of small and medium-sized undertakings , we shall not be making any progress .
I shall be going into the recess in an extremely disappointed frame of mind if the authorities do not resolve a stalemate which the social partners are clearly unable to break by themselves .
Madam President , in answer to Mrs Boogerd-Quaak , I wish to point out that our first communication was a consultation document , so we got all the opinions and could then evaluate the best way to proceed .
The second communication will move in the direction you would expect : concrete action as to how we should progress the social dialogue to take on board all that is necessary for the future .
That will be catered for in the second communication .
I asked whether there is a definite date yet , a date when the social dialogue will next be on the agenda , for example in DG V.
Madam President , the social dialogue is a matter of constant - virtually weekly - concern in DG V , which is involved in all the preparations for all discussions and evaluations that deal with the social dialogue .
If there is a particular point in the social dialogue that Mr Rübig would like to raise with me , I would be happy to deal with him privately .
But I have to say that DG V gives an enormous amount of its time to promoting the dialogue .
Amendment to the Financial Regulation
The next item is the report ( A4-0217 / 97 by Mr Sarlis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( Euratom , ECSC , EC ) ( COM ( 96 ) 0352 - C4-0497 / 96-96 / 0189 ( CNS ) ) , amending the Financial Regulation of 21 December 1977 applicable to the general budget of the European Communities .
Madam President , the report to be considered by the European Parliament concerns a Commission proposal to establish a Council Regulation amending certain orders in the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities .
The amendments proposed by the Commission with the above motion constitute the so-termed seventh set of amendments which seek to ensure the transparent and efficient financial management of Community resources by the Community bodies , and to define the responsibilities of those bodies in a clear way allowing no room for dispute .
I must say that the Commission 's amendments are a step in the right direction and do in fact start from and operate within the framework set by the commission 's programme to improve financial management , known as SEM 2000 , which as we know the European Parliament has already considered and approved .
I must say that the starting point of the Commission 's initiative , but mainly too of the amendments to the Commission 's proposals tabled by the European Parliament , were the problems created in the management of Community funds , specifically in the area of tourism , and the fact that the survey carried out revealed that there are many loopholes in the orders of the Financial Regulation , vagueness of those orders , and unclear distinctions between what a body may or may not do .
I must also say that for the first time the European Parliament is with this report proposing amendments to orders concerning which the Commission itself has made no proposals .
I think this is the first time that Parliament has gone beyond the Commission 's proposals and is proposing , on its own accord I would say , amendments to certain specific orders of the Financial Regulation , as well as a number of new orders .
Finally , before I go on to enumerate certain innovations introduced by Parliament 's proposals , I must thank my colleagues on the Committee on Budgetary Control , who also worked regardless of their political persuasion to improve Parliament 's proposals and views , as well as the secretariat of the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Commission too , because your rapporteur enjoyed very good and harmonious cooperation and , in particular , noted a spirit on the part of the Commission 's services which showed real interest in improving the orders of the Financial Regulation .
As for the specific provisions , I must refer to the amendment concerning Article 22 ( 4 ) on arrangements governing delegation .
The arrangements proposed leave no room for disputes concerning delegation - because this effort as a whole is mainly an effort to establish a legal text - and subdelegation .
In that connection the vagueness of the orders still in force today was what made it possible for all that happened in tourism to take place .
Another amendment relates to Article 22 , where provisions are made for contracting and subcontracting agreements .
Other amendments relate to the famous right to ' passer outre ' .
That right is well known , in other words it is open to the institutional bodies to overrule a view or refusal of approval by the financial controller , except in one situation , namely the non-availability of resources .
We are adding a second instance to that procedure , which is the correctness of the charge .
If the financial controller finds that an item has not been correctly charged to a specific budget item , then the financial controller 's refusal of approval cannot be overruled by the superior institutional body .
Finally , another amendment is a new order which establishes the general principle in the Financial Regulation that whatever powers and authority to conclude contracts are invested in the institutions by the Treaties and the ' acquis communautaire ' , may not be ceded or transferred to third parties outside the European Community institutions .
What does this mean ?
That we will no longer see the phenomenon of European Community institutional bodies and services , whether in Parliament or the Commission or even the Council 's services , by transferring power , ceding authority to third parties external to the Community bodies to determine the conditions of an agreement .
That is all I wanted to say , and I close by thanking once more all those whom I have already mentioned for their contribution towards making this proposal as good as possible .
Madam President , this amendment of the Financial Regulation , as the rapporteur pointed out , derives from the conclusions of the second phase of the SEM 2000 programme for improving financial management of the Commission .
Parliament had already issued a global pronouncement on that second phase in November 1996 and , to a certain extent , we had sketched out the major guidelines for it .
However , in this report , of which I was rapporteur , I had the chance to examine the problem and , therefore , this gives me further insight into the enormous amount of work done by our rapporteur .
I believe that , if we were honest , no one would envy the rapporteur the work he has had to put in on this issue .
This is a carefully worked-out report and , I should say , perhaps a little dry and unrewarding , but it is an extremely important report on the generally good positive basis of the Commission 's proposals .
However , in reality , it is a piece of continuity work , of amendments to amendments , of amendments correcting an amended text , etc . , which , in truth , require in-depth legal knowledge .
I believe that the overall result is balanced and that it picks up the majority of the Socialists ' amendments , about which we are very happy . We would also commend the rapporteur 's spirit of openness .
Therefore , I would like to state that there are no basic problems with his position , although , perhaps , in the vote , we will be upholding some minor difference .
Sometimes , the search for perfectionism has led us to draft slightly different texts , but , I say again , we have no problems in basic terms .
Amongst our contributions which have been accepted by the rapporteur , I would like to highlight the texts which aim to prevent problems of confusion of interests , a recurrent issue in the management of some programmes , and , in voting on the Fabra Vallés report , less than an hour ago we encountered the problems deriving from insufficient regulation .
We therefore believe that the texts we have finally been able to draft are very opportune .
Another aspect to be stressed would be , in terms of what we have contributed , the correct implementation of a system for sampling , when giving visas .
At this point , we have to say that , in our opinion , the Commission has given itself undue licence .
We understand the needs of sampling , to make management more flexible , but we cannot grant carte blanche .
I would now like to go back to what the rapporteur said a moment ago .
On this proposal , Parliament goes further than even the Commission , although this is because the Commission 's proposal is limited in scope .
And I should mention to the Commissioner that we always receive proposals for amending the Financial Regulation in instalments , and we would like to know whether , within an internal work schedule , the Commission has a detailed programme of the various stages and packages it intends to send us .
We are well aware that we cannot draw up a new code but , as we understand that improvement requires the sending of packages , we would like to know whether the Commission has this programme for its future work already mapped out .
And , if not , perhaps it could draw up an overall blueprint and advise us of what the successive volumes we are to receive will be .
Madam President , firstly , if I might just answer what Mr Colom i Naval has just said , I do not have an overall blueprint for the future but will draw his suggestion to the attention of my colleagues who are dealing with this matter .
I would like to welcome the thorough analysis of our proposal and congratulate Mr Sarlis but also Mr Dell 'Alba , the rapporteur of the Committee on Budgets .

The current proposed amendment to the Financial Regulation is intended to provide a legal framework for some of the main reforms in financial management that we are introducing in the context of the SEM 2000 initiative .
Key topics dealt with in this proposal are : the improved management of existing financial commitments and a closer control of work on the implementation of Community activities that is delegated to outside agencies .
Those have been stressed by the Court of Auditors in the last two years in the context of its statement of assurance on the Community 's annual accounts .
Close agreement has been reached between the Commission and Parliament on the greater part of this extensive proposal so I do not want to give a misleading impression by concentrating on the points of difference which inevitably I have to do .
I would like to stress that for the most part , there is a very wide degree of agreement .
But it is my duty to say just one or two things about where we do not agree .

On Amendment No 7 , Article 22 ( 4 ) , Indent 4 , the first essential point relates to each institution 's right to delegate powers for implementing the budget - and that has been referred to by the speakers - in accordance with its internal rules to delegate those powers to Directors-General and in appropriate cases to other officials .
I should emphasize that this particular clause relates exclusively to the delegation of powers within the Institutions and not to external bodies or agencies .
I would also mention that sub-delegations to staff are not something that is done informally but formal documents signed by the Directors-General concerned who themselves assume full responsibility for each sub-delegation of the powers that are delegated to them by the institution .
To add to the formality which is right and proper in such a case , a copy of each sub-delegation is sent to the Court of Auditors .
For operational reasons , in order to be able to do the job , the Commission , which executes 98 % of the budget , needs to be able to delegate powers to 500 or more officials , some of whom inevitably will be exercising some degree of discretion on behalf of their institution .
And it really would not be practical or cost-effective to retain all the detailed decisions on budget implementation at the very highest level in the institutions .
So we would have difficulty accepting the part of the sentence in the proposed amendment to Article 22 which reads : ' The delegation of powers to implement the budget can never be used for exercising discretionary power concerning a Community policy ' .
The use of discretionary power sounds as if you are giving enormous power to the official . In fact some of the things on which they have to exercise a decision is indeed covered by the word discretionary but is really quite technical and detailed .
We understand that such a provision is desirable in relation to delegations of powers to an outside agency and that case is covered by Amendment No 20 to Article 55 ( a ) which the Commission accepts .

I would now like to turn to Amendment No 17 , Article 39 , Indents 2 and 3 relating to each institution 's power to overrule its financial controller , following a refusal of the approval or visa on the budgetary transaction .
At present the only limit on the institution 's power is in the case of non-availability of appropriations to implement the transaction .
Parliament has proposed adding two more limits : firstly , when in the financial controller 's view the item is booked to the wrong budgetary line ; and , secondly , failure to comply with directives in the field of public procurement .
The Commission fully recognizes the importance of proper financial discipline on these additional points .
Nonetheless , the Commission 's view would be that in such matters the financial controller must be able to express his or her judgement objectively through the refusal of visa .
In the light of the financial controller 's decision , the institution must then assume its responsibilities in order to rectify the situation that has arisen , including the settlement of any legitimate claims by third parties .
These are institutional decisions which must nevertheless be taken within the limits of available appropriations and , of course , they must be reported to the Court of Auditors .
So we think the text of this revision should be left as it is .
The few remaining points are of a more technical nature .
Amendment No 6 relates to a previous proposal for amending the Financial Regulation in the EAGGF Guarantee Sector , which is now due to be adopted by the Council shortly as an A point .
Amendment No 12 contains a phrase relating to the re-use of VAT recovered from Member States , which appears inconsistent with the new and , as I understand it , agreed approach for the treatment of VAT defined in Amendment No 11 to Article 27 .
Amendment No 21 relates to procurements and would require tenders to include directly all the requirements laid down in the invitation to tender on pain of elimination .
If rigidly applied , this provision would exclude potentially favourable tenders for perhaps minor technical reasons .
Amendments Nos 13 , 15 and 19 : the Commission can accept the principle of amendments consolidating the financial controller 's right to give a visa on commitments and payments by sampling methods in appropriate cases .
We consider , however , that the existing regulation is already compatible with the use of sampling methods , and the amendments would only confirm existing practice .
We would also like to propose some adjustments to the drafting of this amendment , including possible amendments to the detailed provisions for approving commitments in Article 38 ( 1 ) .
It is a lengthy and complex proposal , incorporating numerous amendments , and it is important not to get it out of proportion .
We have reached agreement on all but two significant points , three technical points and one point of clarification .
I wish again to express the Commission 's appreciation of the close and prompt cooperation of Parliament 's committees on this proposal .
Our aim is to present a revised proposal after the summer holiday .
Madam President , I simply want to thank the Commissioner for his kind words , and Mr Colom i Naval and all our colleagues on the committee too , for the cooperation we enjoyed .
However , I must say - and I repeat this again - that the problem we had both in the MED case and in that of tourism , was mainly due to the vagueness of the orders .
There were orders which if correctly interpreted , would not have led to the results that they did .
Consequently , when one is responsible for drawing up an order , a rule concerning financial matters , one must be very clear in the wording and not allow room for sidestepping .
That was the spirit in which the amendment on subdelegation was drawn up , the amendment about which the Commission has doubts .
I should say that with that amendment in particular , Commissioner , it becomes possible for the Commission on the basis of Article 139 to clarify the issue of discretionary power , as you said . However , in the Financial Regulation it must be established as a general principle that mainly in case of subdelegation the person who accepts the subdelegation cannot exercise it at his own discretion , whatever that may be .
That matter , however , can be clarified , as is said in what Parliament proposes , so that practical problems can be solved .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Financial control of structural funds
The next item is the report ( A4-0230 / 97 ) by Mr Colom I Naval , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Commission document ( C4-0246 / 97 ) on financial control of Structural Funds operations - net financial corrections .
Ladies and gentlemen , I fear that my report will , if I might be allowed to say so , go unnoticed - my fears are all the greater when I look around me at this magnificent chamber - which is curious , because this report , when it comes up next month as a new European Commission regulation , will undoubtedly be the subject of newspaper banner headlines on the first day it enters into force .
The day on which a Member State has to return properly utilized funds , from the structural funds , I have no doubt that at least the press in that country , and possibly other Community countries as well , will make it front-page news , at least in the economic section of the press .
This is therefore one of those ' contradictory ' reports which , to all intents and purposes are technical in nature but whose contents have a tangible effect on the implementation of a major part of our budget .
The report I have the honour of presenting today on behalf of the Commission on Budgetary Control is also an example of the relations which should exist between Parliament and the Commission .
I say this because - and I stress this - there is no legal obligation on the part of the Commission to consult us on this issue .
It is a political thank-you for Parliament 's activity and responsible approach . At the same time , I must say that a code of conduct governing relations between Parliament and the Commission had been signed , implying that this would be automatic and there were good and bad points .
You might say that we have to get started , finally , with this agreement . There has therefore been a small degree of confusion , in terms of our bilateral relations , given its positive appearance in the eyes of the Committee on Budgetary Control and its negative appearance in the eyes of the Committee on Regional Policy .
So I would like to explain why we , the Chairman of the Committee on Regional Policy and I , as rapporteur , were moved to sign a joint amendment , bearing in mind that this was included in the code of conduct .
I would anticipate your comments , Madam President , that obviously the rapporteur will be in favour of this amendment although it was not addressed at the time in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Basically , ladies and gentlemen , the issue is one of transferring the principle of the financial corrections of the accounts of the EAGGF Guarantee Section , which has been in force for many years now , to other sectors of the Community budget .
Parliament has made this request a number of times , most recently and with greatest emphasis on the occasion of my own report on the SEM 2000 initiative , voted last November .
We asked for this principle to be extended and we were told , ladies and gentlemen , that this was very difficult , if not impossible .
However , later , during this fruitful dialogue we have been having with the Commission and which we have had the opportunity to develop in what is known as the Group of Personal Representatives of Finance Ministers , chaired by two Commissioners , and in which Parliament has been represented by your rapporteur , it was concluded that this was an issue which could be developed and perfected and that there was nothing to stop this .
The Commission therefore decided that this should be approved before the end of July .
Hence the urgency requiring us to vote on this report tomorrow without fail , so that Parliament will have defined its position before the Commission finally settles the issue .
We have been aware for many years , now , of how the financial corrections in the EAGGF Guarantee sector operate , designation of a body in each Member State which is accountable to the Commission , accreditation of paying agencies , etc . , etc .
However , these mechanisms were , quite frankly , unclear in the structural policies .
What bases could we have ?
Evidently , Articles 23 and 24 of the Funds Coordinating Regulation .
However , hitherto , these two articles have never provided the foundation for a systematic procedure for clearing accounts or even financial corrections which are occasional , but are linked to specific circumstances .
Why was that ?
Well , because there were reasons which were undoubtedly political , and also technical reasons .
I would be so bold as to say - and I know that the Member States will complain - that there was not the least political will on the part of the Council , despite the Council being the first to shout from the rooftops that it wants effective , fair , strict and rigorous administration .
Yet when it came to the structural fund money , it preferred to look elsewhere .
Given the Council 's attitude , it is understandable that the Commission was disinclined to address the issue .
The SEM 2000 programme has been the catalyst and therefore we have managed to achieve a turnaround in political will .
Moreover , Articles 23 and 24 were , perhaps , unclear and this led to difficulties with applying them .
The Commission now maintains that , with Articles 23 and 24 , it is genuinely possible to make the financial correction , something we had always asserted .
What is more , it proves that EAGGF Guarantee case-law - because cases have been taken to the Court of Justice - does give it a sufficient base and that , therefore , it can thus carry forward a pragmatic procedure for correction of the structural fund accounts without it being necessary to modify the legal base .
What we are stating in our proposal , ladies and gentlemen , is that we can accept this pragmatic base tentatively and experimentally , but that we believe that the legal structure of the proposal is somewhat weak and that , in the medium term , based on experience , we should improve it and supplement it .
We do not feel that we should draft a totally exhaustive regulation , but something which is more complete than what we currently have .
We should give the Commission the means of control in those countries which are implementing the structural funds .
Structural funds are implemented basically by national or sub-central , local or regional authorities , the länder , etc . , and the Commission 's powers in this area need to be strengthened .
Ladies and gentlemen , I do not wish to take unfair advantage of the time available , but I would like to tell you that we regard the Commission 's proposal that the corrections could be retroactive as wrong .
We are not talking about sanctions .
If sanctions are to be applied , there may be mitigating circumstances or there could be negotiations to examine the fine imposed in precise detail .
Here , we are not dealing with fines - we are establishing an accounting procedure which ' photographs ' the situation and therefore we believe that it should not be made retroactive .
Madam President , I should like to do two things , and also make some comments on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy .
In 1995 , total payments from the Structural Funds amounted to about ECU 21 billion .
As is shown in the 7th Annual Report on the Structural Funds , the competent Directorates General , Regional Policy and Budgetary Control , carried out a total of 220 inspections , 134 being carried out by Regional Policy and 80 by Budgetary Control .
As you might imagine , this was not enough .
However , not every project that is supported by EU funds can be inspected by the Commission staff .
The main task , i.e. that of preventing or identifying irregularities , lies with the Member States , as part of the partnership system .
In view of the fact that hundreds of millions of ECUs go missing every year as a result of fraud , however , weak points need to be recognized and remedied .
As things stand at present , I can see three such weak points .
The first weak point is organizational problems at the Commission .
Between the two Directorates General that I have just mentioned , there is the problem that the results of financial controls are not notified to the competent bodies , or else notified too late .
The second weak point is the Member States themselves .
As long as money from Brussels is not used with the same degree of care as national tax-payers ' money , any form of control will be inefficient .
The misuse of money from the Structural Funds must be punished with the same degree of severity as the fraudulent obtaining of subsidies from national funds .
The third weak point is that there is no adequate legal control over the financial corrections .
We do , admittedly , have Articles 23 and 24 of the Coordination Regulation , but these have never yet been used as the basis for financial controls .
I agree with the rapporteur , who is asking for a solid legal framework .
The European Parliament has already , in its approval decision for the 1995 budgetary year , asked for a clear legal basis , under the heading ' Approval of the Structural Funds ' .
As a member of the Committee on Regional Policy , I am aware that we bear a heavy responsibility for the correct use of one third of the budgetary resources of the EU .
The funds are intended to be used for economic and social cohesion purposes , and should not be allowed to trickle away , senselessly and uselessly , as a result of inefficient administration or fraudulent dealings .
I am able to support Document SEM 2000 , Commission Document 3 and also the rapporteur 's conclusions .
Madam President , the Structural Funds are an increasingly important field of EU expenditure .
They are already the second largest expenditure item in the EU budget , representing nearly 40 % of it .
The proportion of the budget accounted for by the Structural Funds will increase further in future , as we saw when the Agenda 2000 assessment was published yesterday , because some 2 billion marks are to be transferred from them to the Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund , mainly for similar use , while in addition structural funding is to be held constant in the budget at its present figure of 0.46 % of GDP .
It is up to the Member States to use these funds .
Mr Colom I Naval has done excellent work in drafting his report and , in it , explaining the difficulties associated with the use of resources from the Structural Funds .
The majority of structural funding is used through programmes to promote particular objectives , which are administered by various Directorates-General in Brussels .
This lack of centralized administration already makes it more difficult to take proper care of the funds .
Moreover , in the Member States the use of the money is again divided among various administrators , and is also regionally decentralized .
It is accordingly difficult to monitor the use of the funding .
All this helps to make it unclear how it is being used .
At the same time , structural funding is used in small , scattered amounts in various areas of society , which further impedes auditing of its use .
Yet the Structural Funds are in a sense a question of confidence between the EU and its Member States .
They seek to promote cohesion and regional equality .
This means that precise net adjustments , as proposed by the Commission , are difficult .
They therefore require an appropriate legal basis , as called for by the rapporteur , and they should be highly predictable .
Only in this way can legal certainty be ensured for the Member States , citizens and the EU .
Madam President , I support the adoption of the report .
Madam President , of course it is important that financial checks are made on the operation of the Structural Funds .
This is why it is good that we have received this document from the Commission .
I am also very pleased with the report written by Mrs Colom I Naval .
It is the Member States which are responsible for making checks to ensure that there is no fraud .
It is also important that we remind the Member States of this procedure of proceeding , so that we do not have to read about various fraudulent dealings in the newspapers .
But perhaps it is not just financial control which the Structural Funds need .
All too often we hear , or read in the newspapers that a project which has received aid from the Structural Funds has had a totally different impact from that envisaged when aid was given .
How , for example , will the Structural Funds affect the environmental objectives which we , ourselves , have set up in the EU and confirmed in the European Parliament ?
And even the opposite of this is true .
There are Member States which do not use their right to Structural Fund aid and there are funds which are frozen because of difficulties in obtaining information . Many do not understand this or the fact that everything must be applied for through Brussels .
The bureaucracy frightens people away and should be amended in the not too distant future .
In conclusion : thank you Mrs Colom I Naval for this report !
I would also like to thank Mr Colom i Naval for the work that he has done relating to this matter .
On financial control , the action that the Commission has taken and which has received support from the report takes two forms .
The first is a proposal from the Commission for a regulation under Article 23 of the structural fund regulation , to clarify the minimum requirements for controls by Member States in the structural funds .
The second is a set of guidelines to Commission services on the criteria for making net financial corrections under Article 24 of the structural fund regulation .
The draft regulation is a clarification , therefore , of the arrangements for management and control already provided for under the structural fund regulation .
It is not a question of laying down new rules or demanding the creation of new structures , but of specifying the nature and volume of controls which are necessary to enable to designated authorities of the Member States to certify that the actions have been managed and checked and that the expenditure is justified .
In particular , the draft regulation clarifies the nature of the certification to be provided by the Member State .
The guidelines for net financial corrections flow , in the Commission 's view , from the existing provision of the main structural fund regulation and do not require any additional legal base .
But the Commission will review the operation of the guidelines in a year 's time and consider whether any changes might be required in the main structural fund regulation for the period from the year 2000 onwards .
Meanwhile we will keep Parliament fully informed about the application of the Article 24 provisions in specific cases , which are applied in full consultation with the Member State concerned .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.55 p.m. )
VOTES
. ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats today voted for the report on the Commission communication concerning the development of the social dialogue at Community level .
The social dialogue is an effective tool which should be built upon with a view to creating and further developing economic and social cohesion in the EU .
The Danish Social Democrats consider that the sectoral dialogue in this context is especially important , since the specific expertise of the participants is particularly suited to ensuring that the benefit of direct practical experience is brought to the social dialogue .
In addition , we are very favourably disposed to the view taken in the report that representatives from the future Member States in Eastern and Central Europe be involved as observers in the social dialogue .
The Danish Social Democrats welcome the Commission 's support in its communication for the principle of the autonomy of parties by emphasizing that only the social partners themselves can develop their own dialogue and negotiating structure .
For the same reason , the Danish Social Democrats are opposed to the call in the report for the European Parliament to be granted a power of co-decision .
Along with the trade unions and employers ' organizations in Denmark , the Danish Social Democrats consider that the EU institutions should not have powers to amend agreements concluded by the social partners themselves .
. ( DA ) There are many reasons why I cannot vote for this report .
It is one more example of how social and labour market policy is being used as a means of furthering integration , with the aim of securing a uniform policy in these fields , partly in the interests of freedom of movement and partly in order to promote competitiveness in the EU .
It also seeks to gain more power for the European Parliament , placing it on an equal footing with the Council .
I absolutely reject this and once more insist that social and labour market policy must remain a national matter .
However , I agree that it may be expedient for the social partners to conclude agreements on an international basis , but this should not only happen within EU borders , and I am directly opposed to EU agreements as such .
Support system for producers of arable crops
The next item is the report by Mr Funk , on behalf of the Commitee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the proposal for a Regulation derogating from certain provisions of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1765 / 92 establishing a support system for producers of certain crops ( COM ( 97 ) 0360 - C4-0343 / 97-96 / 0167 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can be fairly brief .
The purpose of Regulation No 1765 / 92 , which dates back to the 1992 reform of the CAP , was market intervention in the form of set-aside and other measures designed to establish a balance on the cereals market .
Today I am here to report on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development that , in order to receive compensatory payments for arable crops , producers who are subject to the general arrangements have to set aside a certain proportion of their arable land .
This measure serves to maintain a balance between Community production and the quantities likely to be sold .
Certain small producers may opt voluntarily for setaside .
Under Regulation No 1765 / 92 , the Commission is entitled to set aside up to 17.5 % of arable land ; the current basic rate is 5 % .
The fact that low stock levels are currently a feature of the world market situation is probably what lies behind the idea of keeping to this rate of 5 % .
The position is that a compromise was reached at the Agriculture Council in June 1997 , proposing that the set-aside rate for sowing in the crop year 1998-99 should remain unchanged at 5 % .
If a rate of 5 % is established , however , the increase provided for in the case of a transfer must also remain unchanged at 1 % .
The problem is this : in the normal course of events , it is the Commission which proposes the level of the set-aside rate .
Its proposal then goes to the Council and Parliament .
In this latest round of farm price negotiations , the Council suddenly rushed into a decision , without waiting for a proposal from the Commission , namely to renew this 5 % set-aside rate .
I wish to make it perfectly clear that this is not the correct parliamentary procedure , but a quite different one .
It should remain an exception and not become the rule .
However , I must admit that this arrangement does have the advantage of being much quicker .
If we approve the set-aside rate today , the farmers will know before harvest-time what lies in store for them next year , and how much land they will have to take out of production .
One hurdle will , in effect , have been removed .
Nevertheless , I have to say that the Council must keep to the rules .
This should remain an exception .
But in this case , I would agree that there are mitigating circumstances : our aim will be achieved more quickly , and farmers will know at an early stage how much land to set aside and be able to plan accordingly .
Mr President , I am in broad agreement with Mr Funk .
I too believe it would be better to approve this Regulation without any extensive amendments , as a service to farmers .
We all know that doing a service to farmers means doing a service to the community as a whole .
Nevertheless , Mr President , I should like to say once again that I believe that setaside was and is an aberration .
I think it would have been more intelligent , in terms of general policy , to propose the extensive cultivation of cereal crops , with a view to improving quality and protecting the environment , in particular by reducing the amount of nitrogen or crop protection products used in this type of production as a whole .
That , as I see it , would have been an intelligent and inexpensive way of protecting the environment ; those of us who are involved with farming know that the highest cost factors in agricultural production are what we now call the inputs .
I believe it would be easier to increase farm incomes by reducing the burden of inputs , rather than by resorting to premiums or devices of that type .
I have another question - this time a moral or perhaps even philosophical question : do we have any right to set aside arable land in our regions at a time when a billion human beings are going hungry every day on this planet , and the very simple reason why they are going hungry is that they are poor ?
Should we , for heaven 's sake , be allowing human beings to die simply because they are poor and because the only logic that seems to drive mankind today is the logic of profit ?
Mr President , I think that the production of food products and the capacity for that production should be regarded as a natural asset on the global scale , an asset that should be placed at the disposal of every citizen .
These natural assets should be managed by a body less ossified , as I see it , than the World Trade Organization , whose sole purpose is to run our planet for the benefit of the rich and to the detriment of the poor .
I believe , Mr President , because nature has its ups and downs and because the ways in which these cereals are consumed on our planet give us a little breathing space , that we should make it our concern to rethink the general organization of farm production , to plan it for the benefit of human beings wherever in the world they may happen to be , rather than bending it to the service of some kind of commercial logic .
Mr President , it is clear that we are holding this Friday morning debate in the interest of Europe 's farmers .
I think it is in their interest for it to be made clear as soon as possible what the set-aside rate will be for the coming year .
It is absolutely not clear to me why the Commission had to wait so long in making this announcement , when the Council was quite able to take a decision on the matter .
Be that as it may , however .
We have seen considerable changes taking place since set-aside was introduced .
It was originally 15 % .
We now have 5 % , and if we look carefully at the proposals contained in Agenda 2000 , it is meant to return to zero .
Before we embark on this debate , it is worth taking stock of what has happened up to now .
What interests me in particular is what has been the case so far with voluntary set-aside .
Because when we talk about a 5 % or 10 % set-aside rate , there has also always been a certain percentage of voluntary set-aside .
What was the voluntary set-aside when the rate was 10 % , and when it was 5 % ?
If we lower the rate , does the percentage for voluntary set-aside accordingly become higher , yes or no ?
I should be interested to know these figures .
I should also like to know what crops are being grown on set-aside land .
Is this happening in the interest of our environment policy , for example ?
Are these crops being used for farm purposes ?
Can we produce more biodiesel or other crops which are helpful in terms of protecting the environment , and so forth ?
I think that all these aspects will have to be considered during the year when Agenda 2000 is discussed .
For the time being , the farmers know clearly where they stand , and that is ultimately the important thing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Funk said that if the Council takes decisions in this way , the process is quicker .
Matters would no doubt be dealt with much more quickly , Mr Funk , if democracy were abolished , but the big question is whether that would be any better !
The Council has ridden roughshod over Parliament 's rights , and attempted to push through an arrangement without a proposal being presented by the Commission .
What disgraceful conduct !
We should not tolerate this , especially since we only recently asked the Commission when it was intending to submit a proposal .
It was not then in a position to do so .
Now that the Council has stolen its thunder , the Commission is having to go along with it , and we give the whole business our blessing after the event .
We should not accept this kind of treatment !
Turning to the substance of the matter , the figure is 5 % , but there is also voluntary set-aside , which is still possible up to a rate of 33 % .
What is needed here is an arrangement geared not to land set-aside , but to land use or land regeneration .
That is why we have tabled an amendment whereby legumes - grass-clover and lucerne - can be grown on such land .
Grazing should also be allowed on set-aside land , and regulated organic farms should be allowed to use legumes grown there as forage .
The point is that the EU produces surpluses not across the board , but only in certain sectors .
Where we do have surpluses , these are the result of imports of feed from overseas .
It would make a good deal of sense to plant protein crops on this land , because we cover only 20 % of our own protein needs within the EU : it would be an excellent idea to make up for our protein deficit by starting to produce protein crops .
I realize that , pursuant to Article 43 , this amendment will not be successful unless it is taken up by the Commission .
I contacted the Commission yesterday evening , and learned that there are legal difficulties which prevent forage being produced under the compulsory set-aside scheme , but that it can be done on land set aside voluntarily .
So what we agreed was this : we shall suggest an addition - which I shall put forward as an amendment later on - referring to voluntary set-aside .
The Commission will not take up this amendment now , but will do so under the agricultural reform in Agenda 2000 . Mr Van Miert is to make a statement to this effect .
So if compulsory set-aside is reduced to zero under Agenda 2000 , we shall be able to use voluntary set-aside to make up for our protein deficit , thereby introducing a programme of regeneration which will put crop rotation in general on an ecologically sounder footing .
Mr President , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Funk , and Parliament as a whole for having effectively given priority to the Commission 's proposal setting the rate of compulsory setaside at 5 % for the 1998-9 season and introducing certain related measures concerning the sanctions provided by the support system for producers of arable crops if the basic area is exceeded .
The extension of the 5 % setaside rate is justified in a market situation that is notable for the absence of substantial cereal stocks , both in the Community and on the world scale .
The proposal for the 1998 setaside rate is supplemented by a further exceptional suspension of the setaside system in the event that the basic area is exceeded , and by a temporary adjustment of the sanctions system in the event that an irrigated ceiling is exceeded .
As last year , the Commission 's proposal also provides for a reduced increase in compulsory setaside , in the event that one producer transfers his setaside obligation to another .
Some Member States and the European Parliament had asked for a proposal for the month of June .
I have duly noted the comments made by speakers on this subject .
But the Commission wanted to wait in order to obtain a more reliable estimate of this year 's harvest .
However , in order to arrive at a compromise on the price package - and God knows that , as the days and hours pass , the Commission is sometimes persuaded to support a compromise within the Council of Ministers - the Commission agreed to propose , sooner than intended , it is true , an exemption from the basic rate of compulsory setaside , fixed at 17.5 % by the 1992 Regulation .
The impact of climatic fluctuations on arable crop production , however , is now forcing us to adopt a policy of caution .
Regarding the possibility of using setaside land for the production of legumes , this would be contradictory to the setaside obligation contained in the present Regulation - and I do emphasize that , the present Regulation - applicable to the production of protein seeds .
The idea , in itself , has advantages and disadvantages .
However , the Commission considers that the proposal under consideration is not the appropriate framework for this discussion , which should take place within the context of Agenda 2000 .
I hope this adequately covers the concerns expressed by the last speaker , in particular .
I am convinced , therefore , that the Commission 's proposal will conform to the wishes of all interested parties , and the Commission is glad that , even if there has had to be a little improvisation , we have once again succeeded in reaching an agreement .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
On Amendment No. 1
In order to comply with the formalities , I should like to make an oral addition to Amendment No 1 , reading as follows : ' This arrangement shall apply exclusively to voluntary set-aside ' .
This forms the third paragraph of the amendment .
I repeat : ' This arrangement shall apply exclusively to voluntary set-aside ' . That is what was agreed .
Mr President , I have no objection to Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's proposal .
We shall abstain , however , because in our view it should be discussed in detail in the Committee on Agriculture before we start bringing forward such issues from Agenda 2000 .
I would prefer us to discuss first what should form part of Agenda 2000 .
I would ask my group to abstain today , so that we can talk that over first .
Mr President , our group welcomes the fact that the Commission has endorsed the proposal made by the Council during the negotiation of the price package : a setaside rate limited to 5 % and the abolition of the extraordinary setaside , the retention of which would have been particularly absurd when cereal stocks are as unusually low as they are at present .
Farmers will , of course , retain the option of setting aside some of their land on a voluntary basis .
During the last plenary session , our group tabled an amendment , adopted by the House , calling for precisely this 5 % ceiling on the setaside rate , because the European Union , despite the GATT agreements , has to both preserve its export vocation and reconquer its internal market .
I would remind the House of the importance of European imports of cereal substitute products .
Our group has always opposed the structural institutionalization of setaside , and we are bound to say that the facts confirm that our analysis was correct .
Our group voted in favour of the amendment tabled by the Greens , following the speech just made by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , calling for the development of legumes on setaside pastureland , because this is the part of the setaside land chosen on a voluntary basis by our farmers .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Common organization of the market in hops
The next item is the report by Mr Mayer ( A4-0228 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 1696 / 71 on the common organization of the market in hops ( COM ( 97 ) 0098 - C4-0184 / 97-97 / 0066 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like briefly to present the report by my colleague , Xaver Mayer , to those of you who have stayed the course until today , Friday .
It deals with the reform of the common organization of the market in hops .
I would begin by thanking you for agreeing to the urgent procedure , and by pointing out that the early green light from the Commission and the Council means that the hop producers affected by these far-reaching changes can be informed of them speedily and , above all , can obtain the aid they need as a matter of urgency .
Hops are an indispensable raw material in beer production throughout the world .
Beer even forms a basic source of nutrition in certain countries .
It is the substances contained in hop cones that determine the mellow bitterness , the head , the ease of preservation and the typical aroma of a beer .
Besides their principal use , hops are also used in naturopathy owing to the calmative effect of their constituents .
I would recommend this as a natural sedative .
Some 28 000 hectares in the EU and some 24 000 ha in other European countries were under hops in 1996 .
By way of comparison , 18 000 ha were under hops in the USA , 1000 in Australia , 350 in New Zealand and 9300 in the Czech Republic .
Hops are traded freely throughout the world , according to the principle of supply and demand .
This trade is conducted by just a handful of firms .
In order to combat excessive price fluctuations , the bulk of the hop crop in the EU is sold by means of multiannual supply contracts .
Technological progress and changes in tastes have in recent years seen demand for varieties with a high alpha acid content predominate ; other varieties are no longer marketable .
At the same time , the hop market is currently beset by global structural surpluses .
It is estimated that world alpha acid production in 1996 was about 9000 tonnes , compared with the brewing industry 's annual requirements of some 8000 tonnes .
Hop-growing is very capital-intensive : the cost of the trellises alone , up which the attractive hop plants grow , is ECU 20 000 / ha .
Support for the necessary conversion to new varieties is therefore urgently needed , both to reduce the area under hops and to eliminate structural surpluses .
Secondly , old varieties need to be grubbed up and replaced with new ones that are more marketable .
The Commission is proposing the granting of flat-rate annual aid at ECU 450 / ha , as well as the possibility of withholding up to 20 % of the aid to producers to implement special measures , which would be managed by producer groups .
Thirdly , the Commission is proposing a means of accelerating varietal conversion .
Mr Mayer 's amendments focus on temporary set-aside , a system which would not burden the EAGGF with extra costs .
The following conditions would have to be met : reusable hop-growing facilities must be maintained in good condition ; the areas must be given permanent grass cover to improve soil fertility ; and the areas under hops must not be extended to include other farmland .
The proportion of aid to be used for common objectives should be increased from 20 % to 40 % .
It should also be possible to cumulate this proportion over a period not exceeding five years .
The obligation on producer groups in future to withhold 5 % per year of the aid to producers for varietal conversion is not practicable , and should therefore be deleted from the proposal .
It should be possible to use the aid for measures to cultivate and stabilize the markets and to determine quality , for targeted research , and for the authorization of environmentally sound plant protection products .
The level of aid to producers should be based on the historical average not for the last ten years , but the last three , to take account of the fact that hop-growing has become more costly , the necessary varietal conversion is expensive , no further separate funding is to be made available for varietal conversion , and at the same time there has been a persistent fall in market prices for hops .
If only one aid is to be granted , Commissioner , that aid should amount to ECU 500 / ha . This is a comparatively modest sum - I referred earlier to an area of 28 000 ha .
The Commission is of course urged to accept Parliament 's amendments .
The tradition of hop-growing dates back a long time in a number of Member States ; that is why we should help to secure its future , so that every now and again , when our work is done , we can toast each other with a glass of good beer .
Mr President , when we talk about the health of European citizens , we have to be concerned about alcoholism , which claims far more victims than tobacco addiction .
We know that the death rate from alcoholism is the highest in Europe and that alcohol is the most dangerous drug for European citizens , particularly when people drink and drive , endangering their own and other people 's lives .
Of all alcoholic beverages , beer is the most dangerous , because people who drink it do not fully realize that they are consuming an alcoholic product .
We need to think about the health of citizens not only when talking about the production of certain products , but also when individual States and the European Union undertake other actions which are right and proper , such as information and awareness campaigns .
I think that it is absolutely right that today there should be no large line-up of Members here concerned about health , rather than producers .
It is right , I repeat , but I must say I am a little surprised , because I would have thought that there would be greater cohesion and ongoing , rather than occasional , concern - maybe if the product were from the south rather than the north - but I am pleased anyway .
I am pleased that honourable Members fully realize that we are talking about production and not health , that they are reserving their attention for these matters for occasions when health , education and training are being discussed .
There are , however , quite a few contradictions , ladies and gentlemen : for instance , while States are adopting measures to control drinking and driving , and undertaking costly awareness campaigns , Amendment No 5 to Article 1 of this proposal for a regulation provides , on the contrary , for investment in the promotion of production and publicity .
This seems a little excessive to me !
I would accept the idea of including some contrary measures in a regulation of this kind , but one should , in my view , avoid broaching this .
Since , however , in this proposal there is , most appropriately , a reference to measures intended to protect the environment and reduce the use of plant protection products , improving quality and safeguarding European production , I fully agree with the report , even though some will undoubtedly be against it .
Mr President , the 1971 Regulation on hops , geared to providing aid on a per-hectare basis and envisaging a varietal conversion programme , was the subject of a four-point Commission proposal last year .
We , for our part , are in favour of flat-rate annual aid , without distinction between varieties , and the continuance of varietal conversion with no limit in area or time , provided the quality is not affected .
We also agree with the possibility of withholding up to 20 % of the aid to producers to allow the study and implementation of special measures in this field .
On this point we do not agree with Mr Mayer that this withholding should be exceeded , unless there is clearly a surplus situation , evidenced by stocks or unsold products .
In addition , of course , we also believe that it is essential for producers who are members of approved groups to be able to market their own products without any price reduction .
Overall , the proposal is an interesting one , tending towards greater procedural flexibility and reducing the budgetary impact .
Finally , the rapporteur 's proposal that total aid should be increased to ECU 500 per hectare seems a good compromise between the Commission 's proposal and the demands made by certain Member States who would like to see the premiums virtually doubled .
Mr President , for a Member of the Commission , the advantage of being able to listen to a number of reports here on Friday on behalf of one 's colleagues and to express the Commission 's views is that one always learns a great many things .
And today , therefore , I have learned a good deal more about the medical qualities of hops .
I suspect that I shall have to extend my knowledge of the subject a little further , not least after what has been said by other colleagues here in the House - and I gladly accept your proposal of sampling a good beer afterwards .

I should like to thank the rapporteur - and particularly Mr Funk , who has been deputizing for Mr Mayer - for this excellent report , as well as the Committee on Agriculture for its constructive approach .
I am pleased to note that our proposal amending the organization of the market in hops - the aim of which is to help the sector adapt to market requirements - has on the whole been favourably received .
We have taken the opportunity to simplify the legislation and to give the producer groups broader scope and more flexibility , as the last speaker rightly pointed out .
Solutions have been found to various problems on which there were at first differences of view , but I have to say that there are still some of Parliament 's amendments which the Commission is unable to accept .
These include the request for a temporary set-aside to be introduced , contained in Amendments Nos 2 and 13 ; allowing for 40 % of the aid to be withheld , through Amendments Nos 3 , 10 and 12 ; and increasing the aid to ECU 500 per hectare , provided for by Amendments Nos 1 and 11 .
I understand very well that some Members would like to increase the amounts , but the Commission continues to feel that ECU 450 per hectare is an appropriate sum - not a lavish one , but nonetheless a reasonable amount .
The amendments which I can accept on behalf of my colleague Mr Fischler are Nos 4 to 8 on the special measures to be applied in the event of part of the aid being withheld , and also Nos 3 and 12 removing the compulsory withholding of 5 % of the aid for varietal conversion .
I hope , ladies and gentlemen , that in this way I have been able to show a reasonably accommodating attitude on behalf of the Commission as regards the concerns which have been expressed here , while I would ask you to understand that some other amendments could not be accepted by the Commission .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Mr President , I should just like to reply briefly to our Italian colleague , who made a connection between this important subject and alcoholism .
I do share her view regarding the danger of alcoholism , but that danger is minimized by sensible , moderate consumption of wine or beer , in keeping with a country 's traditions .
She is in fact arguing against excessive centralization and standardization in Europe .
In Bavaria , for example , beer is drunk in a measured way - and that is why we call the mug from which we drink it a ' measure ' .
I should like to invite my colleague to come with me some time to Kloster Andechs , where one of Bavaria 's best beers is brewed , and she will see for herself how healthy beer is for body and soul !
Aid to hop producers is necessary .
The point is that the big American dealers exert a considerable influence on the world market situation .
Since the market is not naturally balanced , producers do have to be granted aid .
Regrettably , that aid is much less than it needs to be in order to put up an adequate resistance to American pressure .
The Commission is proposing four changes : 1 ) differentiated aid for each variety is boosted by flat-rate annual aid ; 2 ) members of recognized producer groups can market all or some of their own produce without being penalized by any reduction in aid ; 3 ) producers will have the possibility of varietal conversion on a permanent basis ; 4 ) 20 % of the aid can be allocated to special measures .
The aid is fixed at ECU 450 per hectare .
We are in favour of these proposals , although the total amount of aid does not itself seem sufficient .
We will therefore vote in favour of this report , even though we do not find it entirely satisfactory .
I am voting against this report as I think that the Common Agricultural Policy needs to be fundamentally reformed .
The current tightly regulated agricultural policy is bureaucratic , ineffective and unjustifiably politically divisive .
I hope that agricultural policy will be drastically reformed in 1999 and I will do all I can to see that this happens .
The report proposal before us proposes that 12.5 million ECUs be allocated for expenditure within the bee sector in 1997 .
I consider this unacceptable .
I will vigorously pursue a course here in Parliament to bring the general opinion around to accepting the abolition of the current unhealthy agricultural subsidy system .
Thank you , Mr Posselt .
I am sure that Mrs Marinucci did not intend to pick an argument with you or your colleagues who like drinking beer .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Green paper on competition policy
The next item is the report by Mrs Thyssen ( A4-0242 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission Green Paper on vertical restraints in EC competition policy ( COM ( 96 ) 0721 - C4-0053 / 97 ) .
Mr President , the European Community stands for a market economy with free competition .
Following the action programme to complete the internal market and the introduction of the euro , national measures and borders will disappear once and for all as a means of preventing , limiting or distorting competition .
With the policy on cartels , the aim has always been to deny legitimacy to other ways of distorting competition , in particular certain agreements between undertakings .
While virtually everyone appreciates the policy which has hitherto been applied with regard to various aspects of vertical agreements , it is also generally being welcomed that we now have the Green Paper and that this robust analysis will encourage those concerned to indicate where they stand .
For a variety of reasons , the time is ripe for this .
We too set great store by this approach , Commissioner , and that is also why we have done everything possible to produce our opinion on the Green Paper within the timescale you have laid down .
Our position has not just been drawn up within a theoretical framework , but is also based on many contacts in the field and on an excellent relationship with the services of Directorate-General IV , for which I would thank you once again .
I should also like to make a point of thanking my colleagues in Parliament , because the contacts with them too were always constructive .
The fact that no amendments have been tabled against the basic options which are set out in the Commission 's paper indicates that this report enjoys the broad support of the House .
I therefore hope , Commissioner , that you will take on board both the explanatory statement and the resolution on which we shall shortly be voting .
The keynotes of this report are the following : in the first place , we are arguing in favour of remaining within Article 85 of the Treaty .
One reason for this - though not the only one - is that this is the only way of updating policy within a relatively short period .
Secondly , we are asking the Commission to take particularly seriously the call which has been heard from all sides for the greatest possible legal certainty .
This is not just a legitimate expectation on the part of the business world ; it is also a precondition for a positive climate for investment .
Those who are aware of the reality on the ground know better than anyone that vertical agreements go together with substantial material and relational investments .
The concern over legal certainty leads on to my third point .
The market share approach adopted in the paper is regarded with great suspicion by the business world .
In our view , there is good reason for this .
That is why our position is that the market share approach is only justifiable where it is strictly necessary for the effectiveness of the policy , and also provided that the Commission publishes clear guidelines , after consultation with the sectors involved .
But even then , it is in every sense a daunting prospect for those undertakings for which no reliable statistics are available or for which it is extremely difficult to lay down a clear definition of the market .
Fourthly , we wish to see an integrated policy , particularly with regard to SMUs .
It is not enough , as we have said here more than once , to continually note the incalculable socio-economic value of SMUs .
We also need to ensure that an SMU approach runs through all the relevant policy areas , and this is certainly the case in respect of the policy on competition .
In this context , the Commission has our full support for rapid implementation of the new ' de minimis ' notice published in January .
We would also call on the Commission to be alive to three specific points and to draw the consequences from them in terms of policy .
Firstly , it must be realized that horizontal agreements between SMUs often serve to strengthen their dominant vertical position and to enable them to survive the increasing struggle of competition .
Secondly , it is desirable for the special economic advantages in service-station agreements and beer supply agreements to be commensurate with the purchasing obligations .
And thirdly , the call for greater flexibility should not simply meet with a positive response if this means that , where the dominant positions are not equivalent , greater flexibility for the one party has a detrimental effect on the scope for the other party to negotiate successfully .
This could well be the case if the purchasing obligations in beer supply contracts are defined by generic name , rather than by brand name .
It was not our intention to go into the specific options which have been proposed , but we must draw certain conclusions in this respect .
Besides the ' de minimis ' rules , with which we are completely in agreement , Parliament is in favour of continuing the system of block exemptions , with a responsible increase in flexibility and the broadest possible area of application .
And by the latter , I mean that we wish to see the technique of block exemptions applied in principle to all undertakings in the sectors involved , regardless of market share .
In other words , no grey area for undertakings between 10 % and 20 % , and no exclusion of undertakings above 40 % .
However , to the extent that increased flexibility effectively presumes more supervision , market share can be used , but then only as a procedural criterion for making distinctions .
We would not go further than allowing for the rebuttal of a presumption of conformity .
Finally , there is the call for swifter administrative procedures , and of course I should like to hear the Commissioner 's response to the contents of this report .
Thank you , Commissioner and thank you also , Mr President , for giving me the extra minute in which to speak .
Mr President , the EU 's policy in respect of vertical restraints on competition , i.e. exclusive agreements between producers and distributors , and especially in exclusive distribution , exclusive purchasing , franchising and selective distribution , is of course the ultimate example of a pragmatic or , on the contrary , a somewhat academic - and I do mean academic - attitude to a liberalized competition policy .
In the latter case , and we - or at least I - can only regret this liberal approach , the desirability of market freedom is upheld on the one hand , while on the other a veil is deliberately drawn over the economic realities of the marketplace , sometimes to the detriment of employees and consumers , since the majority of these individuals do not belong to any networks and have no real means of competing economically with far more powerful forces , not to say monopolies .
That is why , with regard to vertical restraints on competition , in addition to the market share criterion , we are also calling for general clauses , so that distribution networks can be seen in a more global economic perspective .
I would draw your attention in particular to the high degree of concentration in the food trade , which creates new barriers to access for suppliers .
It is also regrettable that the market share approach , as proposed by the Commission in Options III and IV , is unattractive not only to those directly involved , but also to consumers ' representatives .
They and we are equally afraid that , particularly when it comes to vertical restraints on competition , it really is extremely difficult to define market share in this context , because of the problem of networks , which eliminate competition between brands and create barriers to market access .
An extension of the regulation on block exemptions , for example to include selective distribution and partial exclusive purchasing , should give undertakings greater flexibility in drawing up contracts .
Finally , I would just say how necessary it has been since the outset - and still is - to have a social dialogue in this sector , involving both sides of industry along with consumers ' representatives and associations .
Mr President , a common competition policy and the extremely important monitoring work carried out by the Commission are essential conditions for a healthy internal market .
It is also important that the Member States make a better attempt to integrate EEC law when drafting national competition legislation .
But it is also the Commission 's task to ensure that we have the best tools for the policy on competition .
Now that we are to begin a review , I would like to emphasise the importance of making EEC law suitably flexible , to allow a reasonable amount of national adjustment but still achieve the most durable common basis .
This is one of the reasons I am sceptical about exact market share boundaries , as these can have different competitive effects in the various larger countries .
During the period of Conservative government 1991-1994 , an almost identical copy of the EEC 's competition legislation was introduced in Sweden , with the addition of a group exemption for large chains .
The Commission 's Green Paper gives us an excellent opportunity to review group exemptions and perhaps redefine them or change their scope .
Voluntary co-operation between small and medium sized companies must be possible .
In monitoring this co-operation , the focus should be on the effect that it has on the market and will , naturally , continue to include blacklisting of restrictive pricing agreements and of the division of markets between partners .
Vertical agreements often take on the character of long term co-operation for management , finance and training so they can be a good , almost necessary support for many new entrepreneurs who otherwise would not have been able to start their own companies .
It is often this type of company which can facilitate increased competition and diversity in the marketplace .
The Commission 's Green Paper is a welcome document now that we need to create modern legislation which reflects the real world .
Distribution networks change with the adoption of new lifestyles and this is particularly true as a result of information technology which not only brings with it new information routes but also new patterns of trade .
The modernised legislation - because we are not talking about anything new here , just a review of something which has , for the most part , been very successful for a long time - must be transparent and aim to bring about neutrality in competition , legal security and also provide for continued development and greater effectiveness in distribution .
Mrs Thyssen has done an excellent job - there is really not much to add .
I would just like to take this opportunity to bring to the Commission 's attention the many other constraints on competition in trade , for example , the new wave of bans on supermarkets , and also the fact that many countries use their quota monopoly to reduce and hinder the growth of increased competition in the distribution chain .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , clearly there is such a thing in parliamentary life as close encounters of the third kind , namely when both the Greens and the Socialists come out in favour of real market freedom , and the Liberals , on liberal grounds , say : ' Oh well , let us leave things be . If there really are oligopolistic market structures , then so be it .
We can do nothing about it , so it is better to do nothing at all . '
That is precisely the point .
By introducing flexible rules - and mechanical algorithms are of little help here , since they are easily disproved - we must firstly strengthen the market position of consumers and , secondly , deal with the diverse networks of vertical concentration and integration in such a way that fair competition is still possible .
Flexible EU rules are needed to this end .
We therefore support the amendment outlined by Mr Ettl a moment ago .
Mr President , the Green Paper on vertical restraints in competition policy reflects a struggle for supremacy between the principles of legal certainty , effectiveness and flexibility .
In the distribution sector , small and medium-sized businesses have their own particular character .
Small retailers can quickly fall victim to excessive liberalization .
Nor is too much scope for vertical agreements a good thing , since retailers can then become pawns in the game of chess played out between major distributors and producers .
The principle of legal certainty is particularly important for small and medium-sized businesses .
The Commission 's Directorate-General IV needs to prove itself a reliable authority .
Then the competition policy will help to stimulate investment and create jobs , without prejudice to consumers .
An approach based purely on market share is less effective in this respect .
The size of the market which has to be considered varies from case to case , and clear criteria must be used here .
The rapporteur 's solution of applying a threshold value would create a certain amount of clarity for SMUs and at the same time ensure the maintenance of competition .
It would make it easier to set up horizontal networks which oil the wheels of a properly functioning and competitive distribution sector .
I have a question for Commissioner Van Miert about his views on legislation concerning zoning and opening hours .
According to the Green Paper , these are admission thresholds .
In my opinion , national , regional or local rules must continue to be possible .
Social and religious traditions which represent an integral part of community life would justify a policy of keeping shops closed on Sunday , for example .
People 's basic needs include rest , and an opportunity to reflect and relax .
It would be undesirable to have legislative frameworks which allow these to be classified as admission thresholds .
I should very much like to know if Mr Van Miert will take these views into account .
In conclusion , I would express my support for the corrective amendments tabled by the rapporteur .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Thyssen 's report follows up the Commission 's Green Paper on Community competition policy and vertical restraints .
As stated in paragraph 13 of the report , this subject particularly concerns beer supply agreements and servicestation agreements , which have hitherto benefited from a system of exemptions .
Regulation 1984-83 provided particular arrangements for these two sectors in the exemptions for each category for exclusive purchasing agreements .
In both cases , we know that the supplier grants the retailer a number of economic and financial advantages , and the rapporteur is asking that there should be a balance , as it were , between the advantages granted and the interests of the other partners .
That being said , it would seem that these agreements are necessary for these economic sectors to function properly , and also that the certainty of the legal framework is obviously an essential condition to ensure that the operators can carry on their business under the right conditions .
The Regulation does not define the advantages proposed , and the rapporteur contents herself with calling for balance , but there is no hostility in this text towards sectoral exemptions from the rules on market shares .
In any case , there is no doubt that the crude application of a market share criterion would fail to correspond to the genuine nature of the market , from the point of view of its structure .
That is why Amendment No 2 , in particular , proposed by Mrs Thyssen , seems to me a very welcome way of strengthening this aspect of the report , as do Amendment No 4 , as far as options 1 and 2 are concerned , and Amendment No 7 .

In general , then , we approve of the broad lines adopted by this report , and we shall be voting in favour .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is little to add to this very clear report .
However , I should like to take up an issue which Mr Blokland has already touched on .
The rapporteur is justifiably critical of the fact that opening hours and zoning laws are classified in the Green Paper as admission thresholds .
This is an extremely sensitive area , and the scope for regional policy measures must definitely be retained here .
The comparison in the McKinsey Global Institute report with developments in the USA is not relevant in this context : the circumstances in America cannot be compared with the structures which have evolved over centuries in a good many European countries .
Experiments with liberal opening hours have sometimes shown that neither businesses , employees , nor consumers are willing to depart from tradition , and that there has been no increase at all in turnover , let alone the creation of any new jobs .
The right to refuse planning permission on environmental grounds is a major aspect of the local authorities ' powers , and should help to maintain a harmonious pattern of urban development .
The building of new supermarkets on the outskirts of small towns has often meant that the creation of new jobs on the edge of town has been matched by a loss of jobs in the centre .
It therefore makes sense for retailers ' associations to have a say , for example through the elected local council in the case of planning permission for supermarkets , and this cannot be described as an admission threshold .
Mr President , I should firstly like to express my thanks to Mrs Thyssen and congratulate her on this report , along with all those who have worked on it , because it shows the exceptional thoroughness with which this matter has been approached and studied .
Leaving the relations between the Commission and Parliament to one side , it is also an intellectual pleasure to be able to deal with one another in this way and to discuss what are indeed rather complex but very important matters for a large area of our economic life .
I therefore particularly wished to thank Mrs Thyssen , not least for the praise she has given to our services .
When that happens for once , it is naturally a pleasure for me to take note of it .
I should basically like to say the following , but perhaps first I would just say something about a brief sentence in the Green Paper which has in fact been taken slightly out of context , namely opening hours and everything associated with them .
It is not the Commission 's aim to concern itself with this area .
These are national matters .
What we have noted is a trend in some Member States , which we welcomed , but at the same time - and this is also in the Green Paper - we have said that this kind of trend must not of course take place at the expense of other things , for example social concerns .
So that sentence has been formulated in a balanced way , and I would ask for it to be read likewise , without one aspect being seized on and taken out of context .
Turning now to the substance of the matter , this is indeed a very important subject , because we are talking here about many hundreds of thousands , indeed millions of jobs in the European Union .
Everyone has something to do with the distribution sector , and what is actually at issue here is the rules on how people deal with each other in this sector : what is allowed , and what is not ; when people are misusing dominant positions to the detriment of what tend to be small businesses , and when they are not .
That is really what this is all about .
And while I shall not go further into the substance of the problems , vertical agreements can be both pro-competition and anticompetition - it all depends on the context in which they are made .
I should like to deal in more detail with a number of the comments made in the report , but I would firstly welcome the fact - and the speeches have just highlighted this once again - that virtually all those who have given this subject their attention are on the same wavelength as the analysis contained in the Green Paper ; they are also pleased that the Commission is willing to look critically at this issue and has therefore asked everyone involved for their opinion , and that after a somewhat long but thorough discussion , we can then arrive at conclusions together .
Of course , some of these conclusions will be controversial , there is no avoiding that , but what we want is for the adjusted rules , on the basis of Article 85 - and Mrs Thyssen has just emphasized that once again , because we must act within the framework of the Treaty - to match the reality on the market .
Because one of the criticisms which has rightly been levelled at the present policy - and it has now been in place for more than 30 years - is that it is somewhat too legalistic , that matters are judged too much on the basis of texts , without looking at what is actually happening on the market .
So now we want to handle this in a much better way .
In this context , I would indeed welcome what you say in paragraph 2 of the motion for a resolution , namely that policy must remain based on Article 85 .
But what disturbs me a little , Mrs Thyssen , is that in paragraph 15 , I think , it seems to be suggested that all vertical agreements should be treated as outside the scope of Article 85 . Perhaps I could ask you to look at this text again , because when I read it , I do see something of a contradiction there .
That is simply a comment which has struck me .
However , a new policy can be worked out and put in place as regards the application of Article 85 ( 1 ) to these vertical agreements , for instance by moving from a rather legalistic approach , as I have already said , towards a more economic one .
In view of the limited time available , I should like to deal with what is in fact probably one of the most critical points discussed in this whole area .
Everyone is in favour of more flexibility , of trying to eliminate bureaucracy .
We also wish to see this , and we are trying to focus on the most important cases , while at the same time creating legal certainty .
Maintaining the block exemptions is , I believe , a good means of helping to achieve this , and I understand that Parliament also wishes to see that done .
We too will seek to retain this instrument as far as possible .
However , the question then arises of the point at which a vertical agreement actually threatens to disrupt the situation on the market and to work against normal competitive relations .
I know that it is a rather artificial exercise to establish such a dividing line , but I have to draw it somewhere .
However , one cannot proceed on the basis - and our opinions differ on this point - that everything should be covered by these block exemptions .
That is what we feel , for instance , when it comes to a market share of 40 % - which is a very great deal , and who has a market share of 40 % ?
There are not many undertakings to which that applies , and then the matter needs to be looked at individually and as quickly as possible , there we are agreed , but we must be able to examine this kind of situation in a more critical way .
That is what we intend to do .
Then we have the problem that if this principle is accepted - and I realize that there are differences of opinion on the matter - then how do we create adequate legal certainty at the same time ?
I know that there is an element of contradiction here .
But we shall have to decide on an efficient policy which also enables us to intervene effectively in situations where smaller undertakings in particular are at risk , and not through an over-complicated procedure which removes the advantages of the block exemptions .
So for the time being , I am inclined to say that for the major cases where a genuinely substantial market position is involved - and once again , we have given a figure of 40 % by way of indication - there really is a need to look at the matter in a better way .
But where I agree with you , Mrs Thyssen , is in hoping that we can do this quickly and efficiently , and I would emphasize the point - as you also have in your report - that we need more people to be able to do that .
We cannot envisage a competition policy which develops tremendously in all kinds of sectors and then just do the work with the same number of people .
That is naturally impossible .
However , I am very grateful to you for including this point in your report , and I hope that Parliament 's Committee on Budgets will take serious note of this and draw the necessary conclusions .
I think I have gone over my time .
I am sorry , because Mrs Thyssen has quite rightly dealt with a good many other aspects in her report , and I suggest that we continue this dialogue with yourself and the other members of the committee who are particularly interested .
And you have of course included the point in your report about discussing the matter further , to inform you of what the conclusions will be and about the responses we have obtained , nearly all of which have now been received .
I gladly put myself at your disposal to come and discuss these matters in further detail after the summer break , as and when the committee wishes .
Once again , my thanks and congratulations .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
. ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats voted for the Thyssen report today , but against certain parts of the report .
The EU 's competition policy is aimed at promoting competition and market integration .
Vertical restraints can affect both parts positively and negatively .
The Danish Social Democrats are opposed to a block exemption from the application of the rules of competition for selective distribution .
We therefore vote against paragraph 12 of the report .
The Danish Social Democrats will not praise the Commission for Option I in the Green Paper .
We do not think that this solution adequately takes account of the criticism which has been voiced over current vertical restraint arrangements .
Paragraph 14 of the report praises the Commission for Option I. We therefore vote against paragraph 14 .
The Danish Social Democrats are opposed to introducing a criterion based on market shares in order to establish whether exemption from the rules of competition is in order .
The use of market shares in the calculation is an unreliable method , because the result will vary depending on how the method is used .
The Commission 's Green Paper is a discussion document which outlines several alternatives .
The final proposal must include regulations which make it possible for food chains such as ICA to continue their operations in conditions which are no worse than those which currently prevail .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Participation by Romania , the Czech Republic and Hungary in training , youth and education programmes
The next item is the report by Mrs Leperre-Verrier ( A4-0247 / 97 ) on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media on proposals for decisions concerning :

I.the Community position within the Association Council on the participation of Romania in Community programmes in the fields of training , youth and education ( COM ( 97 ) 0014 - C4-0161 / 97-97 / 0021 ( CNS ) ) II.the Community position within the Association Council on the participation of the Czech Republic in Community programmes in the fields of training , youth and education ( COM ( 97 ) 0013 - C4-0162 / 97-97 / 0024 ( CNS ) ) III.the Community position within the Association Council on the participation of Hungary in Community programmes in the fields of training , youth and education ( COM ( 97 ) 0012 - C4-0163 / 97-97 / 0018 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this part-session has been largely devoted to the problem of enlargement .
We end this morning with a more practical exercise , the issue being Parliament 's opinion on the participation of certain CEECs , in this case Hungary , the Czech Republic and Romania , in the Community education , training and youth programmes .
This , then , is a first step in the context of this pre-accession strategy . A tiny step , perhaps , but one that is highly symbolic of a declared intent to become more open .
Following the signature of additional protocols with five CEECs during 1996 , the Association Councils specified the arrangements for these countries to participate in the Community programmes .
They expressed the desire to make the education , youth and training complex the first link in the chain of joint action .
We can only welcome that , because education and training are essential elements in forging closer links between peoples .
Furthermore , exchanges already take place in this area , since the three programmes in question can support schemes which integrate Central and Eastern European countries .
In addition , the TEMPUS programme , set up in 1990 within the framework of PHARE , has laid the foundations for co-operation in the university field .
Under this agreement , Hungary , the Czech Republic and Romania may participate in all the activities listed under the three programmes .
Nevertheless , in order to be eligible , the proposed activities must concern a minimum number of partners from the European Union .
Furthermore , if these three countries are to be associated in the monitoring of their participation in the programme , it will be up to them to set up the national structures required for their participation .
As regards the financial aspect , the countries concerned are required to contribute to the budget of these programmes ( the appropriations required for the 1997 financial year have already been committed ) but they have been offered the opportunity of using up to 10 % of the PHARE endowment .
Finally , it should be noted that the total aid received by these States must not exceed their own financial contribution .
This is , therefore , a proper participation agreement concluded between partners and not an aid programme .
This is an important influence , because the CEECs have sometimes felt like poor relations receiving aid from the European Union .
That being so , the conditions for the participation of Hungary , the Czech Republic and Romania seem to be in place : those countries have given notice of their intent , and they have produced the necessary funding .
Some questions still remain . Essentially , there are three .
First , between the signature of the agreement protocols and the present time , the situation has changed considerably , I could even say that , between the time I was appointed rapporteur and today 's debate , the modest results - not to say failure - of the IGC have put something of a brake on the process of enlargement .
Similarly , the choice of countries made for this first phase of negotiations seems somewhat arbitrary , Commissioner .
Secondly , we may question the method chosen .
Involving the CEECs in our Community programmes is , admittedly , a good thing .
Even so , it really is essential to have the means to do so !
Thus , the budget of the Socrates programme is notoriously inadequate .
We must break free of this kind of hypocrisy that involves the portentous announcement of association agreements while at the same time we are freezing the essential budgetary increases ....
In this context , we must avoid a situation where the frustration felt by some young people in the European Union who are unable to participate in activities under these programmes , because the budget is inadequate , spills over to young people in these countries as well .
The cure would then be worse than the ailment !
My third question concerns the CEECs themselves and their requirements as regards education and training .
How are we to ensure that these programmes really will contribute to changing their educational systems and consolidating the rights of children and young people , which are not always respected ?
These various questions have guided us in our work : they have prompted the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and Media to vote in favour of a number of amendments , having considered the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Committee on Budgets .
I should like to thank Mrs Glase and her colleagues on the Committee on Budgets for their contribution .
Of course , we realize that these amendments are no more than indicative , but I should like , Commissioner , to know your position first on the need for a preliminary increase in the budget of the Socrates programme , and secondly on the way in which activities under these programmes will be evaluated in the countries concerned .
Commissioner , I am sure you will understand that the replies we receive will play a critical part in the continuation of this process , partly with a view to bringing in other countries ( there is talk today of Cyprus , Poland and Slovakia ) but also towards bringing in other programmes .
We may be pioneers today , but that is not to say that it is necessarily up to us to hack a path !
Mr President , today 's debate is linked almost seamlessly with Agenda 2000 , and virtually obliges us to pre-empt some of its content .
The participation of the CEECs - Hungary , Romania and the Czech Republic - in EU education and training programmes is a major structural step towards the consolidation of relations in preparation for their accession to the EU .
If enlargement to the east is to be conducted in a socially responsible way , priority must be given from the outset to education and training programmes .
This cannot be stressed often enough .
Nor can there be any doubt about the need for adequate and credible funding of the Socrates , Leonardo and Youth for Europe programmes .
To this end , all the proper mechanisms must be put in place by the EU - or rather , by the Council - and that has yet to be done .
The design of the programmes is also crucial .
Activities to promote foreign language knowledge under the programmes must be supported and stepped up : this is what the Commission describes in its proposals on the implementation of the education and training programmes as the east-west dialogue using the present EU official languages .
More vision needs to be shown here , and considerably more resources could be made available in the CEECs and the EU if , as well as the official languages , those of the future Member States were also included in this dialogue , especially since some of these already have the status of regional languages in parts of the EU and are being kept alive by minority groups .
This , moreover , is what the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs is calling for .
An overall concept of integration , for example with regard to lesser-used languages , also means taking into account those such as Romany , the language of the Roma and Sinti , which is spoken in many EU countries .
Ultimately , this would help to raise the profile of lesser-used languages and also to preserve Europe 's cultural diversity , a basic prerequisite for long-term intellectual competitiveness in Europe .
Enlargement towards the east should not just be regarded from an economic point of view : the inclusion of the CEECs in EU education and training programmes is a key aspect of our strategy of eastward enlargement .
Languages and cultural aspects in general are a vital component of democratic and social integration , and are at least as important as any financial aspects .
Mr President , exchanges are the very best means of building Europe and bringing together its various parts . My group therefore welcomes the intention to allow Hungary , the Czech Republic and Romania to participate on an equal footing in Community education programmes .
We very much hope that Poland and others will also have the opportunity to join in very soon .
I am delighted that the education sector is taking on a pioneering role , as it were , in the strategy of gradually bringing the countries of Central and Eastern Europe closer to the Union .
I should like to stress once again the psychological and political importance of such exchanges among young people for long-term neighbourly relations between the states of Eastern and Western Europe .
Europe is still full of fears and prejudices which must be overcome .
However , these programmes should also make a huge contribution to the economic and qualitative integration of these countries into the European Union through school and business partnerships .
A real transfer of knowledge can take place here , and it should not be underestimated .
I must nevertheless add two points of criticism : Socrates has been a failure from the social policy point of view .
We should discuss this soon , when the programmes are reviewed .
We must keep a critical eye on this programme and , when new states come on board , ask probing questions as to whether all social groups really are included , so that it is not only the new upper echelons in these countries , for whom mobility is easily affordable , who benefit from this programme .
Finally , I would repeat the criticism which has already been expressed here that Socrates is hopelessly underfunded .
Socrates , the flagship of Europe 's education programme , is currently sailing on half power .
I would issue a word of warning : unless adequate funding is forthcoming , exchanges between Western European countries will decline , without there really being any fresh impetus for exchanges with Central and Eastern Europe .
I would call on the Council to consider urgently a transfer of resources - and not to make an exception of the Structural Funds - so as to boost substantially the funding of Socrates and the other programmes for educational exchanges .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can take up exactly where Mr Elchlepp left off .
Whether or not the committee would approve this report was in fact in dispute until the very last moment or , to put it another way , we were on the point of rejecting it .
Not because it had been badly drafted by the rapporteur ; on the contrary , the report is a good one .
Not because we wish to refuse Hungary , the Czech Republic and Romania access to the European educational programmes ; certainly not .
Not because we disapprove of the conclusions reached by the association councils ; far from it .
We welcome this first stage in the process of enlargement , based on the education programmes .
We do indeed wish to send a political signal of invitation to the countries concerned , and in particular to Romania , since that country was not referred to explicitly on Wednesday in Agenda 2000 .
We are well aware of the value of these countries participating in Community programmes - if they really do catch on , if they lead to genuine mobility , and if language training and educational cooperation really are intensified .
But the danger is that this could amount to nothing more than fine speeches and empty words - nothing but hot air , a political gesture ultimately resulting in disappointment and frustration .
It is of course possible to extend the scope of a greatly underendowed fund , but this will rebound on the present 15 Member States .
Even now , many young people in our Member States are being bitterly disappointed .
As MEPs , we receive complaints every week that properly submitted applications have been rejected because of a lack of resources .
An extension would lead not only to frustration in the new countries too , but would also significantly worsen the situation in the existing 15 EU Member States .
All in all , the result would understandably be more frustration and less satisfaction on both sides .
The House has repeatedly drawn attention to such a likelihood and called for a corresponding increase in funding , not least through the initiative of Mrs Pack , our spokesman in the Group of the European People 's Party .
The outcome is well known .
If we now refuse this extension , the blame will mistakenly be laid at Parliament 's door .
That must not happen !
What we could do - but are not doing - is to hold these three countries as hostages to fortune , so as to put the Commission and Council under pressure .
These programmes must be open to the CEECs , but they must also be placed on a sound financial footing .
Goodness knows , the last-minute compromise is no cause for celebration , but it does enable us to vote in favour , provided that the funding is increased as promised .
Let us not be misunderstood : this is not a request , and certainly not a plea , to the Council ; it is a condition which must be met before the House will endorse the participation of these three countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when I was rapporteur three years ago on Leonardo , I had great pleasure in opening up that programme to a number of associated countries in Eastern Europe , together with Malta and Cyprus .
And it was already being said then that the budgets for Leonardo , Socrates and Youth for Europe were on the low side .
Parliament has continually tried to secure more resources for these three programmes , and the Council has continually been opposed .
The point has also already been made by many colleagues here this morning that these programmes can play an extremely important role , not least in terms of Agenda 2000 .
However , I would also point out - and this has been underlined correctly and extremely well by the rapporteur - that we cannot just go on adding things to programmes and letting countries take part in them when they are already ten times oversubscribed .
It is extremely frustrating now for our citizens in Europe when people do a great deal of work to take part in a programme , only to be told that although they have an excellent project , they cannot take part for budgetary reasons .
I can assure you , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , that if the same thing happens with the acceding countries and the countries who are now going to be cooperating with us for the first time , then they will understand absolutely nothing of the Europe that we envisage .
If people are going to do a tremendous amount of work in these countries too so that they can take part in a programme , and then in the end they cannot take part for budgetary reasons , we shall be sending out entirely the wrong signal .
I know that a huge amount of work has been done in respect of Socrates in particular to secure a further increase in the budget .
The same should be done with Leonardo , and if we cannot take the necessary steps now , then it must happen in connection with the budget , and then the Commission too will have to stand up to the Council .
That is what I am calling for here today .
Mr President , my colleagues have already explained what is at stake today .
We are dutybound to carry through what we , the European Parliament , called for when these programmes were launched , namely to open them up to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , as is only natural .
We MEPs introduced this , not the Council or the Commission !
We have kept our word .
The Council has discussed the matter but has not kept its word .
If it had , it would have given us the funds for this venture .
It has not done so .
We launched this programme for 12 countries ; now we are supposed to open it up , perhaps to as many as 25 .
We are not in a position to do so , that is the problem .
The problem now is that at the same time we are negotiating with the Council about an increase in funding .
The Council informed us two weeks ago that it would grant only ECU 25 million more for the next two years .
We had asked for an extra ECU 100 m for the next two years .
In fact , we would need ECU 163 m for the next two years just to carry out the Erasmus part .
There are many other sectors too , such as school partnerships and further training , none of which will be covered at all by these meagre resources .
And now we are meant to go along with the Council 's fine words and extend the programme , without having the money in our pockets .
I do not know how we can be expected to do so .
We are simply being fobbed off .
Anyone who knows the story of the emperor 's new clothes is bound to say that the emperor is quite naked !
That is why we really do need more resources .
Let me make one point : the Council is so impertinent as to choose now , of all times , to call upon us urgently to extend this programme to Cyprus .
We are expected to whisk Cyprus on board in September .
I refuse to do so , and I hope - Mr Samland - that the Committee on Budgets will stand with us in rejecting this request for urgency .
All I can say to the Council is this : what really is urgent is for you finally to give us the money to carry out this task .
The wool is being pulled over our eyes !
What the Council is doing here is making a gesture , but a gesture not backed by anything of substance .
It is costing the Council nothing but fine words !
This is shameful , and I refuse to go along with it !
I am all in favour of opening up these programmes , but I am not in favour of creating even more frustration elsewhere than already exists in our own countries .
I hope , Mr President , that in the weeks and months ahead we shall continue ...
... it is directed at the Council , which is holding us hostage and expects us to take the CEECs hostage .
We will not do so !
We shall put the ball back in the Council 's court .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the position taken by the rapporteur , Mrs Leperre-verrier , and by other colleagues , in particular Mrs Doris Pack , who led this whole process , to make the European Parliament 's agreement depend on a reinforcement of the SOCRATES budget is fully justified .
We have to take into account the ultimate impact on the success of enlargement of a poor start to cooperation in the fields of training and education , essential for paving the way for other areas of enlargement , that all proEuropeans want to see succeed .
Unless SOCRATES is given at least 100 million ECU more , the extension to the countries of central and eastern Europe will have negative rather than positive consequences .
I said the day before yesterday in this Chamber that the Council cannot give us this programme with one hand and take way resources with another .
I shall not go on and shall instead take this opportunity to stress that , among the SOCRATES objectives , there are language-learning actions , vital in order to create understanding between the fifteen and the candidates for accession .
Language-learning , and in general a genuine European policy on languages , demands urgent attenuation by the institutions .
A question of this importance , for the preservation of identities and for normalizing transnational communication and the efficiency of the European institutions , cannot be left to the will of certain Member States that might just be tempted to transform their interests into acquired rights given the void in terms of Community policy .
On the other hand , it is vital to achieve coordination between the various bodies where there is a discussion of the European language policy , both inside and outside the institutions .
I hope that the Culture Committee will take its place in the inter-institutional working group on languages , chaired by one of our Vice-Presidents .
I also hope that the conference on a ' Constellation of languages in Europe ' , to be held shortly in Luxembourg , will receive a committed contribution by all Community DGs linked to this issue . In that way , Mr President , we should in the near future establish a European language policy based on a broad consensus and solid academic , political and functional criteria .
Mr President , after that wonderful tirade from Mrs Pack , I would just begin by saying that I am totally behind her .
She has put her finger on it : the greatest demagogues in the European Union are the ladies and gentlemen of the Council .
They are primarily responsible for the present situation , not only because of the structure , which after all has put us in an impossible position on foreign policy on many occasions , but also because the Council never thinks through what it does , handing us tasks which we cannot fulfil .
I should like to make two points concerning this programme .
Firstly , once we have extracted the funds from the Council , we must take account of the major differences between these countries .
I often have the impression - I come across this all the time - that all these states are being put in the same pigeon-hole .
They should not be .
The history , the past of each country and its education system all form part of the full picture .
Secondly , I would take up what the Portuguese speaker before me said : far more emphasis must be placed on language teaching .
I have seen the same thing throughout Hungary and Romania : the only languages taught there are English and sometimes French .
In the future , there will be a flood of English-speaking people ; the economy needs them .
We must not forget that Communism robbed these young people of language opportunities .
We must see to it that they learn languages which will give them a future .
And I would put Spanish and Portuguese top of the list , because these are our partners .
I would just add that while we can agree to this proposal , we are hardly overjoyed by it !
Mr President , the employment summit is to take place in Luxembourg in a few months from now , and job creation must of course be its top priority .
I believe that education is the prime basis for employment .
Now that Agenda 2000 refers to 11 new countries , education must be our first concern .
It is absolutely essential to communicate with these countries , not only by holding talks at expert level , but by entering into a broader dialogue in firms , schools and universities .
In my opinion , the education programmes have already done an excellent job , and can do even more in the future .
We all know that life-long learning will become much more important in the future .
People must be equipped not just with technical skills , but with social and personal skills as well .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Mrs Leperre-Verrier for her report , and for the positive attitude which it reflects .
I would also say straight away that I not only understand all the speeches which expressed dissatisfaction with the modest financial resources attached to these programmes , but also fully share that sentiment .
I believe that such indignation is justified , and that as we now move to a pre-accession situation , this kind of issue must gradually be given more importance ; more pressure will be brought to bear to extend these types of action and therefore to provide the necessary financial resources for them .
I should also like to say that the Council 's attitude is not accepted by the Commission .
My colleague Mrs Cresson has made it clear that the Commission does not agree with the stance which the Council has adopted on the matter .
The amount which you have mentioned can probably not be achieved this time , but let us hope that the Commission can try - with Parliament - to have more resources made available .
As you know , the Commission , after all these years - because we have in fact been occupied with this for four years now , and Parliament too has long been pressing for it - has now reached the point where we can go ahead with three countries .
You are aware that there is some urgency here , because unless we do it now , the matter will be postponed again , and that would certainly also be a very bad political signal at this time , which it would be difficult to explain to people in the countries that are seeking membership .
So on behalf of the Commission and my colleagues , I am grateful that Parliament - despite its serious criticism of the scale of the resources and of certain other elements - is nevertheless prepared to join with us .
With regard to various comments which were rightly made by the rapporteur , Mrs Leperre-Verrier , I would say that I understand the proposal she has made to set up a kind of steering committee , but that we feel that perhaps it may not be necessary to do this .
There are already so many committees , and as you know , we are trying to limit the proliferation of all kinds of committees to some extent .
However , we do take very seriously the idea which the rapporteur has put forward that these programmes must be monitored in an appropriate way .
I believe - though I can also give you more details personally if you wish - that the Commission has provided for a number of measures to that effect .
So I think that we can basically meet your concern , without necessarily setting up a steering committee .
Languages have also been mentioned , and you probably know how much importance I personally attach to the fact that the languages which we work in are the official languages , and that these are always properly respected .
So I can well understand if some of you point to that and say : look , let us not forget the importance of languages which people are used to working in and speaking , and in which they practise their culture .
However , I think that for the time being , while the candidates in question are not yet members of the European Union , we have to keep to the rule that we work in the eleven current official languages .
I shall leave it at that , ladies and gentlemen , and apologize for the fact that I have not dealt with some other aspects which have rightly been touched on , in view of the limited time we have available .
Once again , I am grateful for your positive attitude in still taking this matter forward now , despite the well-founded criticism which I have heard here in Parliament , and which I can assure you is largely shared by the Commission .
Thank you , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
The Commission has just announced that accession negotiations are to begin with Hungary and the Czech Republic ; the third country to which the decision under consideration relates , Romania , will likewise undoubtedly join later .
When preparing for accession , many kinds of cooperation and support measures are needed .
Support for education and the possibility of participating in Community education and youth programmes are certainly among the most effective ways of assisting preparations and promoting development in the applicant countries .
The Council decision to open up the Socrates , Leonardo and Youth for Europe programmes to those countries is therefore certainly welcome and should be supported .
However , there is still a problem , at least at this stage : funding , especially in the case of Socrates .
Parliament has adopted by a large majority an increase of ECU 100 million in the funding of Socrates precisely bearing in mind the programme 's great importance to the applicant countries .
The widening of the programme should be approved on condition that this additional funding is provided .
The Central and Eastern European countries can use their own share of the funding to fund Phare , so that matters will be in order as far as this is concerned .
The Council must now adopt the right order of priorities .
From the point of view of the budget as a whole , the required increase in funding for Socrates represents a small amount , but to young people both in the existing Member States and in future Member States , it is important .
We cannot afford to disappoint them by destroying a successful programme and , in advance , depriving subsidy-providers of the opportunity for instructive interaction .
In my opinion it is important that Central and Eastern European countries should enjoy a relationship of equal partnership with the existing Member States under this programme , and should not therefore be seen as aid recipients .
I hope that these programmes can be used to assist the development of education systems by meeting the challenges of information technology and more generally improving the life of children and young people .
Each country could really do with its own programme , which could be used to make progress towards the objectives .
The work of the European Training Foundation in Turin should be stepped up .
I support the rapporteur 's call for the programme committee to carry out a precise analysis of the measures initiated and their impact on the development both of education systems and , above all , of the situation of the young .
The challenge is a major one , so measures need to be correctly targeted and effective .
( In successive votes , Parliament adopted the three legislative resolutions )
Development problems and structural operations in France under Objectives 1 and 2
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0203 / 97 ) by Mr CASTAGNEDE , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on development problems and structural operations in France under Objectives 1 and 2 ( C4-0038 / 96 - C4-0039 / 96 - C4-0040 / 96 - C4-0041 / 96 - C4-0042 / 96 - C4-0043 / 96 - C4-0044 / 96 - C40045 / 96 - C4-0046 / 96 - C4-0023 / 97 ) .
The floor is yours , Mr Castagnède .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report on structural operations in France is another opportunity to emphasize the major part played by Community action in favour of economic and social cohesion .
In general terms , France can be regarded as one of the richer countries in the Union .
However , the twenty-six regions that make up the country differ greatly in their level of development .
In the Paris region we have a GDP per inhabitant equal to 165 % of the Community average , yet it is a French region - Guadeloupe - that is classified by the Commission as the poorest region in the Union .
France is also seriously affected by the decline of certain sectors of industry , while a large part of her territory is made up of rural areas where the economy is fragile .
In general terms , the unemployment rate is still a cause for serious concern .
In recent years , Community activities have made an important contribution to mitigating or adjusting these imbalances .
France benefits substantially from the structural funds , receiving about 10 % of all appropriations over the period 1994-9 .
Six regions - the four overseas regions , French Hainaut and Corsica - receive contributions under Objective 1 ; twenty of the twenty-two metropolitan regions receive Objective 2 appropriations ; and nineteen regions benefit from appropriations to underdeveloped rural areas .
To these forms of aid must be added appropriations under the horizontal objectives and Community initiative programmes .
Without going into detail it is clear that this aid has played a critical part in , for example , opening up the overseas departments , compensating for the effects of industrial decline in northern and eastern France and reviving many rural areas .
Although the balance sheet is broadly positive , it is not of course immune to certain imperfections associated with Community aid , while the experience gained does suggest certain guidelines for future programmes .
Under the heading of imperfections of the existing arrangement , particular attention should be paid to delays in the implementation of Community credits , the complexity and rigidity of procedures , various ambiguities concerning the implementation of the principle of additionality , and inadequacies in the evaluation of schemes , especially with regard to net job creation .
With regard to the desirable guidelines , some are essentially of concern to the national authorities .
I am thinking particularly of the need for more in-depth partnership which , in the case of France , will have to comprise broader involvement of all the local actors - not only the regions but also other local authorities and economic and social actors - in defining and implementing regional policy .
Other orientations are of more direct concern to the Community authorities and should be discussed in connection with the open debate on ' Agenda 2000 ' .
In this context , we can welcome the proposal for greater geographical concentration of some forms of Community aid to benefit the least favoured regions .
I am thinking here , for example , of the outermost regions of France .
We are also keenly interested in the idea of strengthening aid to disadvantaged urban areas , on condition of course that such aid is not made subject to a criterion of GDP per inhabitant .
The ravages of unemployment and exclusion are not confined to the poorest regions .
The cohesion effort cannot be exclusively regional - it must be a social objective , too .
The Community action can and must set an example , and that example is needed in our inner cities , too .
On the other hand , it is a matter for regret that the Commission has apparently not adopted , at present , the idea of extensive territorialization of resources to promote employment , which , it seems , are to remain linked to a horizontal objective .
It does seem to us , however , that action in favour of employment would be more effective closer to the root of the problem , allowing broad scope for the initiative and responsibility of the local actors .
In conclusion , we would stress the essential value of maintaining , at Community level , a strong programme of action in favour of economic and social cohesion .
It is through the structural funds that Europe shows that it is not just a free trade area but an area of solidarity , too .
Consequently , we are pleased to note that Agenda 2000 aims to deepen the cohesion policy to promote enlargement .
Of course , steps must still be taken to ensure that the legitimate support given to the new Member States does not adversely affect the necessary continuation of the efforts made to ensure the cohesion of the Union in its present form .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank Bernard Castagnède for the receptive attitude he has demonstrated while preparing his report .
After discussion in committee , he has in fact accepted all the amendments I tabled on behalf of my group .
Those amendments were adopted in committee , and as a result we are completely satisfied with the report in the form presented to the House today .
In this debate , therefore , I should like to confine myself to recalling the main points we felt it important to emphasize .
Everyone is well aware that we have reached a key point in regional policy .
Consequently , reports on structural operations in the Member States are of particular importance .
In this House , aware as we are of the great importance of social cohesion , we are driven by the desire to see it working better , and working with greater transparency and efficiency .
We therefore tend to highlight the failings , the problems , so as to do our best to remedy them .
That is , of course , the main objective of this type of report , but we should also strongly emphasize the positive aspects of regional policy , which Mr Castagnède has just mentioned in his speech .
Positive aspects in terms of impact on economic and social cohesion , on growth , on training , on employment , but also the formulation of a global , consistent vision to ensure the balanced development of territories within groups of regions sharing common problems .
The structural policies provide an overall consistency with a concern for jointly defined priorities - employment , respect for the environment - and they act as a step-down lever in their effect on local initiatives .
We need to stress this point , and I am glad that this report does so , because otherwise we should be giving free reign to the arguments advanced by those - and there are more and more of them in France - who call for the renationalization of aid .
Taking their cue from the record of under-utilization of funds , they suggest that this financial cycle , Paris - Brussels - regions , is too complicated and that it would be so much simpler for every State to finance this regional aid directly .
And that would be the end of one of the policies which offers the best specific familiarization of the public with the European idea .
We must fight against this tendency , stressing the positive aspects and trying , as this report tries , to suggest ways of making things work better .
The under-utilization of funds is admittedly a genuine problem , but rather than jumping to the conclusion that the financial volume is too great for requirements it would be better to wonder about the specks of grit that are jamming the mechanism .
Enough emphasis has been laid on the complexity of the procedures , and I shall not dwell on that .
But rather than indulging ourselves in regular denunciations of the technocrats in Brussels , would it not be better to start in our own backyard ?
Does not the main blame lie with the excessive French-style centralization , and the highly dirigistic supervision of the SGAR and the regional prefects , which all too often result in the marginalization of the local authorities and other local actors ?
Inadequate information , a lack of transparency in decisions and case selection , a failure of democracy at all levels of decision-making , problems with arranging joint financing - these are the obstacles to the judicious use of the European appropriations .
And what about the excessive cumbersomeness and slowness of the financial cycles , when we know that the French government budget serves as an administrative staging post and generally seems to be in no hurry to channel the funds towards the ultimate recipient , who is often left in a precarious situation as a result ?
Some undertakings , especially those in the third sector , cannot handle such situations because they do not have sufficient funds of their own .
For this reason , and because of the difficulty in finding joint financing , this sector of the social economy is virtually excluded from access to the structural funds , and it really is regrettable that we should deprive ourselves of its acknowledged know-how in matters of training and employment .
In conclusion , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome this balanced report which , although it emphasizes the responsibilities incumbent upon the Commission , is also incisive in dealing with the responsibilities of the French Government and its administration , which , in my view , are considerably more influential with regard to the difficulties to which I have referred .
Mr President , Commissioner , our colleagues have given us an admirable account of the development problems and structural operations in France under Objectives I and II , and the ways in which these shortcomings might be addressed .
I must also thank Mrs Lindeperg for identifying the problems that are specific to France , and caused particularly by the centralist nature of the French State .
For my part , there are two comments I should like to make .
First , in studying the structural operations in France , and very particularly in listening to the various regional officials , we have become aware of the existence of a number of inefficiencies , rigidities and delays in the consumption of those Community appropriations which , as you know , are so badly needed in the regions of France that qualify under Objectives I and II .
Two examples will illustrate my point .
The rigid criteria applied to the SMEs and SMIs mean that many projects are disqualified even though they would create large numbers of jobs .
We may also note the problems which project sponsors encounter in complying with the principle of additionality , and I suggest the Commission should give thought to this point and submit some proposals .
Finally , I would remind the House that in all probability the total Community contributions for the period following 1999 will be conditioned by the commitment rate achieved as of 31 December 1999 .
My second comment is this : in the context of the debate on the decentralized management of the structural funds initiated by Agenda 2000 , we must - as I stated in committee - find an administrative framework for the activities of the structural funds when they are granted to regions that have no administrative existence and no budgetary powers of their own .
Next , I should like to move on to two areas where the report is somewhat timid .
First , it is timid about associating the elected Members of the European Parliament for the region concerned with the monitoring and evaluation committees .
It is also timid about the future .
It seems essential to me that we should call for a transitional phase for those regions that are currently eligible for the structural funds but will no longer be in 1999 .
The Commission has given us various clarifications on this subject , and the Commissioner explained , at a meeting which I attended , that the transition after the Objective I funds will take place in accordance with a timetable that I find very interesting .
Leaving aside these two points , on which the PPE Group wished to retable amendments in the House , we welcome the fact that the competent authorities have finally been called upon to ensure adequate publicity for European aid in the form of publicly displayed plaques , panels and brochures , which will bring us closer to the citizen .
When we see the funds allocated to the structural funds today , and the number of major projects implemented , we realize that advertising for those products needs to be advertising for Europe , too , to promote public awareness of the fact that all these projects are financed by the efforts of Europe .
We shall therefore be voting in favour of the Castagnède report .
Mr President , I should firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Castagnède , on this report , in which the European Parliament is considering the development problems and structural operations in France .
The merit of the report and also of the motion for a resolution it contains is certainly that it draws attention to the specific problems of the French regions .
These are regions which are disadvantaged by their remote situation , such as the overseas departments , or because they are islands , like Corsica ; there are regions which are faced with problems because some 50 job sectors have been seriously affected by industrial decline , and finally also rural areas which are threatened by depopulation .
The Commission is also in no doubt that these regions have to contend with these specific handicaps , and that they must be tackled .
It has therefore been trying to take account of these problems since 1989 , through the combined programming documents and in the Community initiative programmes .
As regards the aid provided from the Structural Funds , I should like to comment briefly on four points .
Firstly , the rapporteur points out that the transfer of appropriations from the national authorities to the beneficiaries is often still too slow .
In the motion for a resolution , it is said that this slowness acts as a disincentive to project operators and compromises the success of programmes .
A number of speakers have also made this point , which I can only echo .
The transfer of appropriations from Paris to the regions generally takes between four and six months , and while we have recently seen some improvement , it would appear that Article 21 of the regulation on coordination of the Structural Funds - which provides for a maximum period of three months - is still not being observed .
The Commission will certainly draw the French Government 's attention to this and ask it to take steps to accelerate the transfer of Community funds .
The issue has also been raised of the relocation of businesses between different Member States , as well as between regions within Member States , and this is a problem which is steadily increasing .
I regularly receive complaints from Germany - western Germany - for instance , where businesses are attracted by subsidies in the new Länder and hence relocate a few dozen kilometres away .
The same problem is occurring in Belgium , where firms move from one region to another amid the suspicion that this is connected with the regional aid which is available there .
The same is happening in France , and of course there is the phenomenon of ' frontier-hopping ' .
At its last meeting , the Council of Industry Ministers asked the Commission to investigate this further .
I can assure the House that we are doing so , and looking both at the Regional Fund and the national regional aid which is available , so as to try at least to come up with some ideas on how to avoid these undesirable effects .
For the rest , one must of course accept the logic of the regional policy , in other words that we help the regions which have handicaps , either through the Structural Funds or through national budgetary resources .
We must naturally accept that logic , and this may of course lead to certain businesses moving from one place to another , quite apart from the specific economic arguments which lead businesses to concentrate their activities .
The third point I should like to mention is the extremely rigid nature of the principles which determine whether or not subsidies can be granted .
I would first point out , however , that these principles are laid down for the various funds and the six objectives in the Structural Fund regulations , sometimes in very great detail .
The Commission is therefore obliged to ensure that these principles are respected .
When the Council imposes this stringency on us , it is of course then difficult for the Commission not to apply it .
However , the regional authorities lay down measures for implementing the Structural Funds , and rules are frequently introduced which are even more restrictive than those contained in the general programming documents .
Then of course the impression arises that this is stringency on the part of the Community , when the additional rigidity - if I may use that phrase - is in fact being created at the receiving end .
We shall certainly see what more can be done in this respect , not least with a view to the further discussions that will take place in connection with the 2000 document .
I know that my colleague Mrs Wulf-Mathies is particularly aware of these problems , and I am sure that she will be at your disposal to discuss the matter further .
I should like to end with the fourth point , and this concerns the provision of aid from the Structural Funds after 1999 .
I have already referred to the document which President Santer has presented this week .
In my opinion , as most of the speakers have indicated , this is a balanced approach whereby we are seeking to keep the essential features of the regional policy , including the possibility of intervention , but to concentrate things better - reducing the number of objectives - and to tackle the bureaucracy which is associated with it , and so on .
However , I am sure that you will devote many more hours to discussing that document , not least in terms of the Structural Funds and regional aid .
So I think I can leave things there for today , Mr President .
Thank you , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
The report stresses the increase in appropriations in many sectors .
We welcome that , though we must deplore the fact that France is receiving , both proportionately and in absolute terms , far less aid per inhabitant than most of the other Member States of the European Union .
It seems to us that priority should be given to aid for reviving the rural areas .
For the population to be concentrated in cities is certainly undesirable as regards quality of life .
In any case , modern communications techniques mean that it is much easier than it was in the last century to sustain and develop economic activities in rural areas .
I must criticize the rapporteur not only for neglecting these aspects but also for wanting to allocate an increasing proportion of future appropriations to urban areas .
Urban areas in crisis do deserve help , but , I say again , we must avoid concentrating the population in those areas .
For this reason , I shall be abstaining , though I do approve this increase in the appropriations .
As the Member for a region classified as Objective II , I can only endorse the basic thinking in Mr Castagnède 's report on development problems and structural operations in France under Objectives I and II .
I have therefore voted in favour of this motion .
I have often had first-hand experience of the specific problems associated with the implementation of the structural funds in my region : lack of information , lack of transparency , complex and cumbersome procedures , etc .
In the light of my local experience , I am glad to note that this motion emphasizes the primary role that Community regional policy can play in familiarizing the public with the European idea .
In this connection , it seems essential to me that we should ensure appropriate publicity to indicate the part played by the Community 's contribution in implementing each project .
I also support the idea of providing more support for regions afflicted with severe industrial change , which has tragic consequences for employment .
You will excuse me if I particularly stress the case of the armaments industry , on which my own region is still heavily dependent .
I also hope that , in the future , aid granted under the structural funds will no longer result in intra-community or inter-regional relocations of industry , which are entirely contrary to the objectives pursued by Community regional policy .
Finally , I am totally in favour of the amendments tabled by Francis Decourrière on behalf of the PPE Group , particularly where they relate to associating Members elected to the European Parliament by the eligible regions in the various phases of the decision process : monitoring , evaluation and harmonization .
The European Union 's regional policy represents an essential tool and support , which is in need of improvement .
I have no doubt that this resolution by the European Parliament will contribute to that .
Without questioning the rapporteur 's objectivity in any way , I think it is in principle wrong that Parliament 's rapporteur comes from the same country where aid is under review .
For reasons of principle , Parliament should always endeavour to select a rapporteur who cannot be seen , in any way , to have an interest in the issue under scrutiny .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Aid to Armenia , Georgia and , if appropriate , Tajikistan
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0212 / 97 ) by Mr Kittelmann , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council decision providing exceptional financial assistance to Armenia , Georgia and , if appropriate , Tajikistan ( COM ( 97 ) 0024 - C4-0099 / 97-97 / 0028 ( CNS ) ) .
Please go ahead , Mr Kittelmann .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our readiness to provide all possible forms of financial assistance to the states of Central and Eastern Europe is beyond doubt .
The Association Agreements with Georgia and Armenia must be put on a firm financial footing , and that is the purpose of the special financial aid being proposed by the Commission .
We are aware that , in spite of the economic disintegration which followed the collapse of the Eastern bloc - although it is often forgotten that all was not well before - the countries concerned have worked economic wonders .
Economic programmes aside , however , internal political problems have repeatedly had a damaging effect on infrastructure , and Georgia and Armenia are no exceptions .
It is encouraging , although only relatively so , that Armenia and Georgia have been able to overcome many of these difficulties .
In order to receive financial assistance , the recipient states must for their part meet certain conditions .
Firstly , they must negotiate an agreement with the international financial authorities , in particular the IMF , to make loans available .
It is then important for the remaining financial requirements to be covered by EU financial aid .
Armenia introduced stabilization measures and structural reforms in 1994 .
By pursuing an austere and consistent budgetary policy , inflation and the budgetary deficit have been reduced .
Georgia has achieved relative stability in its economy and a steady and consistent price policy .
Here too , clear progress has been made .
That is why the Committee on External Economic Relations can support the Commission 's proposals .
The European Union is duty-bound , we believe , to make further contributions .
Developments on the lines of those in Georgia and Armenia are unfortunately not yet visible in Tajikistan , which only recently began to introduce economic stabilization measures .
Moreover , the negotiations with international funding institutions have not yet been concluded .
That is why , in our view , it would be preferable to separate the financial assistance for Armenia and Georgia from that for Tajikistan .
There is no doubt , however , that EU assistance can and must in principle be provided , as soon as the necessary conditions have been fulfilled .
Georgia and Armenia could use the resources made available - which must be authorized by the Council and the European Parliament - not only to ease the burden of interest on the special financial aid , but also to pay off debts .
We therefore call for the report and the amendments to be adopted .
However , the chairman of the Committee on Budgets has asked me whether , pursuant to Rule 131 , we could discuss the report today but refrain from voting , for reasons which the Committee on Budgets will explain briefly - I am not sure whether its chairman is here in the Chamber .
In such cases , one should only overrule the Committee on Budgets when there are very good reasons for doing so .
I can see none here .
I endorse the request by the Committee on Budgets , and would ask colleagues to vote in favour of the report when the time comes .
Mr President , I am the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets , but as the Chairman wishes to speak I shall of course allow him to take the floor ahead of me .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , I shall allow Mr Samland to speak at the appropriate time , according to the Rules of Procedure .
I would now ask you , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets , to speak to the House .
Mr President , there are times when the Rules of Procedure should take second place to politeness or courtesy .
That was the thinking behind my proposal .
Of course , if the debate must take place , then it must take place , and the vote will come later .
The Committee on Budgets gave a favourable opinion , unanimous but for one abstention , on Mr Kittelmann 's report .
Mr Kittelmann has just given an excellent account of the reasons for the exceptional assistance to be provided to Armenia , Georgia and , if appropriate , Tajikistan .
The Committee on Budgets , in its written opinion that appears in the report , proposed two amendments . One proposed that , in accordance with standard practice , the financial provisions should be incorporated into legislative acts ; the other stressed the exceptional nature of the combination of the ' loans / borrowing ' aspect and the ' grants ' aspect .
That in fact is the point on which I should like to speak .
This procedure must be recognized as an exception and must not constitute a precedent .
The Committee on Budgets , virtually unanimously as I said , endorsed the idea of this combination while wishing to stress its exceptional nature , having regard to the fact that it attaches particular importance to its relations with the countries concerned .
The rapporteur in fact made that point just a little while ago .
Regarding the questions to the Commission proposed in the opinion , the Committee on Budgets has , in essence , received favourable replies , particularly regarding the proposed ECU 95 million financing .
Mr President , that concludes my remarks on behalf of the Committee on Budgets .
Mr President , perhaps I will be allowed my speaking time after all !
Ladies and gentlemen - those who have stayed the course - we are behaving as if stand-by aid were real aid .
In practice , these countries are being given support to enable them to repay the IMF , but stand-by loans will not solve their debt problems .
With the aid of EU loans , money is being lent at favourable rates by private banks ; the European taxpayers are acting as guarantors .
However , the recipient states must repay that money to the banks , which means that EU assistance is causing these countries to run up debts with private banks .
And we call this support for economic reform in these countries !
This is a fundamental issue which I believe we must address .
On balance , I am pleased that the report is being held over , since it might then be possible to include Tajikistan - not ' if appropriate ' , but for certain , because we need to show willing .
Tajikistan has made tremendous progress towards peace , surpassing all expectations . I think that we should therefore show willing , and not exclude Tajikistan .
Ladies and gentlemen , under Rule 19 of our Rules of Procedure , the President is authorized to organize the work of the part-session .
You may rest assured , I am aware that this is a temporary power which is , moreover , always subject to your rigorous supervision .
However , I have , since the start of proceedings today , availed myself of these powers . We have now arrived at the end of the debate and I would like to hand over to Mr van der Waal who , I understand , is making his last speech before this House .
I would now like to pay tribute to the valuable contribution he has made to democratic coexistence - one of the cornerstones of this institution of ours - and I will today use my powers , Mr van der Waal , and authorize you to use as much speaking time as you require .
Please go ahead .
Mr President , thank you for your generosity .
We all have to make the most of our time here , and I particularly appreciate the fact that you are allowing me to go a little beyond the two minutes which I am officially allowed this morning .
It is also a great pleasure for me to do so , as I am speaking on a report by our respected colleague Mr Kittelmann which he has just introduced .
When considering the partnership and cooperation agreement with Georgia and Armenia earlier this year , we expressed the hope that this stepping-up of relations with the Transcaucasian Republics would stimulate the economic and political reforms in those countries .
The proposal from the Commission which is now before us on the granting of financial assistance to Armenia , Georgia and , if appropriate , Tajikistan can also provide impetus for the reforms .
As we know , this financial assistance is aimed at helping these countries meet their payment obligations .
Both the Commission and Mr Kittelmann draw attention to the disastrous consequences of the break-up of the Soviet Union for the former Soviet republics .
The disintegration of the Soviet economy resulted in trade and payment transactions coming to a standstill , a slump in production , arrears in payments , and hyperinflation .
Moreover , the infrastructure was disrupted by domestic conflicts and the earthquake in Armenia in 1988 .
In the light of this , the proposal to grant exceptional financial assistance to Armenia and Georgia is entirely justified .
Nevertheless , the Kittelmann report quite rightly makes a number of comments in connection with the Commission 's proposal .
Firstly , a distinction must be made between Armenia and Georgia on the one hand and Tajikistan on the other .
In recent years , Armenia and Georgia have shown evidence of seriously wishing to address the reform of their economies .
Through ambitious stabilization programmes , they have succeeded in considerably reducing their monetary and budgetary problems .
Tajikistan only recently began to introduce economic stabilization measures .
Even more important is the fact that the IMF has already concluded stand-by arrangements with Armenia and Georgia , while the negotiations with Tajikistan have yet to be completed .
Moreover , Tajikistan is not yet able to guarantee that it will meet its payment obligations to the Union .
It would therefore set a false precedent to include Tajikistan now as a potential recipient of aid in the proposal for exceptional financial assistance .
A separate decision will have to be taken on that , when this country meets the conditions .
A second comment on the Commission 's proposal concerns the grant element in the package .
The proposal to provide aid of ECU 170 million in the form of long-term loans , with a grant component of ECU 50 m , only partly solves the debt problems of these countries .
Moreover , it is questionable whether the problems will be adequately tackled by providing further loans .
This makes it harder rather than easier for Armenia and Georgia to stabilize their debt burden .
We therefore agree with Mr Kittelmann that the financial assistance should be provided as far as possible in the form of grants .
The ECOFIN Council included many of these points in the decision of principle on financial assistance which it adopted in February .
That has our approval .
It must be emphasized that what is involved here is ' exceptional ' financial assistance - in short , an exception which will not automatically be made for other countries .
Precisely because of its exceptional nature , the Council and the Commission must monitor the results that are achieved from this financial assistance .
A separate proposal for Tajikistan will no doubt be produced by the Commission in due course .
Once again , Mr President , thank you for the time I have been able to take for this final contribution .
It is a special moment for me , not just because it is the very last subject before the summer recess , but also because it is the final speech that I shall make .
Thank you most sincerely .
I should like to thank the presidency , my fellow Members and all the services of the House for everything they have done for me in the past 13 years .
I should also like to pass on my best wishes to the Commission , present here in the person of Mr Van Miert .
It gives me particular pleasure to be able to pass on my best wishes to Mr Van Miert , because I have very good memories of him from the time when he was Commissioner for transport .
Thank you , Mr President , my best wishes to the European Parliament and all my colleagues , and many thanks again for what you have done for me .
Thank you , Mr van der Waal .
Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , you now have two minutes in which to speak .
Mr President , I am one of the newest Members of this House , having been here only since last November .
So it is a tremendous honour for me now to be able to follow on from Mr van der Waal , as I have noticed even in such a short period of time what a pillar of support he has always been to the House , especially on matters relating to personal values or the family .
Christian values lie very close to my heart , and in this area he has always been a mainstay of Parliament .
I wish to thank him most sincerely for that !
As far as the report is concerned , I naturally have mixed feelings about the fact that the vote on financial assistance to Armenia , Georgia and Tajikistan is not to take place today , if I have understood correctly .
I think that it is extremely important for us to support these countries , for the economic reasons already explained by Mr Kittelmann , but for political reasons too .
I believe that these three countries are Europe 's natural political partners , but that all three are in a very difficult , exposed position .
All three of them are more susceptible to Russian influence than we would like .
We should not forget that Russia has on the one hand proved itself to be an expansionist state and , on the other , fallen short of our democratic standards .
Georgia in particular has regrettably proved on many occasions to be a puppet of Moscow .
Nor should it be forgotten that President Shevardnadze is only in power at the moment because he deposed the democratically elected president , Mr Gamsakhurdia , with Russia 's assistance .
Nevertheless , Georgia has done much to assert its independence .
I therefore very much hope that support will be forthcoming for these three countries , because we Europeans ought to show them that we mean well .
Mr President , the rapporteur will not take it amiss if I too begin by saying something to Mr van der Waal - and I am not sure if I should congratulate him now that he is leaving Parliament or hope that he can now take things a little easier .
What I would say in any event is how much I and other colleagues have appreciated working with him for all these years .
He is an exceptionally good Member of Parliament with a deep knowledge of the subjects that he deals with , and also a very pleasant way of collaborating with others .
And just as he still has good memories of the days when we worked together mostly in the transport sector - and I am grateful to him for saying so - I should also like to say that I shall never forget how closely and constructively we were able to work together on a wide range of transport issues .
I am thinking in particular here of the problems of inland waterways , which he always tackled with an immense knowledge of the subject .
I thank him most sincerely , and I am sure that I am also speaking on behalf of a good many other colleagues in the Commission who have been able to work with him over the years .

Turning now to the report itself , I too would of course like to join in thanking Mr Kittelmann for this report , but I have to say that I am a little surprised at the fact that it is not going to be put to the vote today .
We naturally wanted and expected that to happen .
So it does come as something of an unfortunate surprise to us , since we had hoped to be able to send out another positive signal today , not only by debating the report , but also by putting it to the vote .
I am bound to say this , although I can understand some of the comments which have been made in this respect .
Because the fact is that this support for the efforts being made by these countries to achieve stabilization and reform as part of an ambitious IMF programme also requires us to state our views on the matter clearly and distinctly now .
Our financial assistance will in fact help to alleviate these countries ' lack of external financial resources , thereby supporting the continuation of the policy of stabilization and reform .
It will also make it easier for the countries in question to fully meet their outstanding financial obligations towards the European Union .
Our aid should also encourage support from other potential donors who are in fact waiting for the European Union to clarify its policy on the matter .
That is why we should have liked Parliament to vote on this before the recess .
Moreover , firm conditions are attached to the aid which is to be provided .
It is only being granted to countries which have met or can meet all their outstanding financial obligations towards the Community , and which are also implementing their programmes of adaptation and reform satisfactorily , under agreements with the IMF and the World Bank .
This is therefore exceptional assistance which cannot be seen as a precedent for similar aid to other newly independent states .
The Commission welcomes the fact that , generally speaking , its proposal is nevertheless clearly supported by the parliamentary committees which have given it their attention .
In this context , the Commission can accept the most important amendment tabled by the Committee on External Economic Relations , concerning the removal of Tajikistan from the proposal for the time being , given that your committee has made very clear its support for similar aid for Tajikistan as soon as the conditions have been met , in other words when the agreement has been concluded with the IMF .
The Commission is unable to accept the amendment aimed at countering further combinations of loans and grants in assistance operations .
Such combinations of loans and grants have in fact proved very helpful in the past and may also be of service in the future , where the economic situation in the beneficiary countries is appropriate .
The Commission would therefore like to keep this option open .
Once again , I think we are basically very much in agreement , and I hope that in any event this matter can be settled as quickly as possible .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Mr Samland , Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , is asking to speak .
Mr President , there is no disagreement on the substance of the matter .
What we have had in fact , and still have - so I am surprised by the Commissioner 's surprise - is a difference of opinion between the two arms of the budgetary authority , which we had actually hoped to settle in July .
But then one arm of the budgetary authority , namely the Council , postponed the date for reaching a decision , through a trialogue or conciliation procedure , until September .
And now we are in some difficulty .
This was not what we wanted : we had hoped to settle things this month .
The problem is that the date for conciliation is not until early September .
So it is because of this postponement that we are asking , pursuant to Rule 131 , for no vote to be held today .
There is no conflict as regards the substance of the matter .
I am sure - and I am grateful to the rapporteur for having said as much - that we shall be able to adopt this report by a large majority in the House at the September part-session .
The only difference of opinion is with the Council .
Under the Rules of Procedure , I have to allow one speaker to speak in favour and another to speak against Mr Samland 's request for the vote to be postponed .
You may go ahead , Mr Kittelmann .
Mr President , I have already said that I support this request .
I should be grateful if , in discussions of this kind where an explanation is required , the chairman of the committee could be given an opportunity to provide this at the outset , because then everyone could take account of it during the debate .
But I do urge all colleagues to support this request by the Committee on Budgets .
We shall now vote on Mr Samland 's request .
( Parliament approved postponement of the vote )
Adjournment of the session
Ladies and gentlemen , please firstly allow me to thank all our many collaborators , our interpreters - they may now rest their voices - our ushers - they may now take a well-earned rest - and all our Bureaux colleagues , who can now stand down . They have all helped Parliament to function properly .
However , ladies and gentlemen , we began our week here with an expression of grief .
The President of this House , with his customary forthrightness and serenity , condemned the assassination of a 29-year-old man whose ' crime ' was nothing more than to believe in democracy and to have electors believe in him .
My closing words for this sitting must be words of remembrance , but I should also like to inform you that , this week , I was able to hear a statement from Miguel Ángel Blanco 's mother , in which she overcame her grief - I have no idea how she managed that - to say that the death of her son will not have been in vain if , by means of that sacrifice , we can all move closer to a peaceful society .
All of us bear the responsibility for making this a reality .
We must continue to use the democratic process to achieve democratic peace .
The session is adjourned .
( The sitting closed at 12.15 p.m. )
Resumption of the Session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 18 July 1997 .
Tribute
Ladies and gentlemen , on 5 September Mother Teresa passed away in Calcutta .
She was an exceptional woman .
In this Parliament we do not often pay tribute to the memory of a figure unconnected with the world of politics .
I do so today in the knowledge that we all recognized in Mother Teresa 's tiny , fragile form a rare human being , and a true example of love and dedication to others .
The deep sadness felt by the people of India at the death of Mother Teresa is a testament to the way a life dedicated to helping the poorest of the poor can break down the barriers which sometimes divide different religions , beliefs or attitudes .
I believe it is absolutely right that we should remember her here today , with a small tribute from our Parliament .
I also wish to inform you that following the tragic death of Diana , Princess of Wales , I ordered the European Union and United Kingdom flags to be flown at half-mast on the Parliament buildings , in mourning for the death of someone who was much loved by millions of people in Britain and throughout the world .
On the same day I sent a telegram to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II , which I shall read to you now : Your Majesty , may I offer you my most sincere condolences , and those of my colleagues in the European Parliament , at this time of immense grief for your family and for the British people .
The tragic loss of Diana , Princess of Wales , has deeply saddened both those who knew her and those who recognized her generosity of spirit .
The thoughts of the whole of Europe are with your family , and especially with the Princess 's two sons , Prince William and Prince Harry .
It is our heartfelt wish that the legacy of grace and kindness bequeathed by the Princess of Wales may live on .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is also my sad duty to remind you that our colleague Sir James Goldsmith died on 19 July , following a long illness most bravely borne .
Sir James Goldsmith was elected a Member of the European Parliament in June 1994 from the L 'autre Europe list .
He led the Europe of Nations Group from July 1994 until it was dissolved in November 1996 , and then the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations until May 1997 .
Before joining the European Parliament , Sir James Goldsmith led a busy professional life in industry and business . He gave up these activities in 1990 in order to set up a foundation dedicated to environmental protection .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of Friday 18 July have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( The Minutes were approved )
I shall do so with great pleasure , Mrs McCarthy .
This Parliament has always steadfastly and consistently supported the peace process in Northern Ireland , so what you have just said describes the policy this House has always followed .
Mr President , since our last meeting a statement has been made by Mr Gerhard Schroeder , a German socialist leader , that the Poles are heavily involved in car crime , prostitution is dominated by the Russian mafia , and most drug traffickers come from south east Europe and black Africa .
I would like to know what our socialist colleagues on the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs think of that statement , in particular , Mr Ford , Mr Schulz , Mrs Lindeperg , Mrs d 'Ancona and indeed Mr Oostlander .


I would mention that the comments I referred to were made to a leading German newspaper by Mr Gerhard Schroeder , a candidate in next year 's elections for German Chancellor .
Mr Le Gallou , your remarks will doubtless be taken up by your colleagues if they see fit .
At all events , they will do so according to the Rules of Procedure , but certainly not in this part-session , and not now .
Welcome
It is my great pleasure to welcome Mr Joan Marcet , Vice-President of the Spanish House of Representatives .
His visit takes place in the context of the many fruitful contacts between our Parliament and the parliaments of our Member States .
With ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam about to commence , I feel sure that exchanges between the parliaments of the Member States and the European Parliament will take on major significance .
I hope Mr Marcet 's visit will be a great success .
Order of Business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents ( at its meeting of Thursday 11 September 1997 ) pursuant to Rule 95 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
Sittings of 15 to 19 September in Strasbourg
Monday :
The Group of the Party of European Socialists has asked for Mr Azzolini 's report on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the Commission communication on cohesion policy and culture : a contribution to employment , to be moved up the agenda and included after Mr Sanz Fernández ' report .
Mrs Green has the floor to move the request .
Mr President , the first draft of the Azzolini report was further up the agenda , but it has slipped down .
I understand that Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report is on first .
At this stage to ask for the Azzolini report to come first would be difficult . But we would like to have it further up the agenda .
The Committee on Regional Affairs is meeting tonight and that makes it particularly difficult if we move the Azzolini report to the end of the agenda .
So , we would ask that it comes forward .
Since nobody has opposed the request , I shall put it to a vote .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
Tuesday :
The Group of the European Radical Alliance has tabled an oral question to the Commission ( O107 / 97 ) on illegal imports of CFCs .
This question will be included in a joint debate with the question by the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party on the same subject .
The Group of the European People 's Party has asked for the oral question to the Commission from the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on respecting prominent personalities ' right to privacy ( O-104 / 97 ) , to be taken after the presentation of the 1998 budget .
Mr Pex has the floor to move the request .
Mr President , as chairman of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , I am very disappointed that the Conference of Presidents decided not to put the committee 's oral question on the agenda .
The decision to table it was unanimous in committee .
As usual , I defended that decision in my group and secured its support .
But perhaps other members of the Committee on Culture who had agreed with the decision were less happy with it , so I am now urging this House to revert to the original decision .
The oral question from the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media is about respecting press freedom and yet guaranteeing the right of privacy as far as possible .
This has been an issue for some time , but the circumstances dictate that we discuss it now .
Given its importance for democracy , I believe the matter should be debated in this part-session .
The debate has already taken place in committee .
It was a balanced debate , and ended , as I said , with the unanimous decision to table this questions .
This is the second time the Conference of Presidents has rejected an oral question from the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media .
In March , there was the problem of newspaper distribution monopoly in the United Kingdom and other Member States of the Union .
This is another issue relating to press freedom and the like .
What is the wrong with this subject ?
Are people afraid of it , Mr President ?
We should not be afraid of it .
The subject is being discussed everywhere else , so why not in this Parliament ?
Mrs Green has the floor to oppose the request .
Mr President , with all due respect for Mrs Green 's opinion , I do not see discussion of sensitive issues in Parliament as a problem , nor do I think that there is any inconsistency in having a preliminary debate in this sitting , as requested by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , followed by the drafting of a report .
The one does not exclude the other , and I honestly believe Parliament should have the opportunity , just as it has the standing and the responsibility , to discuss this matter in principle because it has aroused such strong feeling and there are , of course , very differing views on it .
I shall now put the request to a vote .
( Parliament rejected the request )
The Group of the Party of European Socialists has asked for the Commission statement on the World Trade Organization panel 's decision on bananas to be brought forward and taken immediately after the presentation of the budget .
Mrs Green has the floor to move the request .
Mr President , I apologize about all these changes at this late stage . But you will appreciate that the agenda this week required a lot of changes .
This is a very important issue .
The whole economy of many Caribbean states is actually in turmoil as a result of this decision .
We believe that it is not appropriate to discuss that very late in the evening .
Of course we accept that we need to consider the availability of the Commission , but we would ask that this item be brought forward because of its huge importance .
Mr President , everything we do here in this House is important and the evening sittings are important too .
We now have a second request by the Socialist Group to bring forward an item on the agenda and it makes me wonder what we all actually did at the Conference of Presidents on Thursday afternoon .
Mr President , I just want to say here that we should not have to keep bringing items forward just because one person in one group so desires .
We should maintain the agenda as far as possible .
We all agreed to it so we should stick to it .
Mr President , I would like to add my support to Pauline Green .
The seriousness of the issue demands that we give it a prominent position on the agenda .
We are keen to learn what the Commission is going to do and what the Commission 's reaction is going to be .
More importantly , the enormous insecurity which the Caribbean producers feel at this time demands a speedy response and a response which gives the proper priority to this issue .
I urge this Parliament to ensure that this item is taken as early as possible on Tuesday afternoon .
I shall now put the request from the Group of the Party of European Socialists to a vote .
( Parliament approved the request )
Mr President , this is another sensitive issue .
As chairman of the Committee on Women 's Rights , I can tell you that the committee has discussed the sterilizations in Sweden , Finland , France , Denmark , and no doubt in several other countries too , according to the latest media reports .
The Conference of Presidents looked at whether a Commission statement with debate could be included on the agenda but , for reasons best known to itself , decided against .
I should very much like to see that decision reversed , especially as Commissioner Flynn has expressed his willingness to make such a statement to Parliament .
We have an important debate on a number of women 's issues this morning , so I do find it extremely odd that the Presidents have decided not to put it on the agenda .
I would like us to vote on it now and I hope the statement can be made and debated as part of the general debate on women 's affairs which is on this morning 's agenda .
You know the Rules as well as everyone else , Mrs van Dijk .
A decision of the Conference of Presidents can be opposed by submitting an alternative to the House , but this has to be done at least one hour before the opening of the part-session .
That has not been done .
No group , including your own , has put in a request .
So , under the Rules , I cannot put it to a vote .
Wednesday :
The Group of the Party of European Socialists is asking for the Read recommendation for second reading , on the application of open network provision to voice telephony and on universal service for telecommunications in a competitive environment , to be brought forward and taken after the Council and Commission statements on the situation in the Middle East .
Mrs Green has the floor to move the request .
Mr President , I think this is simply a mistake , because of the way we set the agenda last week .
Of course , this is a second reading and we need to have it debated in time for it to be voted on Wednesday lunchtime .
It is a perfectly sensible proposal , for we usually try to have second readings voted at lunchtime on a Wednesday .
Mr Robles Piquer is asking for the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , I have a question .
If this change is made , which reports or agenda items will be delayed as a result ?
It is very difficult to take a clear and unbiassed view without knowing that , and I think that the Secretariat could tell us before the debate continues .
Mr Robles Piquer , the recommendation for second reading of Mrs Read 's report on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , No 309 , would come before Mr Moorhouse 's report , No 305 .
The Moorhouse and Fitzsimons report and the Flemming recommendation for second reading would come immediately afterwards , in the same order as before .
Are there any other speakers in favour ?
This proposal ought to mean that the Fitzsimons and Flemming reports are also brought forward .
As that is the logical consequence , I propose that we take the Fitzsimons report after the Council and Commission statements , then the Flemming report and then the report by Mrs Read .
Then we will have dealt with all the second readings by lunchtime without having to give preferential treatment to a Socialist rapporteur 's report .
Does the group making the request agree ?
Then I put it to the vote that the two recommendations for second reading should be brought forward , to precede the first readings of reports .
( Parliament agreed to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's proposal )
Thursday and Friday : no change .
Sittings of 1 and 2 October in Brussels
( No change )
( The order of business was adopted as amended )
Calendar of Part-Sessions 1998
At its meeting today , the Conference of Presidents agreed to propose the following calendar for the 1998 part-sessions :
12 to 16 January 28 to 29 January 16 to 20 February 9 to 13 March 25 to 26 March 14 to 17 April 29 to 30 April 11 to 15 May 15 to 19 June 1 to 2 July 13 to 17 July 14 to 18 September 5 to 9 October 19 to 23 October 4 to 5 November 16 to 20 November 2 to 3 December 14 to 18 December
The deadline for tabling amendments to these dates is 12.00 noon tomorrow , Tuesday 16 September .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Mr von Habsburg is asking for the floor .
Mr President , that does not leave us much time to table amendments .
Would it not be possible to extend the deadline for amendments at least until 9.00 a.m. on Wednesday morning , instead of doing it in such a rush when most Members are no longer present and not all the information is available in writing either .
I think we are being rather steamrollered , and we have both an interest in and a right to prior study of the motions , which at least means we need more time to table amendments .
Mr Von Habsburg , the matter has been given careful thought .
Postponing the voting day was even considered , but it was felt preferable to take the vote on Wednesday , when attendance is highest , rather than postpone it .
That involves careful preparation for the vote .
So initially the maximum time-limit is 12 noon on Tuesday .
This could be extended to 3 p.m. at the latest .
I do not think it would be possible to carry it over to the following morning , because we would not be able to prepare properly for the vote .
But , in view of what you have said , I propose extending the deadline to 3 p.m. tomorrow , Tuesday .
( Parliament agreed to this deadline )
Advertising
The next item is the report ( A4-0272 / 97 ) by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 84 / 450 / EEC on misleading advertising with a view to including comparative advertising .
The rapporteur , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , has the floor .
Mr President , at last , after six years we have conciliation , - the last stage of the legislation on comparative advertising - a result has finally been achieved .
It has taken a long time , but as rapporteur on comparative advertising I am nevertheless delighted .
The proposal on misleading advertising was first submitted as early as 1978 , and it was then felt that regulating comparative advertising ought to be possible .
At the time this was blocked by a number of Member States .
Comparative advertising is a good thing and it is also a good thing that legislation is coming in , but it will still take another two and a half years - 30 months - before it is finally incorporated into national legislation .
A number of Member States which have not yet done so must now incorporate it .
There are several reasons for harmonizing comparative advertising in the European Union and I would just like to recall them here .
Firstly , there is a need for this important marketing instrument to be regulated because it has been applied in so many different ways in the Member States .
Secondly , comparative advertising is an opportunity to provide the consumer with better information and thirdly , it promotes competition .
The cross-border aspect is an important feature of advertising .
Advertisements cross borders via the packaging of goods , via radio , television and via the other media .
Differences in advertising legislation in Member States hamper the marketing process and may therefore also obstruct the free circulation of goods and services .
That could lead to an unfavourable position with regard to competition in certain Member States where comparative advertising has up to now been prohibited .
Then there is the consumer 's right to information .
As a result of the internal market , the consumer is increasingly faced with products and services from other Member States .
This will continue to increase owing to the rapid growth in cross-border communication media - just think , for example , of new media such as the Internet , and so on .
In this context , the comparative advertising that is now possible will mean a whole useful source of information for the consumer , making it easier to make choices .
Nevertheless , comparative advertising must of course still fulfil certain conditions .
The conditions are described very clearly in the directive .
What exactly is understood by comparative advertising is , for example , explained in a definition .
The conditions relate , among other things , to the characteristics of goods and products , but also , for example to the trade names of products .
The producer may , after all , not be adversely affected .
There is also the protection of products with the name of origin ; the wine-producing regions in particular requested this .
A provision has also been included concerning the imitation of goods .
You cannot compare a real product with an imitation and then stick on another price tag .
I must say that the last amendment was really difficult to get through in the conciliation procedure .
Another point is that by allowing comparative advertising , the opportunities of the smaller companies to challenge the market leaders become much greater .
It was also very striking in preparing for this part-session and when preparing the legislation , that the large market leaders were absolutely set against comparative advertising and that the smaller companies said that in any case it offers us a chance to market our products much better .
Parliament has made a number of adjustments and refinements to the proposal .
I am of the opinion and the Commission and the Council have also adopted that opinion that self-regulation is also an extremely useful instrument in comparative advertising .
A number of provisions have also been included in this regard , which I am very pleased about .
Just as with distance-selling , the initial impetus has been given to measures on the treatment of cross-border complaints .
This is a very important subject on which we must obtain further legislation .
Parliament has made a contribution to bringing about the protection of the consumer and of companies on very tricky aspects of comparative advertising .
Where it might lead to problems , we have found good definitions .
As I have just said , the amendment for which we finally received support in the Council with regard to imitation goods , is very important .
In two and a half years the legislation will come into force .
The rapporteur is pleased and I hope that Parliament will accept the proposal as it now stands with satisfaction .
Mr President , I apologise to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten that I was not in the Chamber at the moment she began .
I am actually chairing another meeting in the furthest part of this vast building .
I have just three very simple points to make in support of the position the rapporteur has taken .
I congratulate her on her patience during the prolonged conciliation proceedings .
Occasionally we exchanged a sharp word but it was all in the spirit of friendship and cooperation .
The main points worth stressing - and I speak for my whole group - are that we are now in a position where we can move beyond seeing advertising which makes direct comparisons as being somehow dangerous .
Plainly , in the single market it is not and should not be .
Advertising which makes a real comparison between real qualities in an objective way serves the interests of the consumer , and it should be seen as such .
There have been many attempts , diversions and smoke-screens which have tried to suggest in some way that this was not the case .
I believe that this is a major step forward and that we should have comparative advertising where it can be shown not to be misleading , where there is rapid redress if misleading information does actually appear in the advertisement about which there is a complaint and where there are comparisons between goods or services which meet the same real need .
The rapporteur has already referred to the second point , which my Group would like to stress : the way in which the directive has ultimately succeeded in drawing the line at advertisements which mislead by the use of remarkably similar names .
The use of a similar name to ride on the back of another product , which may have been established on the market for 20 or 30 years , is an unfair business practice , and outlawing it in the way that the amended directive has done is an eminently sensible thing to do .
We have had many examples brought to us in the recent past of jeans and other domestic commodities which trade on a remarkably similar name .
My third and last point is to say that the national self-regulatory bodies need to coordinate their work .
The directive will produce a framework in which they are able to do that .
In consumer terms , cross-border complaints are plainly now the main item on the increase .
If we can qualify and classify these with the cross-border bodies , we shall have done a very good job .
I congratulate the rapporteur once more .
Mr President , I was able to listen to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten from the beginning and as in most cases I am completely behind her as rapporteur .
However , I should like to request the Council and Commission in future to work somewhat faster .
Mrs Oomen describes this in paragraph two of the explanatory note .
It took two years after the first reading before the Commission had amended a proposal and another two years before the Council had established a common position .
I must say that when the final conciliation procedure eventually took place on 25 June this year , we also attempted to mess things up three times because the date was cancelled .
That was not the Parliament 's fault and I would request the Council and the Commission to stick more to the rules .
It will be clear to you , when we examine the subject matter , that I do not have much new to report .
I think that decent compromises have been reached for all the amendments .
I would just refer to the cross-border aspect .
I expect the Commission will now make a proposal on time .
It has taken two years to implement the cross-border complaints in the directive and I hope that it will now issue a report and a proposal within two years .
Mr President , as the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party we wholeheartedly approve these directives .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on her fine work .
We have every confidence in her skills as rapporteur in this very awkward conciliation procedure .
I would like to draw your attention to two matters .
When national self-regulatory official bodies come up against these cross-border complaints , it is natural they should embark on a course of even closer mutual co-operation .
Perhaps the time will come when internal markets will have developed to the extent that there is a need for a European self-regulatory body , but I do not believe that time has yet come .
Secondly , if we are going to be able to undertake comparative advertising , we will also need a comparative study .
We should in every way encourage the creation of independent European research institutes to analyse the content of products and services and their features .
To some extent we already have such a thing , but more are needed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
The current range of national regulations , from full acceptance of to a total ban on comparative advertising , makes imperative a harmonization by demarcation of the limits , particularly in view of increasing cross-frontier advertising in the media .
The parameters which must be taken into consideration are : increasing competitiveness and conforming to fair rules of conduct ; easing of goods and services trade ; consumer information ; and consumer protection .
Even though it has taken a considerable time , the proposed directive is successful in obeying these criteria and in creating a framework within which the consumer can be kept comprehensibly , clearly and unequivocally informed - in other words , without being either misled or deceived - about the quality of a product , whilst at the same time unjustified disparagement of competitors is avoided .
Furthermore , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , the regulation allows Member States flexibility of application within the framework of its objective , and maintenance of advertising constraints .
For all these reasons we Members of the Austrian Freedom Party shall vote for the regulation .

Mr President , we have every reason to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , and also in particular Mr Collins and the members of the parliament 's delegation , for their work .
The text before you today contains a whole series of points that Parliament had already formulated , but which could not be of implemented , so in this instance the procedure has resulted in total victory for Parliament .
I would like to say this to Mr Eisma : It only seems as if the Commission has taken one and a half years to present the amended resolution .
In fact , the Council in Edinburgh came between the first reading in Parliament and the first discussion by the Council , and , with the concurrence of Parliament , required the Commission to check the need for the proposals against the principle of subsidiary .
This naturally involved consultation with the Member States and led to the year and half 's delay .
However we have now completed that procedure .
I would like to emphasize the agreement of the Commission to the presentation of a report on the possibility of introducing effective measures dealing with cross-border complaints in cases of comparative advertising .
In this respect the Commission declares its intention , if possible , to present the report at the same time as the one on the complaints procedure provided by Article 17 of Directive 97 / 7 / EG dealing with protection of consumers entering into non-regional sales contracts , because the two subjects obviously have something in common .
So we can look at them at the same time .
Naturally , the Commission will do everything possible to continue to progress the matter and ensure that Parliament 's intentions are put into effect .
Thank you very much , Mr Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Cultural Heritage - the Raphael programme
The next item is the report ( A4-0267 / 97 ) by Mr Sanz Fernández , on behalf of the European Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council Decision establishing a Community action programme in the field of cultural heritage - the Raphael programme ( C4-0391 / 97-95 / 0078 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , the Conciliation Committee between the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers has reached an agreement over the RAPHAEL programme for the conservation of Europe 's cultural heritage .
A commitment has been given for the financing of the programme over the next few years , which was the issue of particular concern to Parliament and the Council . Therefore cultural action in the area of heritage is no longer blocked , and the programme will become operational shortly .
The European Parliament proposed a sum of ECU 86 million for the four years from 1997 to 2000 , while the Council reduced the figure to ECU 30 million for the same period , with a limit of ECU 10 million for each of the first two years , and subsequent revision .
The agreed solution proposes a grant of ECU 30 million between 1997 and 2000 .
However , this will not be divided annually , but will be fixed each year by the budgetary authority , and will be revised after the second year of operation .
This margin of manoeuvre left in the hands of the budgetary authority will allow a certain amount of flexibility in the management of these funds , which will make it possible for the annual budget to be progressive .
On the one hand , this will allow the ECU 10.6 million allowed for in the 1997 budget to be unfrozen .
This sum has not yet been used , because of the lack of a legal basis according to the Commission . On the other hand , the European Parliament will be able to allow for a reasonable increase for 1998 during the budgetary procedure currently in progress .
Therefore it looks hopeful that a real financial effort may finally be made in this area , to back up initial statements about the importance of culture .
Furthermore , at the request of Parliament and subsequently of the Culture Council which met in Luxembourg on June 30 , the European Commission has made a statement in which it promises to present , as soon as possible , an framework-programme which will encompass Kaleidoscope ( devoted to artistic and cultural activities ) , Ariane ( devoted to books , reading and translation ) and Raphael .
This is a very interesting approach and will allow the European Union to use a single organization to cover cultural activities , which are currently split up .
This framework-programme will be able to be operational at the end of next year , which is when the Kaleidoscope and Ariane programmes come to an end .
The Commission will consult widely with the parties and institutions concerned , and in particular with the European Parliament to determine their proposal for the framework programme .
The joint project , which has been adopted by codecision , includes other proposals by Parliament , such as to improve access to heritage for disadvantaged people or those who live in peripheral or rural areas .
As for the commitology , the agreement reached is the same as in the previous cases - Ariane and Kaleidoscope- with a mixed management committee for certain matters , and consultative for others .
Based on what I have just said , I think that the Plenary should vote in favour of the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee , but we must analyse the problems which arose during the approval procedure for the Raphael programme , which took more than two years .
The codecision procedure with unanimity in the Council is very inefficient .
The fact that any country can block the procedure makes agreement difficult , and it can be a long process .
One might think that the problems arose for budgetary reasons , but that was not the case .
It is simply ridiculous , in view of the low budget devoted to cultural heritage and cultural activities in general .
I believe that the problem is more serious .
There is a basic disagreement among a few countries about the Union 's powers in cultural matters .
This Parliament should once again take the initiative in order to demonstrate that the cultural values which are common to all Europeans are perfectly compatible with the cultural diversity of our citizens , and that to preserve and make known our common European heritage is a necessary part of integration at this point in the building of Europe .
Finally , I should like to emphasize that activities in the heritage area lead to job creation and economic development in many regions of the European Union .
Mr President , like the rapporteur , I certainly welcome the conclusion of the interminable discussions on the Raphael Programme .
I wish to congratulate our rapporteur , Javier Sanz Fernández , for his fortitude and perseverance .
I find myself in an unusual position , given that it is Commissioner Bangemann who is here with us this evening , of wholeheartedly congratulating the Commission on its fortitude and perseverance .
But the Commission has been a willing , able and patient partner of Parliament over this programme - and quite rightly so .
The Commission proposed a programme in which Europeans would join together to protect and enhance our cultural heritage : the heritage that is visible , that gives us pride in our towns and cities , that is the very physical backbone of our European civilization .
Yet some ministers - not all - would have preferred there to be no proposal at all .
This , quite sadly , is proof of the real lack of interest and commitment on the part of certain ministers in developing European cultural initiatives , even when they prove to be of enormous popularity .
Like Mr Sanz Fernández , rather than boring our listeners , I would just like to dwell momentarily on the constitutional aspects of this report .
The length of the procedure ( two years ) , the apparent ability of one Member State to stop all real progress in the cultural field , comes about because Article 128 is beset and dogged by the codecision procedure with unanimity in the Council of Ministers .
On that basis , my group - and I believe this whole Parliament - regrets that the Amsterdam Treaty has not changed this .
We should have qualified majority voting in this area .
Perhaps ministers will listen more if we talk more about economics and the importance of the cultural industries , of the creative economy .
Through their actions some ministers undervalue the critical part the cultural industries play in the whole of our economy and the enormous potential they have for job creation .
I wish they had realized this a little more when they were considering this important cultural programme .
Quite simply , as a former culture minister , Michael D. Higgins , reminded us : very often the European Union cannot live by commercialism alone .
Books or buildings are not the same as buckets , films are not fish .
They need a different approach , more appropriate help , more support and more special measures .
I welcome the final adoption of this programme .
I hope this is just a start , that we can build on it , improve it and give it more funding in the future .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate Mr Sanz Fernández on the fact that he has succeeded in guiding this programme safely into port .
In fact , as Parliament , we should never have been able to approve this programme and we should not have been able to approve the result of the conciliation proceedings .
Because what we are actually doing is causing disappointment among the population .
The preservation of our cultural heritage should be our number one priority within the cultural policy of the European Union .
So many projects can be tackled and when we now publicize this by the fact that we have set up a Raphael programme , then we shall find that we shall receive many applications and we shall probably very quickly have to say " no ' for budgetary reasons .
It is wrong vis-à-vis the population when we create programmes that we cannot implement .
It was wrong of the Council of Ministers to think that in this case we are dealing with what I always call a spending department , in which you must be economical .
It is great that I can now disagree with Commissioner Bangemann , because he naturally has a great deal of understanding about culture but also about economics and the two come together here .
No better employment programme could be devised than the restoration of the cultural heritage in Europe and especially in the countries that are to join the Union , where there must be an enormous number of projects .
Nothing is more labour-intensive than this kind of work .
I thought it had been agreed in Amsterdam that job creation was the number one priority .
I have not heard anything specific and here is a specific programme and the Council of Ministers does not wish to provide any money for it .
Apart from the fact that it not only involves economics and not only culture .
I think that the fact that we are prepared to declare the protection and the preservation of our cultural heritage as priority number one can also be a political instrument for further European integration .
As chairman of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and he Media , there are really two reasons why I have been able to agree with the conciliation .
In the first place , because I wished to do Mr Sanz Fernández the favour of rewarding the work of so many years with success .
In the second place , because we have got the Council of Ministers , together with the Commission , to organize an inter institutional conference in the next few months in which we can talk about the programmes of the future , the culture programmes of the next few years .
There is still a misunderstanding between the Council of Ministers and the Commission and the European Parliament 's Committee on Culture and that is the fact that the Council of Ministers and the Commission think that we shall want to talk about the financial regulations , but I , as chairman of the Committee on Culture , shall battle to ensure that we speak about the content of this kind of programme and about the place of the programmes in the overall policy .
Do we see the cultural programmes as spending departments in which we must act thriftily or do we wish to see these programmes as an outstanding way of bringing European integration a bit further in the next few years .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate rapporteur Sanz Fernández for the excellent work he has provided us with and , above all , for his proven qualities as a negotiator in bringing the Raphael programme to a successful conclusion .
This programme is dedicated to supporting the actions of member States on behalf of European cultural heritage , be it moveable property or real estate , archaeological , subaquatic or architectural , whether it concerns developments , beauty spots or cultural landscape .
What a programme for so little money !
According to the accounts of my colleagues , the conciliation procedure between the Council and Parliament has been very difficult .
Whilst Parliament considered a budget of ECU 86 million to be necessary , the Council stuck strictly to the budget of ECU 30 million that they had always proposed .
We finally accepted this budget of 30 million divided over four years , but without an annual breakdown .
The budget will be re-examined before the end of the second year , taking into account the budgetary situation and the results obtained during the first phase of this experimental programme .
Files of requests are accumulating .
The chairman , Mr Pex has said so .
We therefore need to hurry up .
Have we done well ?
The question can again be asked today .
Personally , being heavily involved in following the work of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media and , above all , that of the Conciliation Committee , I am very happy to see this report brought to a conclusion but very sad to note the rigid attitude of Member States who , whilst having fine words to say on the theme of culture as a factor of identity and in the development of jobs , refuse to invest in the theme .
What end do political statements serve if they are not followed through with financial acts ?
The conciliation procedure has once again taken time to come to a conclusion , and this being with few concessions on the part of the Council , who play at wearing down their partners .
And it is unfortunately not the Treaty of Amsterdam which is going to advance this unhappy situation , on the grounds of article 128 , as Carole Tongue has clearly said .
However , we hope that the results of this programme will be sufficiently convincing for Member States to take future action to provide a decent budget for the Raphael programme .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the European Union programmes for culture have been problematic and slow to start .
The Commission has failed to grasp their great significance .
Lack of unanimity has proved a hindrance .
The result has been a lengthy debate over programme budgets .
But , in fact , the funding concerned is small-scale when compared to the whole .
The Raphael programme has gone through the same difficult process and it is with that in mind that we must obviously be pleased with the results of the conciliations and with the commencement of the programme , and we thank Mr Sanz Fernández for his excellent work .
Financing , however , has been insufficient to fulfill aims , and it will be vital to top up the budget at the end of 1988 .
The aim of the Raphael programme was to enhance European cooperation in the area of cultural heritage .
When we consider what unifies us and the underlying principle of our mutual co-operation , is it not just that common European cultural heritage in all its rich variety ?
Support can be most effectively used by the creation of networks of co-operation between functionaries and institutes in various fields in different countries .
Telecommunications technology provides new opportunities for bringing cultural heritage to a mass public dimension and , furthermore , raising the status of cultural heritage .
Training for professionals in the cultural heritage sector , both in the area of new communications services and the administration of traditional professional methods is also one of the main aims of the Raphael programme .
I would like to emphasize the need for broader cooperation in all areas of culture , so as to achieve maximum benefit and synergy from the process , for example , in cooperation with the Council of Europe and UNESCO .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
We Greens also regret the conflict and thank the rapporteur for the fact that a solution has been found here .
We should stress , however , that we are not happy with this compromise and , indeed , cannot ever be happy with it , as long as we recall the stubborn and unreasonable attitude of the Council in recent years .
From the very beginning there were conflicts over the financial framework for the Raphael programme .
For years we have experienced the ritual refusal of the Council to carry out the wishes of Parliament for the extension of this programme and of the cultural programme as a whole .
This refusal must be regarded as particularly incomprehensible in the light of the debate on employment policy .
Here , there is already a European authority for employment policy , an authority that needs no further debate and one that undoubtedly meets with the highest level of public acceptance .
It is simply incomprehensible , therefore , that this authority is not being aggressively developed , but that the Parliament is basically dragging its way through years of conflict , in order to produce a half way acceptable programme .
That will not do , and that will not do for the coming years !
Mr President , I would also like to express sadness , whilst at the same time congratulating the rapporteur for his tireless work .
But once again , as was the case with the conciliations relating to the Ariane and Kaleidoscope programmes , the parliamentary delegation has not been able to win the case with regard to the budget .
The margin for negotiation between the ECU 30 million over four years approved by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media in the common position and the ECU 86 million requested by the European Parliament at the time of the vote on the second reading seems substantial .
There was none .
The demands of the European Parliament collided , as usual , with the principle of unanimity which is current in the Council with regard to cultural policy .
Here , above all , the problem we are faced with is that of non-respect of the principle of interinstitutional equality between the two colegislatures when the application of a codecision procedure has , in compensation , the unanimity of the Council .
The Treaty of Amsterdam has maintained the status quo and we can already expect admissions of powerlessness from Parliament in the sphere of cultural policy .
This conciliation has been a failure .
The amounts allocated to the Raphael programme will be manifestly insufficient because they will also have to cover , on the basis of a very wide definition , participation of the CEECs , Malta and Cyprus .
Certainly , however , the delegation can be satisfied with the more practical aspects of the agreement .
Thus , there will be no annual breakdown of the budget .
The annual allocation will be voted by Parliament , by means of the budgetary procedure .
Also figuring in the ranks of small satisfactions are the clause regarding revision after two years and the commitment of the Commission Executive to present a global cultural programme in 1998 .
These are our only , and very slim , hopes .
Mr President , almost two years after first dealing with it in this Parliament , the Raphael action programme for cultural heritage is soon going to start up .
The budget of ECU 30 million , which is about 1.2 billion Belgian Francs , has been established and this Parliament will be able to speak its mind about how it is spent .
And although I consider myself a mild but rational Euro-sceptic , I am for once convinced that many of these millions will be usefully spent .
In any case , more usefully than some other , or should I say , most other , European budgets .
I would , however , essentially take the view that culture must strictly be the responsibility of the European people and that even programmes favouring the so diverse European cultural heritage should preferably not be established at European level .
Experience in my own country with European budgets , and I am thinking very specifically of the structural funds , has taught me , speaking very practically , that , on the one hand , squandering and , on the other hand , uneven distribution are the order of the day and that is in fact very often the fault of the Member States themselves .
But almost by definition , so-called " European money ' is treated less carefully and what is more the money does not have to be coughed up by the taxpayer .
For these two reasons , I shall not approve this report , although I wish to state explicitly once more that that does not mean that I am not in agreement with the intended aims of the programme .
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and Parliament 's delegation which brought the difficult conciliation on the Raphael programme to a conclusion .
I think they reached a very valid compromise , particularly in view of the revision of the financial appropriation - currently ECU 30 million for a four year period , but without any annual breakdown - by the end of 1998 , that is , two years after adoption . That revision will give the programme more flexibility .
The proposed actions are initiatives to promote conservation of the European cultural heritage , thematic networks and cooperation between European museums , professional training in cultural heritage conservation , restoration of facades which have been painted over , and the study and appreciation of the cultural heritage of the preindustrial age .
It is also planned that Community actions geared to supporting and incorporating initiatives by Member States involving cultural property of Europe-wide interest should be covered by a framework programme for culture , which the European Commission is starting to formulate in the current weeks , as soon as the latter becomes operational .
Conservation of cultural and architectural heritage clearly highlights culture 's role in society and the objectives to be pursued by cultural policy through decisions which , unfortunately , usually drop down to second place at crucial and dramatic times in the life of mankind .
The language of art and architecture , particularly in their most varied and outstanding forms and expressions , can be seen as a universal language understood by all , enshrining values and principles of respect , peace , tolerance and solidarity .
It should also be borne in mind that recognized cultural contributions and stylistic influences deriving from other countries and cultures produce an individuality and a symbolism which becomes our common cultural heritage , that is , our identity , enriched by national diversity .
Identity crises are not born of momentary bewilderment or doubt of the value of our heritage , but of lack of an exciting project to be shared with others .
Cultural policy , the expression of Europe , thus becomes a bulwark of our design for the construction of a Europe which is more than an economic , political and social area .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
We too agee with the rapporteur that a lot of effort into grappling with a severe shortage of money .
Maintaining the cultural heritage is certainly a European responsibility .
But we cannot first moraleize on the subject or give up , just because the cost has to be counted , because there is the duty to administer the cultural heritage .
So we advocate further research and that projects to be funded be prepared accordingly .
The Parliament 's responsibility cannot end when the cheque has been posted and the money has been paid ; that is a long way from ensuring that Europe 's cultural heritage is preserved .
The o / t acclaimed integration , the cross-border effects and , above all , the economic success constantly referred to here in relation to sustained employment and so on will only be achieved when communication about the cultural heritage is managed in the same way .
The custodians of cultural property must ensure that their message reaches the public .
, Member of the Commission . ( DE ) Mr President , to start with the last point : it is not up to me , Mrs Poisson , nor up to the Commission .
Of course the resources are inadequate , and the Commission would have been delighted if the programme had been better funded , but there was no more was to be had .
When the programme has proved its worth there will be a better case for continuing and improving the funding .
In any case , the rapporteur - whom I should like to congratulate at this point - has achieved a great measure of success for the programme itself .
Indeed , you have all emphasized that yourselves .
The question of culture is not so simple .
I was just wondering , what Parliament would do if this discussion were taking place before an election .
Say , for instance , you had to take 150 million away from the agricultural policy and add it to this programme .
I do not mean to be rude , but it really would be interesting to take a vote in Parliament and see which of the two would win .
But it is quite true that culture is much more than the expression of human life .
Even in this debate there has been dissension on what culture actually is .
I do not think it can be defined .
It is the expression of the lives of individuals , groups and peoples .
But if you look at the four stages or this programme more closely , it is not based on the assumption that there is a kind of artificial , superior , European culture that has nothing to do with the individual cultures of the regions and peoples .
Quite the reverse : the programme is actually designed so that lesser known cultures undervalued by others can become better known ; to broadcast their existence and inform people of their life and development .
This means any representative of a regional or folk culture can happily support this programme .
It goes far beyond the boundaries of individual Member States .
In my view it would be very short-sighted to define culture as only existing in one region or one nation , and unable to develop a European form of expression as well .
I believe that all our European regional and national cultures contain elements in common .
That becomes clear at latest when one compares them with other cultures from other parts of the world .
The Commission recognizes that here we have a way of combatting unemployment .
I hope that will become ever better understood .
Looking at where the new jobs are being created today - Mrs Tongue has touched on this - culture in its widest sense , as described by Mr Pex , is certainly one of the few areas where new jobs are being created .
The point is not just that we want to do something to preserve our cultural heritage , without regard to what this means for the development of the economy and hence for the creation of new jobs .
No one should be in any doubt about the connection .
I am aware that economic and employment policy-makers frequently fail to recognize that connection , and the importance of culture first has to be explained to them in many ways .
First of all , it must be explained that most activities which today lead to economic success are creative .
People no longer have to prove that they are superior to machines : anything machines can do , it can do better than a human being .
What is really human in work , and in capacity for work , is creativity inspiration .
I have never met a creative or inspired person whose abilities were not in some way based upon or used as a result of his relationship with culture .
So economic activity today is to have a purpose and reason , if it is to be capable of being utilized , it must have a connection with and be relevant to culture .
That is much more important than a direct means of creating jobs .
Let that be absolutely clear .
Today , culture is a direct economic factor .
Port exhibitions and tourism depend on it .
It is always much easier to establish businesses in a country or a region , in which a cultural heritage is discernible , in which culture thrives .
Of course there are also direct effects of culture upon the economy , but I believe that the real heart of the matter is the coexistence of peoples and the creative , innovative force arising from that coexistence , in terms of the current position of Europeans and their employment markets .
The funding available here may seem laughable against this background .
But , at least , it is a beginning .
As you know , the Commission is organizing a conference , what we call a forum , in January , in which Parliament and cultural life representatives will be able to participate .
This forum will examine how these programmes can be implemented .
We are in the process of preparing a green paper to be laid before Parliament and the Council towards the end of 1997 , specifically on the subject of the effects of culture on the creation of jobs .
So as you see the Commission shares the position of Parliament 's Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media .
I am delighted at this cooperative effort .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 .
Cohesion policy and culture
The next item is the report ( A4-0252 / 97 ) by Mr Azzolini , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the Commission communication on cohesion policy and culture - a contribution to employment ( COM ( 96 ) 0512 - C4-0056 / 97 , ' Hughes ' procedure ) Draftsmen ( ) : Mr Ribeiro , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy Mr Cabezón Alonso , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . Mr Vecchi , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media
Mr President , I want to thank the Committee on Regional Policy for assigning this report to me and I must say I have found it very absorbing because I have always maintained that culture is a great instrument with vast potential for regional development .
If it is true - and it is true - that one of the fundamental aims of our Community action is to guarantee and ensure peace and development in the Community , it is also true that the basic objective remains the employment of present and future generations .
Culture can only be seen in this light and it is essential pursue a plan to integrate it with other activities leading to development and employment , which is of concern to us all and on which all are trying to concentrate their efforts .
But I also have to say that , from a ' cultural ' point of view , there is clearly a lack of strategic knowledge on how to integrate the resources .
I am revising my speech in the light of what Commissioner Bangemann said just now , because , objectively , it is important to achieve conciliation on a programme like Raphael to obtain a really complex and well-expressed demonstration of the validity of sustaining a cultural programme .
In the recent past there has been , and unfortunately there still is , a serious dysfunction , a serious gap in structural funds spending capacity in certain objective 1 areas , especially in our country , alas .
That is why I maintain , and I say so in this report , the fundamental importance of making culture a basic link in this development , this commitment , and this expenditure .
So an increase in the link with the employment strategy is not unthinkable , but would be both sensible and wholly consistent , because the old continent is the custodian and provider of a cultural heritage which is just waiting to be exploited , but in a structured and appropriate way .
It is also necessary to have the capacity to re-examine the cultural process on our continent .
We have objective 1 areas with latent potential which has not been properly exploited , and they could experience a time of recovery through appropriate use of the structural funds , precisely in a cultural key .
Our Committee on Regional Policy has dealt with this issue several times and I am also particularly sensitive to the Euromediterranean policy aspect involved .
In short , these regions ' best chance of affirming their cultural identity is through a process of cultural renewal .
This can be done through the enlargement mentioned earlier .
At this point I also want to thank the committee secretary and our officers for their contribution , because the issue was very complex and , obviously , everyone 's contribution was essential .
Those contributions , the reports of the draftsmen of opinions and the many amendments I have taken up were all excellent in my opinion .
I believe this report of ours effectively represents an innovative step in the area we are debating and which was also dealt with a little earlier .
In fact , Europe , the old continent , can draw full advantage from this issue which is so crucial not only to jobs , but also to peace .
Cultural deepening clearly adds to the consolidation of peace and cohesion between peoples and areas , especially in the Mediterranean , a much more remarkable aspect than the one more generally dealt with .
I have accepted almost all the amendments including Amendment No 5 , as long as it is incorporated into paragraph 25 , otherwise I will have to reject it as too specific .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in this headlong rush towards the Euro and eastern Europe , it almost seems unusual to be talking about cohesion , regional development , culture - culture , indeed ! - and their contribution to creating jobs .
But it is urgent to do so and overcome all resistance , transcend all indifference .
In doing so we are talking about local power , about participation by the people , about democracy .
And about respect for the cultural heritage bequeathed to us , which is deep-rooted and must be preserved or humanity will be the poorer .
We are talking about the local power of those of us who have been elected , and who remain close to the people and share with them their daily traditions and the appeals of modernity which can undermine identity .
And we are talking about employment , about cultural activities as generators of jobs , which can and must create the indispensable harmony between the past to be preserved and the future to be built , not denying that past but valuing it .
I am delighted that this report has taken up the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and industrial policy which I had the honour and pleasure of drafting and presenting .
I congratulate Mr Azzolini on his work and the receptiveness he has shown .
And I hope this report will not be submerged by the wave of economic liberalism and cultural abdication , that it will not remain an incidental report , a set of good intentions and fine words neglected in the strategies and neglected by the actions and the financial resources which , as the Commissioner himself has just recognized , are ludicrous and need to be reconsidered and strengthened .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , structural funds have been used to finance projects linked to culture in its widest sense .
On first assessment , the Commission estimates such finance at about ECU 400 million .
Perhaps the most obvious are those activities in the area of restoration of our architectural heritage , but culture is not one of the objectives of the structural funds , despite what it has been possible to do .
In its communication , the Commission gives us some important examples , and it would be useful if our committee had access to as much information as possible . This would give us more details about the added value of these activities in the area of employment , and allow us to define more clearly our strategy for future action .
Culture , which is both defined and expressed in many ways , is also an activity which involves large numbers , with respect to funding , employment , tourist movements , etc .... You could say that there is a real industry linked to cultural matters , with a potential for employment .
In countries visited by tourists , culture in all its manifestations is an additional attraction ( and not the least ) for those visitors . It is an important attraction , and it would be useful to give some attention to the training of staff who play a role in these activities .
We must insist on developing the intrinsic potential of the regions ; implementing large projects for the renovation , restoration and conservation of infrastructure ; intervening in new forms of cultural activity ; and optimizing the reasonable exploitation of our historical , architectural - in short - cultural heritage .
The quality of interventions within the framework of Community aid depends on the strategies and ideas of the Member States .
Nevertheless , cooperation and a greater awareness of experiences must be encouraged , in order ( I repeat what I said at the beginning ) to see the significant added value of the cultural activities of the structural funds for the development of some regions , and for employment .
Mr President , culture has long been the Cinderella of the structural funds .
No mention is made of culture in the funds ' present regulations , except in a narrow and marginal way .
It seems clear , from the Commission 's communication , from the Council 's various recent meetings , and , above all , from what has been put forward by the European Parliament for years , that support for cultural activities is not an unproductive luxury but a condition of development , progress and job-creation for the whole European Union .
In our opinion , drafted on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , we have essentially emphasized three points : the first relates to what can already be done using the existing funds and regulations .
Intervention in the cultural sector and , above all , the integration of culture at all levels of socioeconomic development are , by their nature , valuable in both social and civic terms and economic and employment terms .
They fulfil the provisions of article 128 , paragraph 4 , of the treaty , and permit better integration of culture into all Community policies .
In this context , they involve promoting dialogue between those responsible , at any level , for programming Community funds and the operators in the cultural sector - be they institutions , associations or private organizations .
The second point relates to the definition of the future structural policies of the Union .
It is clear that the objectives and regulations of the structural funds , after 1999 , must provide for and permit better integration of culture into the Community 's policies for economic and social cohesion and development .
The fact is , investments in the cultural field are neither encouraged nor promoted at present .
Thirdly , we stress the need to develop , in addition to the structural funds , direct Community action in the cultural sector , giving it greater consistency and visibility .
We suggest that the existing cultural programmes should be grouped together under a single framework programme with new actions and programmes , the promotion of cultural industries , high level training in the sector , and so on .
As well as promoting Community action , this would have the effect of promoting , boosting , guiding and completing the projects promoted and carried out at decentralized level under the structural funds .
Mr President , I very much welcome the Commission communication which followed a request from the Committee on Regional Policy for further discussion and debate on the role that culture can play in achieving economic and social cohesion .
I believe that Structural Funds have provided many opportunities for the promotion of our cultural heritage and a recognition of cultural trades .
If we have a problem , it is that we have not made enough of that , nor have we blown our trumpet enough about what we can do with European regional development funds .
I would like to give some examples of things that have been done in my constituency .
Increasingly my constituency has become a sought-after film location after the British Broadcasting Corporation produced the film ' Pride and Prejudice ' and , more recently , a European-backed film ' Jane Eyre ' , by Franco Zefferelli .
It created a tremendous boost for local jobs in the constituency and for the tourist industry .
This Thursday I will be launching the Durban house project , a heritage centre in Eastwood , Nottinghamshire , which has only been made possible with European Rechar funding .
As you said , Commissioner , this is not only about heritage ; this is not just about honouring D. H. Lawrence , a twentieth century novelist famous for ' Lady Chatterley 's Lover ' .
The building has training rooms ; it has a cafeteria ; it is linked in with the local training college and , in fact , we are providing jobs and training for a very high youth unemployment problem that we have in that area .
I also believe that we should not only look at the issue of heritage and culture in an architectural sense , such as renovating town centres .
I believe that we have a lot of potential in promoting cultural industries where there is very good value for money .
Culture in its broadest sense means making the link with the youth culture , with the pop industry .
I do not know whether you have heard of the Spice Girls , Commissioner , or indeed if you have one of their records , but there are very many famous British pop bands such as Oasis and the Spice Girls .
Behind them there are many thousands of jobs .
We have done it with structural funds in Liverpool with the Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts where £ 3.5 million of European regional development money has gone into promoting youth training and training in the cultural industries for young unemployed people and , indeed , for young offenders .
I hope , Commissioner , that you will take away some of these ideas and that you will push for the cultural industries to be put on the agenda at the forthcoming employment summit .
We can make more of this and we can make the link with communities right across the EU , particularly disaffected young people and the unemployed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it gives me great satisfaction to welcome Mr Azzolini 's report and the Commission communication on cohesion policy and culture because I firmly believe culture must be protected and also considered anew in terms of employment and development .
But I think one comment is called for , and I am sure the rapporteur and the other speakers will agree with it .
If culture and the individual traditions of European countries are to be truly respected , I believe it is fundamental to distinguish between culture to be protected and culture to be sold , while keeping to the line proposed by the Commission whereby culture as a whole , in all its many aspects , should be regarded as an instrument for employment .
Culture should indeed be seen as a source of employment , but there must be no attempt to cast it into the hands of speculators and others who might destroy what peoples and their traditions have succeeded in fostering and handing down over the centuries .
What has substantially happened in tourism is the example that must not be followed . The unbridled development of the tourist industry has often transformed coastlines , islands and cities of the arts into building sites , asphalt jungles or camps for tourists , usually without any sense of culture or even a minimum code of behaviour .
Rather , the fact that must be emphasized is that all forms of culture are fragile and at risk of being lost over the years , at risk of being engulfed by globalization and muddled up with new forms of mass culture without any link with tradition .
This means prioritizing all types of intervention , assistance , and encouragement to respect and conserve the cultural heritage , linguistic traditions , regional forms of expression and sports events , all handed down to us by history .
Culture and cohesion policy as a new source of employment : here I want to stress the need to avoid creating new forms of seasonal , casual employment , which happens all too often in tourism .
It would be better to stimulate sensitivity to cultural factors in the most structured way possible , with the development , for example , of faculties for the restoration of cultural heritage , with registers of professionals , recognized throughout Europe , and diplomas or certificates which permit mobility of architects , restorers and so on .
The Commission ought to confront these issues starting from the recognition that only 3 per cent of structural funds appropriations going to fund projects relating to cultural heritage - the current position - is too little .
This share must be increased . A new and extended legal basis is also needed , with culture included in the reform of the structural funds .
I would also like to see two geographic features more strongly emphasized in the approach to cohesion policy and culture : cities and islands . Cities , because they are the real scene of this idea , capable of making European artistic expression a driving force in development , and islands , precisely because they are distant from the continent we often like to call cultural and are the visible testimony to historical periods , architectural styles , crafts , and individual dialects which are still largely pure .
So I fully support the amendment tabled by Mr Alavanos on this issue and I am very glad he tabled it .
During the public hearing last November , when culture and cohesion policy were discussed , the interesting suggestion emerged of an objective 7 devoted to culture , a horizontal objective .
With the planned reform of the structural funds , this idea is very unlikely to be considered , given the considerable reduction in the objectives in general .
It would therefore be appropriate to look at different forms of implementation , one of which might be Community training initiatives .
Mr President , this is a positive communication from the Commission which highlights to the importance of culture for employment , regional development and , of course , trade between regions and nations , as well as for ensuring that the structural funds are used in a better way than today to support the cultural sector .
The report is positive too .
On the whole it supports the communication from the Commission and points to examples of sites of historical or architectural interest , which is good .
In this context , the significance of the structural funds too could be quite different to what it has been so far .
Another important point is that employment should be widespread and evenly distributed across the various regions of a country .
But perhaps the most important contribution we can make , in the form of both job opportunities and cultural exchange , is to be found , I believe , in another area , i.e. in the activities of local and regional associations and organizations .
There are lots of associations and organizations which quietly make major contributions to society and are of great value to democracy .
These include organizations which we more generally regard as NGOs , i.e. non-governmental organizations , in areas such as the environment , nature , schools , sport , academic work and educational associations .
There are great opportunities here to support local and regional cultural life by providing assistance and by developing various cultural activities and cultural institutions which can create both a better cultural exchange and job opportunities which are well distributed over regions and countries .
This is money well spent and we in the Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Group support both the communication and the report wholeheartedly .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur for his hard work on this report .
Cultural projects have a great potential in our Community framework - a potential not yet realised , unfortunately .
They not only have the strong interest and support of citizens for their intrinsic value but they also have an important contribution to make to employment in our European regions .
In this regard , I would like in particular to welcome and support the proposal for the dissemination and communication of information through innovative libraries and new technologies .
I should also like to welcome in particular paragraph 37 of the report in which there is a proposal to mobilize local and regional authorities , together with the close participation of Community and women 's groups who are active in promoting heritage and culture at grass-roots level .
In this context , I welcome the importance the rapporteur has given to culture in peaceful conflict resolution .
The support project for Northern Ireland for peace and reconciliation is a model of grass-roots activism and could be a model for this particular proposal here in listening closely to the grass roots and giving them support .
Particular reference has been made to the importance of different bodies in the Commission working closely together in the cultural field in order to pull the strings together .
Finally , since Mrs McCarthy has referred to her region , I cannot resist referring to my own region and the importance of the film business there at the moment .
At present we have Meryl Streep making a film based on one of our twentieth century playwrights .
I can give her more information on that later .
Mr President , of the many valuable and forward-looking ideas contained in this report I would emphasize the need to link cultural requirements with quality tourism .
The areas of cultural variety , quality tourism and employment policy must in future represent a sort of golden triangle in European regional policy .
The reform of the structural funds after 1999 presents a first class opportunity to bind the cultural dimension , generating economic growth through quality tourism , much more closely to aid policy .
The European Parliament will play a particularly active part in this matter as a focus for the variety of European cultures .
I am particularly grateful to the rapporteur for emphasizing that sport is a cultural activity which should also be used in the struggle against racism .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
I believe it is important that the part played by culture in regional development , as highlighted in this report , is always understood .
Article 128 ( 4 ) of the treaty requires that the Community pay regard to the cultural aspects of its duties .
Only a few weeks ago German students at Witten University asked me about the possibility of realizing the following question : How can we make it possible for culture to be recognized amongst the activities of the European Union ?
Is it , indeed , always reasonable for culture to be considered , even when the main concern is for economic aspects ?
This report shows that there are indeed areas , as shown in the structural policy , in which culture may not at first glance appear to play a role , but in which closer inspection shows it to have a clear influence .
It has been shown , furthermore , that cultural projects are thoroughly compatible with the aims of the cohesion and development plans .
According to current regulations culture can only then be considered when it is part of the regional or local development plans for the creation of permanent jobs .
The development of our society shows that services and mobility continue to grow in importance .
The demand increases constantly for cultural aspects of tourism , because of ever more leisure time and raised expectations .
The cultural sector is , therefore , in other areas , such as in the media , a particularly dynamic part of the service industries that can also play a positive part in employment .
We should not forget , however , that cultural measures have a mainly indirect effect on employment .
It is questionable , therefore , if they can be as effective for employment as are direct investment measures .
According to the programme support of the structural funds , it is the role of the Member States and regions to give due weight to the enhancement of culture within the framework of over-all support .
In accordance with the subsidiarity principle it must also be left in future to Member States and regions as to how they value cultural activities .
Mr President , all too often regional authorities fail to make use of cultural opportunities as a source of employment and innovation .
Only rarely is it realised that cultural events , new works , or activities concerned with the conservation of the landscapes or buildings , create jobs both directly and indirectly , and sometimes even more than with traditional productive companies .
Commissioner Bangemann referred to this in his speech .
From Mr Azzolini 's excellent report it is clear that culture does not feature as part of the region 's development strategy in objective 1 programmes .
And , unfortunately , other programmes lack the cultural angle .
People have only just awoken to the fact that development projects can be structured to fund culture also .
In fact that happened only after the Venice meeting .
Culture has to be understood in a broad sense .
Culture is the past and a respect for tradition , but it is also the creation of the new : new realizations , an appeal to human emotion , aesthetics , and the need for knowledge .
The new applications of information technology and their use to enhance cohesion and regional equality are part of today 's culture .
The dissemination of culture and the products of culture to all people , irrespective of where they live or their social background , will require public funding .
To that end , the Commission should now adopt those measures recommended in the report , such as the production of sufficient background information and statistics on what the real effect of cultural activity is on employment , to make the case to the responsible authorities .
And so I think it would be an excellent idea if , in the November conference , prominence were given to the subject of culture as a force for the creation of jobs .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in today 's debate we are considering culture from an unusual angle , from an economic viewpoint ; its contribution to economic development , its great potential for the creation of employment and the impulse it gives to regional and local development - in a word - its contribution to European economic and social cohesion .
Ever since this debate opened in Venice in May 1996 , various Community documents have stressed the economic potential of culture in the creation of skilled and lasting employment , both directly and indirectly , as well as its potential contribution to regional or local development .
But the Azzolini report shows quite rightly that this potential has so far been under-used . Only 3 % of all structural fund loans are directed towards cultural projects , despite the fact that 80 % of spending on culture comes from those very structural funds .
This fact will have to be considered during the reform of regional policy which is currently in progress .
But the Azzolini report contributes new and worthwhile approaches .
It mentions the conservation of our natural heritage ( which could be called ecoculture or natural culture ) thereby involving culture and environment .
It mentions quality tourism .
We should acknowledge , and also demand , the encouragement of : high quality urban development ; the use of new social information technologies ; the participation of the private sector , foundations and patronage ; inter-regional transborder cooperation ; and the globalized institutional dialogue of all the institutions of the European Union . This is the way to apply the principle of subsidiarity , which is so important in an area such as culture where the inter-regional , regional and local bodies have such great powers .
But it must not be forgotten that in addition to its economic aspects , culture is also an end in itself , as a basis for identity , and individual and collective integration . It allows a qualitative leap to be made in the process of building Europe , to create an authentic and historical community of values .
I congratulate the Commission on its initiative , the rapporteur for his excellent report , and allow me to conclude , Mr President , by recalling the words of Jean Monnet : to rebuild Europe , we must start with its culture .
Mr President , may I thank Mr Azzolini most sincerely for his input , which pulled off the trick of incorporating the various amendments and which is still here !
This , too , is a contribution to a piece of political culture .
I am still sorry that some Members , such as Mr Ribeiro and others , pose questions and make critical remarks , but are then not here when one attempts to give an answer .
After all , in the long run this communication between Commission and Parliament is only possible on such occasions , at least for the main part .
For instance , I should have liked to tell Mr Ribeiro that culture seldom or never has anything to do with political beliefs .
One should preferably let culture get on by itself , and one should not try to possess it for oneself .
Political systems which have attempted that have been wrecked .
To introduce culture into the conflict between liberal economic systems and socialism is not , in my view , relevant .
Nor do I believe that Mr Viola , who is also unfortunately no longer present , but I shall say it anyway , perhaps he can read it in the Minutes - is right when he says that there are special parts of culture deserving of protection , and one should concentrate on these , leaving the others , which find a place in economic life anyway , to one side .
At any rate , I do not share that view .
It is very difficult to decide what counts as culture according to this definition , and is to be valued as real culture , and what is not culture .
With regard to the so-called pop culture , Mrs McCarthy asked me a moment ago if I had heard of the Spice Girls .
I can confirm that I have , and perhaps that proves that I do not belong to any elitist cultural movement .
I just hope the Spice Girls do not get banned by the European Parliament one day when you debate Mrs Lorenz report .
It is my belief , therefore , that there should be no elitist cultural movement , but that we must try as far as is possible to define culture .
In this must be included those cultural values which do not belong to created works , having been more or less donated to mankind as landscape , but whose cultural value it alone appreciates and , of course , it alone can preserve ; so we have also included that in our report .
I hope that you will very quickly abandon any reservations which still remain here and there , such as that we are intending certain powers of the regions .
We are doing no more here than already pertains to regional policy : projects and matters seeking funding are not processed by us , but individually by the regions .
As far as that goes there can be no danger , they are processed in the same way as everything else under regional policy .
Here too , I believe , one should look back after a certain period on what one has achieved .
The first pilot projects which we shall carry out will perhaps show what is achievable .
I think we shall then see somewhat more clearly how to incorporate this important factor in the future .
As for what culture and the maintenance of culture mean for jobs , I have explained this in the preceding report and have no need to repeat it .
Once again my thanks to the Parliament .
I should like your understanding for the fact that neither Mr Oreja nor my female colleague could be here today .
Neither is it a fact that I am the secret Cultural Commissioner , but merely that I am here today because postal services are on today 's agenda .
However , it has been an enormous pleasure for me , to speak on culture for once .
I rise to inform Mr Bangemann of what he surely knows from his parliamentary experience : that we often have three meetings at the same time in this Parliament .
Members unable to be present at the moment are at committee meetings at the same time , just like the colleagues you are representing .
Perhaps you might discuss these cultural differences with Mr Ribeiro and the others , for whom I hereby apologize , over a good meal .
That is undoubtedly a culture that you share with our colleagues , the reply to whom I , or those colleagues who are present , have received on their behalf .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Postal Services
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0271 / 97 ) on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , concerning the common position of the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive on common rules for the development of the internal market of Community postal services and the improvement of quality of services provided ( C4-0223 / 97-95 / 0221 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , first of all , congratulations on reading the title .
The title in itself should take up about three minutes ' speaking time .
To us , in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , it has become known simply as the postal directive .
The second reading of the postal directive sees us approaching the end of what has been a long-running saga .
Honourable Members of this House will be aware of the positions taken by the House , not only on the first reading but on the original Green Paper and various oral questions .
Indeed , while both the Commission and Council have been divided on this issue , Parliament has been very clear in its views - with the exception of Mr Wijsenbeek , of course , who always finds himself in a minority of one : the retention of a public service with a reserved area large enough to ensure a universal service at an affordable price to all citizens of the EU irrespective of where they live .
Add to this our wish that an improvement in the quality of service should be aimed for and you have Parliament 's position in a nutshell .
The pros and cons and our arguments have been debated on previous occasions and , frankly , this time last year there seemed to be little prospect of an agreement being reached .
However , thanks to the intervention at the Dublin Summit of President Chiral and some goodwill on all sides , things began to move , with the Council reaching agreement earlier this year which was very close to Parliament 's position .
Therefore , as rapporteur , it is my belief that for the second reading Parliament should keep its amendments to a bare minimum , thus facilitating a common agreement in this sector .
Can I , however , bring Parliament 's attention to some technical adjustments that will need to be made to article 2 ( 13 ) , and article 5 ( 1 ) which follow from Amendment No 3 that was adopted by the Transport Committee .

First of all , the definition of a universal service provider in article 2 ( 13 ) should read : ' the public or private entity providing a universal postal service or parts thereof within a Member State , the identity of which has been notified to the Commission in accordance with article 4 ' .
Then at the beginning of article 5 ( 1 ) the words : ' is guaranteed an ' should be deleted to avoid duplication with article 4 .
I stress that these are technical adjustments - not changes of substance or of principle .
Can I thank Parliament 's Secretariat and all those people , including the trade unions who work within the postal sector , for their help in what has been a complicated and sensitive issue and also the Council and the Commission for their help , particularly in the later stages .
I believe that should Parliament accept the amendments of the Transport Committee , and only those amendments , at second reading , then together we will have succeeded in ensuring that the goals I set out earlier are achieved and the common position with the Council realised .
There is still one outstanding issue - that of terminal dues .
No doubt , both the Commission and Parliament will return to this problem at a later date .
However , I believe that introducing this issue at this stage could seriously undermine our ability to reach an agreement with the Council , which is why I cannot support amendments on this subject .
Nevertheless , I would like to see some indication from the Commission as to what action , if any , it proposes to take on this issue in the future .
In conclusion , I would ask Parliament to support the Transport Committee on this second reading and , in so doing , to strike a blow not only for the universal public service but also for Parliament itself .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
Slowly but surely is a German maxim .
I should like to apply this saying to the discussion about the postal services guidelines , for this really has been a slow process .
Whether or not the guideline is a good one , I take leave to doubt .
It could be much more satisfactory - in particular , a definite reference to protection for employees as a result of restructuring is missing .
Nevertheless , the Group of the Party of European Socialists will accept this proposal by the Council .
We are aware how difficult it has been to obtain agreement in the Council , and we should not wish to endanger this compromise .
Our concept of a good and commercially viable postal service within the Union went further ; and although the Commission regrettably adopted only a few of our amendments , the Council proposal did reflect the tenor of our resolution .
It is important for the whole Union that a regulatory framework should at last be in place for the postal services , upon which the member states can base their legislation .
Unfortunately , the wording of the guideline too often contains the word " can ' , instead of " must ' , and I fear that this " can ' will be exploited by some Member States as a means of avoiding the European regulations .
The clear definition of universal service and the reserved sectors is really positive .
That will guarantee the consumer a service at a reasonable price in every region .
It will also be helpful during the debate in the Federal Republic on the new postal services law .
I trust that this guideline will quickly become effective without a third reading , for that will nullify the mendacious rumours in my country , which maintain that Europe is , for example , forcing us to close sub-post offices , make collections only twice a week , and so forth .
I fully support Mr Simpson 's amendments , and I am pleased that the postal service for blind and partially-sighted people has been more precisely defined by Amendment No 4 .
We shall not support Mr Ferber 's amendments on the subject of redirection .
However reasonable and beneficial these may actually seem to me personally , they would not be accepted by the Council , and would therefore endanger the fragile compromise .
A solution will have to be found to the problem of redirection , and it will have to be more clearly defined than at present in article 13 , otherwise distortions of competitiveness will remain .
I ask the Commission , therefore , to present a separate guideline proposal on the final payments , and for this to be December 2000 at the very latest when it reports on the new postal services guidelines and their implementation .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
Today we have another opportunity , after well over a year , to debate the postal services , and this time during the second reading of the guidelines with the interminable title .
If we are to be honest , this guideline is no great leap forward .
The only success one can acknowledge is that the guideline is temporary and thus - I say it quite openly - this puts a certain amount of pressure on Member States to make their postal services competitive and fit for the internal market .
If this were not possible , the guideline would not be worth the paper it is printed on .
We do not wish , however , to quarrel with the main planks of the compromise , agreed by the Telecommunications Council of Ministers last December , because I naturally see the following problems here : a ) a majority decision , b ) forcing the issue through in Council .
A certain reserved sector is essential to ensure that basic postal coverage also applies to rural areas .
A universal commitment to service - in other words a certain minimum range of postal products available to all citizens at acceptable prices - is equally justified .
My group , the Group of the European People 's Party will not puss for a compromise procedure , as we must at long last come to the point where things start moving in the member states .
The crucial issue is how we organize a common market in which the central European question , namely final accounting , has to be regulated by an antiquated system - the World Postal Union .
No one has been able to give me a satisfactory answer to this question .
It was quite astonishing how diplomatically Brian Simpson presented his report today , with little trace left of the combative and innovative spirit we saw in the first reading .
A year ago we agreed that we had to find a European solution to the problem of final payment .
Now , in the second reading , allegiance is withdrawn , just so as not to endanger the Council 's compromise .
My compliments to the British on how quickly they have learned the rules of the game !
We in the Group of the European People 's Party feel that we must achieve a common market , with competition even in the postal services , but that this competition should not grant one nation advantages over another .
A reserved sector , a universal service obligation , which is attacked , even undermined , by unauthorised redirection can never meet with our approval .
I am really touched by Mrs Schmidbauer 's crocodile tears , but if you want social protection and so on , support my amendment !
Then things will proceed automatically , then we shall no longer have any need to discuss small post offices in Germany and the like .
You have it in your power to do something tomorrow for your comrades !
I had wanted to cover a few more things , but time has run away from me .
Mr Commissioner , The matter of terminal dress has still not been settled .
Even though , thanks to the dissension of the opposing side , we shall not win tomorrow , I must ask you to see that we make progress here .
We cannot create an internal market with a World Postal Union !
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I would like to congratulate Mr Simpson for his excellent draft recommendations on the harmonization of postal services .
In fact , these will play a decisive role in the organization of this sector in Europe since they pick up once again the position taken by the European Parliament at the time of the first reading and that of the Franco-German agreement , an initiative of Jacques Chiral , which is the implementation of a universal service along with the clear definition of a reserved service for businesses which will be allocated by each Member State in respect of the principle of subsidiarity .
Today , the postal sector is experiencing the urgent need to have a regulatory framework which guarantees its legal security and economic viability .
Similarly , citizens and businesses expect from the European Union the guarantee of a quality public service at an affordable price .
My group repeats our attachment to public services , an irreplaceable element in social cohesion and of balanced regional and rural planning .
I repeat that public service cannot be guaranteed if the balance in its economy is compromised by an uncontrolled and unbridled liberalization and , in particular , by an overly restrictive definition of the reserved services sector .
For all these reasons , my group wishes to see rapid adoption of the directive , if possible during the Telecommunications Council on 1 December .
We must avoid recourse to the conciliation procedure which could cause questions about an agreement that was extremely difficult to obtain from the Council .
This is why the Group Union for Europe will vote in favour of Mr Simpson 's draft recommendation .
Mr President , here we are with the remains of what once should have been a liberalizing policy .
It is typical that all the previous speakers drew attention to the workers in the postal services and that nobody said a word on behalf of the consumer who is entitled to a good service .
Not even Mrs Schmidbauer , she talked about the postal workers , too .
It is really very depressing that the Commission can sit here blushing with shame .
Because what has happened is that we have been hanged for vested interests .
But there is one thing that we cannot forget .
The postal service that thinks that it can be monopolistic has not been so for a long time .
Both fax and E-mail will also force the postal services to be really competitive .
At first reading , my group , not just me , Mr Simpson , voted against .
We shall not do that at this second reading .
But we do want to try one thing : save what can still be saved for the European consumer who is entitled to a decent service , who is entitled to the letters that he has posted at the post office being delivered within a certain time .
Very recently Agence Europe reported that only 80 % of letters were delivered on time .
I really do not understand how anyone can imagine that means are not standards in Europe .
The Commission should be held accountable in the future , it should monitor these standards and immediately point out to the services that do not comply with them , using the means at its disposal , under the treaty , that the consumer is the first affected party and that we are engaged in making European policy for the consumer .
Mr President , the post office question is urgent !
The input of Parliament with regard to the report or guidelines on the internal market for the postal services is thus important to correct the matter .
Our contribution is important in order for there to be no adverse competition during the liberalization of markets , and above all so that there is no social disadvantage , but that social security is maintained and the social functions of the postal services can be retained .
European regulation is in my view absolutely essential for the period in which the European postal businesses are negotiating over the problem of terminal dues .
We know that there are huge , competing , economic interests .
Misuse , which was previously possible , was barred by Amendment No 19 to Article 13 , paragraph 2 .
In a common market we need common regulations .
We must not use national arguments , but in the World Postal Union we must argue as a European Union .
In my view the legal basis for all future legal statutes aimed at liberalisation of the postal market should be article 100 .
There was found little support from the Commission for this at first reading .
We are pleased that the Council has taken up our protest and shares our opinion , and we hope that things will go better at second reading .
We must preserve social security for work in the postal industry , and for this reason the primacy of politics is also important .
I think conditions should not be as they are amongst private providers .
We have just seen in the USA how jobs can be cut by UPS a universal postal service .
That must not be allowed to happen in the European Union .
I myself worked for many years as a postman .
I know that the social function of the post is important for old people and for underdeveloped regions .
There must therefore be no regional discrimination , either against the sender or the receiver .
Because there is a social obligation , so must there be state control .
Then there can be either public or private providers .
I hope that we shall come to a solution in the interests of the consumer and of the postal workers , and that we can then regulate the problem of final payment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a directive formulated by the Commission is an important step towards the setting up of a single market for postal services in the European Union .
The most enthusiastic defenders of public services will certainly not find in this text the guarantees that generally ensue from a benefit of this nature , even if the Commission accepts , at second reading , what I obviously hope it will , the amendments proposed by the rapporteur and retained supported by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
But if we are talking about quality of service and citizen equality as regards pricing , in whatever geographic area where the service is provided , including peripheral or island regions , if we are talking about the employment of hundreds of thousands of workers in this sector , then in these essential areas the future is not guaranteed , not for more than a few years , at all events .
Therefore , the implementation of the directive will have to its merit the fixing of a regulatory framework , and its adoption will also throw into the nettles the , to say the least , strange text drawn up by the Commission which was described as a ' notice of application ' , a text which was totally inconsistent with that of the directive , to which it claimed to refer .
The European Parliament , in all of this , was able to remain clear and firm in its position , even if all the amendments passed at first reading were not taken up . It is certainly this clarity and firmness that will have enabled the Council to look for , and find , a compromise , and lead the Commission to be more attentive to the direction in which Parliament wished this directive to go .
In this regard , the rapporteur , Brian Simpson , both for his tenacity and the quality of his work , deserves both our congratulations and our thanks .
Mr President , postal services fulfil a crucial function in society .
The considerable differences in the quality of the services provided between the Member States represent a serious problem .
Where quality fails , it is not because of geographical differences , but because of a lack of efficiency .
The strengthening of the operation of the market should undoubtedly improve this quality .
However , in its common position , the Council postpones real liberalization of the postal market for at least five years . And that is despite the fact that good results have already been achieved with liberalization of the postal services , particularly in Sweden .
Just like this Parliament at first reading , the Council chose by a majority the short term interests of the inefficient postal services , particularly in the large Member States of the Union .
The interests of its citizens and companies have been subordinated here .
The liberalization of direct mail and incoming cross-border post has not only been postponed but , what is more , the Council and Parliament will have to decide on them again in the year 2000 .
All this time the subject has remained on the political agenda and , what is much more serious , the postal sector in the European Union has clearly been denied clarity on the subject .
The Council should have put forward a clear timetable for liberalization .
Unfortunately , the Council also extended the possibilities escaping the obligations involved in the universal provision of services .
Because of the fact that the national bodies may themselves determine whether such an exception is applicable , the principle of the universal provision of services is seriously affected .
Furthermore , the common position has no standard for the delivery of domestic post , so that a detrimental backlog still remains in various Member States .
My criticism of the common position means that I am far from happy with the report by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , which largely endorses the Council 's position .
In view of the opinion of the majority of this Committee , I have little hope of any improvement in the report .
At a time when technological development is constantly making the alternatives to physical post more attractive , postal services remain inefficient monopolies .
It looks as if they will lose even more of the market share than with limited liberalization .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Simpson report on common rules for the development of the internal market of Community postal services and the improvement of quality of service , which we shall be considering at second reading , is extremely important . One has only to think of the number of committees which have been asked for opinions , including the Committee on Budgets , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizen 's Rights , to mention only a few .
This problem has been building up since 1992 .
So we in the Alleanza Nazionale will vote for those amendments which are aimed at better and more equal border tariff arrangements in the European Union .
I would mention Amendment No 7 , which requires Member States to respect the same quality standards for internal mail as for cross-border mail , and Amendment No 5 , which seeks to reconcile the wish to introduce a uniform tariff , supported by Parliament , with giving postal operators the right to conclude individual agreements on prices with customers .
The rapporteur is right to recommend - and I am glad he does - the adoption of the common position by Parliament on the basis of few improvements to the final text which could be accepted by the Council and by the Commission and which are intended to enhance and clarify the general aim of the directive .
Mr President , as I have said often before in this Parliament , I am a former postal worker and remain strongly linked to the postal workers ' unions as well of course as primarily representing here more than half a million postal consumers in my constituency .
I want to congratulate Brian Simpson , the rapporteur , on the way he has steered the European postal services debate and directive over the past few years .
The rights of Member States to reserve collection , sorting , transport and delivery of mail for the post offices that provide the universal service , and the principle of the price of sending letters remaining affordable for all , will go a long way to defending the interests of the postal consumers and the postal workers .
I am pleased that the Council eventually saw sense when it adopted its common position on the directive and I pay tribute to the role of President Chiral in the lead he provided to the Council to get it to reflect the French crossparty positive approach to postal services as an essential public service .
If the Commission goes ahead with its notice concerning competition in the postal sector , it must be drastically amended from the published draft so as to be fully in line with the directive .
The directive is the result of agreement between the democratically elected European Parliament and the overwhelming majority of democratically elected Member State governments in the European Council of Ministers .
With the greatest respect to Commissioner Bangemann and Commissioner Van Miert , I would remind the Commissioners that they are appointed not elected and they should remember that , rather than even thinking of trying to overturn democratically decided policies .
It is in the interests of the people of Europe that we have an efficient and affordable postal service that reflects the fact that postal communications are an essential public service .
Mr President , in area after area today demands are being made for deregulation and liberalization .
We make these demands because the old monopolies are failing to live up to the demand for a wellfunctioning service which we are all entitled to make .
We also make them in order to be able to keep up with technical developments in various areas , and in order to be able to lower prices .
That is how it is in a number of different areas . However , so far the activities of the post office are a major and regrettable exception .
If the decision which the European Parliament took at first reading a little over a year ago had been the final position , then the countries which had carried out the necessary deregulation and so created alternatives to and competition for the old postal monopolies would presumably have been forced to re-regulate at least parts of the post office 's activities .
It would have been quite unreasonable if we had made such a decision .
A year ago the emphasis was very much on regulation and very little on liberalization and open competition .
Fortunately , the Commission is more far-sighted than this Parliament .
I want to thank Commissioner Bangemann for that .
Of the 57 proposed amendments which Parliament supported , very little remains today , which I consider positive .
For the countries in the EU which have made demands for free competition in the postal sector , there is now the opportunity to continue this development in a liberalizing direction , which is also positive .
As far as Sweden is concerned , this is a development which is also being made step by step in substantial political unity .
This means that there is now a lot of choice , and many new companies have created many new job opportunities .
I say this to Mrs Moreau in particular : the reduction in the number of people employed in the former postal monopolies , both in Sweden and in other countries , is due more to technical development than to the existence of competition .
On the contrary , competition has created many new job opportunities .
Mr President , postal services are social services and , as such , both their profitability and the level of quality of the services provided are matters that should be addressed .
But in this matter , as in the other public utility sectors , the deregulation and liberalisation of the sector and the fundamental abandonment of the meaning of a universal service is being carried out to the detriment of the quality of the services and to the disadvantage of consumers .
The surrender to private ownership of the most lucrative sectors and analogous services means in fact reducing public services to a minimum , resulting in the downgrading of the services provided for the great majority of consumers , private individuals and small businesses .
At the same time it directly affects the position of the workers , which can be translated into a significant loss of jobs in postal offices which at present employ 1 , 500 , 000 workers .
It is a fact , Mr President , that the common position of the Council has sustained certain positions and proposals of the European Parliament , which allow , to some degree , for the strengthening of the capacity of those public providers of postal services to offer additional services to the citizens of Europe , for however long the relevant regulations remain in force .
However , the restricted period of enforcement of these regulations and the refusal of the Council to accept proposals concerning the protection of public post offices against uniform rates in a liberalized market of postal services causes intense anxiety not only about the fate of the public service , but also about the level of service provision in disadvantaged mountainous , island and farming regions , since here , of course , the interest of private businesses is non-existent , due to the lack of profit , while public organisations will soon not be in a position to provide these services .
Mr President , we are also concerned not only about the workers in this sector , but also about the users of the services , especially in the disadvantaged regions , who , with the complete liberalisation of the market , will be abandoned to their fate .
For this reason I think that the relevant modifications that we have submitted must be approved by the European Parliament .
Mr President , the right to receive and send mail is an essential civil right in any civilized state .
Accordingly , it is society 's duty to ensure civil rights are observed .
Furthermore , in large , sparsely-populated countries the post services must access all regions and all citizens on as equal a basis as possible .
This principle inevitably comes into conflict , at least to a certain extent , with the principle of free markets .
We must ensure that the rationalization and growth of the postal markets do not supplant the postal service as a public civil and regionally equal service .
It is difficult to ignore the impression that in the debate on , for example , public services , virtually free access to the postal markets on the part of different companies was emphasized , to some extent , as an important principle .
Timely and sufficient attention should be given to such a development .
It is quite clear that the general move to enter the mail markets is not meant as a guarantee to the public and companies of a better , more competent mail service , but as a chance to engage in lucrative business .
It follows that the main interest will be large cities , where they can operate more profitably .
Postal services for the inhabitants of remote and sparsely-populated regions will remain the task of public services , which will not make huge profits as a result .
It will prove a costly business and a drain on revenue resources .
This kind of development will lead to a decline in postal services , severely affected , as they will be , with budgetary problems related to public finance , as well as to haggling over the important issue of equality .
We have to call a halt to this trend in good time , in order that society may see that the rights of people living in remote regions are not being violated in this way .
The transportation of post as a business purely and simply also carries with it questions of responsibility , which have not been adequately discussed .
Mr President , may I begin by congratulating our colleague Mr Van Dam on his maiden speech : it was intelligent and clear , the kind of speech we used to hear from his predecessor .
I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur , Brian Simpson , on the common position of the Council .
I know of few cases where the Council has so greatly departed from a Commission proposal in order extensively to meet the views of the rapporteur and the majority of the Parliament .
In this situation , I feel it is important for the directive to be accepted as quickly as possible .
I would ask my colleagues again to reflect carefully before we accept amendments that will lead to the conciliation procedure and therefore to further delay .
The postal services and companies may also request that the politicians finally provide some clarity , so that they can develop a policy for the future , in which of course the interests of the consumers must be central .
I should like to hear from the Commissioner whether I am right that if Amendments Nos 7 to 12 in particular are accepted , they will very probably mean further delay .
The present directive is an extremely small step on the way to an internal market for the post in which there is room for a modest market operation in the interests of the consumer .
To hollow out this directive even further as some of the amendments aim for , is not good for the consumer and is also not good for jobs in the medium term .
Technological developments occur quickly .
I should very much like a pledge from the Commissioner that at the end of next year he will come up with a realistic programme for the real liberalization of the market in the interests of the consumer and jobs .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 8.00 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes from yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I wanted to draw your attention to the fact that on page 5 , under the item ' Tribute ' , it is stated that Sir James Goldsmith died on 19 June 1997 .
In fact , the date was 19 July .
I would like to take this opportunity to observe that the first page of yesterday 's ' Info-session ' mentions the tributes paid to Mother Teresa and Diana , Princess of Wales .
I do not think it would have involved excessive expenditure on ink to have added the name of Sir James Goldsmith .
On your first point we will correct the Minutes .
On the second point the English Minutes say quite clearly that the President also paid tribute to Sir James Goldsmith .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Equal opportunities for men and women
The next item is the joint debate on the following two reports :
( A4-0257 / 97 ) by Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , on the Commission 's annual report on equal opportunities for men and women in the European Union ( 1996 ) ( COM ( 96 ) 0650 - C4-0084 / 97 ) - ( A4-0251 / 97 ) by Mrs Kokkola , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , on the Commission communication ' Incorporating equal opportunities for women and men into all Community policies and activities ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0067 - C4-0148 / 96 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , on behalf of my colleagues on the Committee on Women 's Rights , I wish to express our great satisfaction .
The fact that four of our reports , and there were very nearly five , can be dealt with together in a debate on a Tuesday morning is quite an achievement .
To my knowledge , Mr President , this preferential treatment has rarely or never before been applied .
It is proof that the equal opportunities policy is being taken seriously and this is indeed as it should be .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this annual report is the first of its kind and in that sense we are dealing with something new .
We wholeheartedly applaud the Commission 's initiative , first , because it is a valuable instrument with which to establish the progress made from year to year and secondly , because the debate on the future of the equal opportunities policy must be initiated .
Mr President , as this is a first report it is also important to make a few comments on the form , with a view to putting the Commission on the right track in the future .
The structure is far from sound , it is too much of an overview and there is too little evaluation .
The second criticism is that important areas are missing , such as violence against women .
Now to the content : I shall go through the six sections which approximately coincide with the objectives of the fourth action programme .
The first , and in my view , most important section concerns mainstreaming or the integration of the equal opportunities policy into other policy areas .
The Committee on Women 's Rights is completely behind these new approaches .
To promote mainstreaming , we would particularly request that more attention be paid to statistics broken down by gender .
Next , a gender impact assessment on proposed legislation by analogy with already existing business or environmental impact assessments and thirdly , mainstreaming in the operation of the European Parliament itself by setting up a mainstreaming monitoring board consisting of two members from each Parliamentary Committee as proposed by Mrs Hadar Cars .
Mr President , the same points are repeated in the Kokkola report , which we fully support .
The second section deals with the UN Beijing Conference on Women .
Here I want to refer to the Union 's responsibility for implementation .
Unfortunately we find that the Union has done virtually nothing about several of the priority objectives of the Beijing Platform For Action .
Women and the environment , violence against women , and women and health .
As far as the latter is concerned , the recent communication on women and health did nevertheless herald some progress .
Thirdly , the problem of under-representation of women in decision-making .
Ladies and gentlemen , the photograph of the Heads of State and of Government who put the final touches to the new Treaty of Amsterdam speaks for itself .
Apart from Queen Beatrix , there was not a single woman .
The Commission rightly points to the underrepresentation of women in political decision-making as one of the causes of the democratic deficit .
Positive action is necessary here and the following measures must be emphasized .
Number one , the introduction of a temporary quota or targets .
These can be effective and sometimes necessary means of achieving equal participation in decision-making and we also wish to highlight the repercussions of electoral systems on the representation of women in the political bodies .
An investigation by the study service of this Parliament has shown that majoritarian voting systems like those used in the United Kingdom or France have a clearly adverse effect on the equal participation of men and women .
The fourth section is on women and the economy .
Broad dissemination of the European code of conduct on equal pay is needed .
We trust the Commission will evaluate the success of this code of conduct in its next annual report .
In order to improve the position of women in the labour market further , we would request that further research be undertaken into the individualization of social security entitlements and an improved status for assisting spouses via the long-awaited revision of the existing directives .
The fifth section deals with combining work and household .
If we wish to offer men and women equal opportunities on the labour market , then both women and men must be better able to reconcile work and family life .
In this regard , we would argue for flexible opening hours for shops and public services and promotion of child care initiatives .
The last section deals with women 's rights .
A Eurobarometer poll shows that most women are not aware of their rights .
Information campaigns must rectify this .
And here I am thinking , for example , of the Citizens ' First campaign .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Women 's rights supported my report unanimously .
We hope , Mr Commissioner , that all Parliament 's proposals and comments will be taken into account when the next and subsequent annual reports are drawn up .
I would like to thank the secretariat of the Committee on Women 's Rights , and all those who have contributed , for their sterling work in producing this report .
Finally , I also wish to congratulate the three other rapporteurs who are presenting their reports in this morning 's debate .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after lengthy discussion and analysis of the policy of incorporating equal opportunities for men and women into all Community policies and objectives , and of mainstreaming , and given the new shape of the Treaty of Amsterdam , we have now reached the home straight .
Today the whole house of the European Parliament is debating this report and will , I hope , adopt it .
But the efforts we have made throughout this period to shape a resolution for the policy of mainstreaming which will fulfil the practical needs of women today must not stop or be interrupted .
A report of the European Parliament is not enough to change attitudes and traditions overnight or for mainstreaming policy to have practical application in people 's lives .
What is needed is for all of us to unite our forces in this endeavour to change today 's society and create a society where sex does not decide who is first to become unemployed , a society whose members are not be excluded from decision-making positions because of their sex , or do not have equal access to information or education and training programmes because of their sex .
I believe that we owe it to the generations to come to pursue this endeavour .
Before continuing my brief presentation I would like to outline my position on the name of this policy . The term " mainstreaming ' , taken from the terminology of ecologists , is unfortunate .
The European Union has the tendency to clothe its policies with names which are not readily understood or cannot be rendered exactly in all the languages of the European Union , and the result is confusion amongst those involved and , in this particular case , confusion about the extremely important notion of equal opportunities and objectives .
I think the best term for this particular concept is ' action to incorporate equality ' and I will use that expression from now on .
Achieving action to incorporate equality could be regarded as the ideal for the equality of the sexes .
As rapporteur , however , I have the duty to alert everyone to the fact that action to incorporate equality involves the danger of ranking all at the same level , whereas equality promotes diversity and encompasses the notion of solidarity in diversity .
So , clearly , positive action must continue to be carried out in concert with the implementation of this policy .
The structural funds are an area where action to incorporate equality may find fertile ground for development , which means that equal opportunities and equal rights must be included in the objectives of the funds in question .
This would make it easier to draw up a list of qualitative and quantitative indicators to evaluate the incorporation of this policy into the sphere of activity of these funds , and to present the statistics and data for the two sexes separately .
Action to incorporate equality will have been accomplished when equal opportunities and equal rights are included in all the regulations and policies of the European Union .
At this point I must emphasize the active role of nongovernmental organizations and bodies in drawing up the programmes .
Mr Commissioner , as you well know , however positive the will , however resounding the declarations , regardless of whether you , as Commissioner , and we , as a Parliament , agree , if the appropriate funding measures and the necessary administrative structures to bring about coordination and enable evaluation of whether an action promotes equal opportunities are not guaranteed , I am afraid action to incorporate equality will remain an idea in the files of those responsible .
For this reason I ask you to put all possible pressure on everyone involved to create the necessary structures and make the necessary resources available .
I would like to end by saying that I believe that it is not just women who need equality , Europe needs equality , the whole global community needs equality .
The policy of action to incorporate equality must be the subject of an information campaign , our own campaign , which we all promote in our national parliaments , in our governments and in our social organizations , and this must be a process with the constant aim of full equality .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to begin by expressing my satisfaction with the set of reports on women before this House , and especially that this is happening on the Tuesday rather than the Friday as is normally the case .
It would be a good thing if this continued , since there is rarely much discussion of topics relating to equal opportunities , and this might be a way to achieve it .
There is still a long way to go to attain the goal of incorporating equality into all the Union 's policies .
That is why this debate is so important .
In its first annual report on equal opportunities , the Commission has presented a very full and well-researched document which really gives us a broad picture of the situation throughout the Member States .
And yet , Mr Commissioner , after studying the document I can only say that my feeling is one of helplessness .
Helplessness at the lack of effective measures to promote equality , helplessness at the lack of stability in women 's employment , helplessness because we women are under-represented in decision-making positions , and , above all , helplessness at the lack of strategies in the Commission 's communication .
We have a good study , some good statistics , and an evaluation of the general situation .
But my question is : ' now what ? '
In her excellent report , Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens sets out some interesting proposals which I wholeheartedly support , and , Mr Commissioner , I urge the Commission to bear them in mind in its future reports , so as to progress more rapidly along the long road towards equality .
Turning to Mrs Kokkola 's report also , I would say that , of the four reports on equality presented this Tuesday , hers is without a doubt the one which , if implemented , would contribute most towards improving the situation of women in European society .
What Mrs Kokkola 's report is calling for is genuine incorporation of the principle of equality into all the Union 's policies and strategies .
I congratulate Mrs Kokkola on her work and her critical analysis of the Commission 's communication , and I support her in her request for greater clarity .
The confusion begins with the very term ' mainstreaming ' and ends at that fuzzy boundary between Community powers and the principle of subsidiarity .
If the Commission delegates the responsibility to the Member States and they have other priorities , then there will be no real change in equality policies .
So it is vital that the aid given to the various countries should contain clauses about the principle of equality , which should be binding .
The incorporation of equality should be something for everybody to aim at , in all areas of internal policy , but also in development cooperation agreements and - why not ? - in negotiations about enlargement .
In order to implement these policies successfully , investment is necessary . Certainly , the structural funds may be the best instrument to achieve success in mainstreaming and in the horizontal policies on equality in all the policies of the European Union .
Mr Commissioner , we look forward - I certainly look forward - to the Commission 's proposals on this , in order to progress more rapidly towards achieving equality for all women within the European Union , and we hope to be able to export this model as well .
Mr President , I would first like to congratulate both the rapporteurs .
Mrs Kokkola 's report gives a thorough and lucid description of EU policy on equality and the current , highly essential concept of mainstreaming .
I have had the honour of drafting the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy on this issue , and analysing the extent to which equality is taken into account in the structural funds .
Despite the fact that the principle of mainstreaming was contained in the structural funds regulation four years ago , its implementation still poses major problems .
Technical and rational issues have been emphasized in the aims and methodology of regional and structural funding .
These are areas where men are well entrenched through traditional career choices .
So in general , structural policy , which is ostensibly sexually neutral , only offers real opportunities to the opposite sex - to men .
To achieve equal opportunities , areas of particular interest to women must be included in the process .
Women have more interest than me in the everyday infrastructure , so to speak , that is , local and social issues .
Also , women still have greater responsibility for the family than men .
Women 's opportunities to work or receive education or training therefore undeniably depend on social services such as child care and care for the elderly , school meals , and public transport .
Financial support for these should also fall within the scope of the structural funds .
These needs cannot be fully met unless they are applied at every level of planning , decision-making , implementation and monitoring of structural policy .
Mr Commissioner , this action should be undertaken right down the line from the Commission to regional cooperation panels .
A common complaint is that it is hard , not to say impossible , to find qualified women for expert bodies .
We have made some progress in Finland in this respect : agencies always have to put forward one male and one female candidate for any vacancy , and one of them is elected .
This ensures that the principle of better representation by women on various bodies is safeguarded .
I would recommend the adoption of this practice throughout the European Union .
Mr President , this policy of action to incorporate equality is very important , and Mrs Kokkola has done an excellent piece of parliamentary work .
The Committee on Institutional Affairs has worked on its opinion in the light of the new draft Treaty of Amsterdam , and has made an important contribution by suggesting a new term - and I thank Mrs Kokkola very much for accepting it - as well as proposing the creation of an interinstitutional working group .
As regards the new draft Treaty of Amsterdam it should be noted that , in contrast to other areas where the new treaty hardly makes any advances , but rather marks time or even loses ground , in the field of women 's rights it must be acknowledged that it represents significant progress on both recognition of discrimination against women and defence of women 's equality .
In the employment and social policies of this new treaty , we will be able to find an effective method .
It must also be said that this is not guaranteed , because the new treaty is highly ambivalent and whether it is effective or not depends on which method is used .
However , it must be recognized that finally , at the dawn of the Twenty-first Century , the new Treaty on European Union is attending to the enormous problem of discrimination against women , which affects over half of all Europeans .
For the first time we have been noticed , and that is no small thing , for we are well aware that in politics recognizing a problem may be the first step towards solving it .
Mr President , at last a significant morning to deal with a significant issue !
And one which concerns all European Union citizens , not just the women .
So I hail the European Parliament directive which recognizes that .
And I congratulate all the rapporteurs and draftsmen of opinions taking part in this debate .
It was high time the Commission drafted and presented to the European Parliament a report on equality of opportunity between men and women in the European Union .
Fortunately it did so in 1996 .
It is not enough to define policies full of good intentions : if their implementation and the results obtained are not studied , they may not be sufficiently effective unless the politicians responsible are aware of what is happening .
So it is essential not only for the statistics to break down the results by sex , but for the indicators used to make it possible to monitor and check the results of the policies followed .
For example , this year , for the first time , the Portuguese government presented a programme for incorporating equality between men and women into all policy areas .
To support its implementation , equality councils have been set up for each ministry , reporting directly to the High Commission for Equality and the Family , which is responsible for monitoring and controlling the implementation of this plan .
In addition , in June 1998 , in the context of the fourth action programme for equality , the Portuguese Parliament will be organizing the second interparliamentary conference of the committees responsible for women 's rights in the parliaments of the fifteen countries of the European Union and in the European Parliament .
The objective is precisely to analyse the way the policies drawn up , both by the European Parliament and by each country , to promote equality between men and women are being applied and what results have been obtained .
We hope that this interparliamentary conference in Lisbon will help the Commission to draft a more concrete report for 1997 , effectively taking advantage of the equality policies .
Commissioner Flynn , I hope that , with the help of the European Parliament and the parliaments of the European Union , the Commission will be in a position to incorporate into its next report on equality policy the numerous suggestions we are proposing to you here today .
As regards mainstreaming policy , or incorporation of equality between men and women into all policy sectors , I consider it a decisive step for achieving normality in society , that is , women and men having not only the same rights and obligations , but also the capacity to become really able to exercise them .
So , this report , magnificently drafted by Mrs Angela Kokkola , is one of the most important that has ever been debated by the European Parliament on equality policy .
With the ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam , mainstreaming will come to be one of the objectives of the Union and consequently there will be an enormous strengthening of opportunities for applying it .
So we will be looking forward to that very much , Mr Commissioner , and it would be appreciated if you would pass that on to the Commission .
We are not naive : as long as equality is not achieved , implementing horizontal policies which incorporate this objective across the sectors are not enough . It is absolutely necessary to continue expanding specific actions and programmes to support women .
If we want equality , specific measures will still be needed for a considerable time to close the gap that exists today .
If we want women to be financially independent , managers of companies , creators of employment , promoters of more human and environmentally sustainable development , mainstreaming is not enough , although this policy is very important .
Positive action for women must be maintained and broadened .
And it is essential to apply the new technologies that exist in society today more effectively .
I am firmly convinced that only with us making decisions jointly with the men can that equality truly be obtained .
Mr President , in this debate , I particularly wish to focus on Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens 's excellent report , and my colleague , Mrs Peijs , will speak on Mrs Kokkola 's report .
It is a very good thing that the Commission has issued the annual report and also excellent that the Commission has decided to produce such a report every year .
I would like to compliment Commissioner Flynn on that initiative .
It is fifteen years since this Parliament undertook a detailed study on the position of women in Europe and a lot has happened since then .
At that time , if I may just reminisce , Mrs Veil was the President of our Parliament , Yvette Roudi was the chairman of the committee of inquiry and I myself , as a young Member of Parliament , was the general rapporteur for that committee of inquiry .
That action in 1981 has achieved a great deal .
Since then , the European Commission has placed the subject of women high on the agenda and we now have our own Committee on Women 's Rights , which was set up afterwards .
Much has changed for the better since that time .
On the basis of the European directives , the Member States have taken many legal measures in order to enforce the equal treatment of women .
The position of women in education , the labour market , in politics and in administrative bodies has improved .
Arrangements that make it possible for women and men to combine work and caring for children have been greatly extended .
Nevertheless , there are still many aspects which have not yet been settled properly or where the situation is unsatisfactory .
In fact , it is inconceivable that 25 years after the third wave of emancipation and 15 years after the European Parliament 's committee of inquiry , our children , our daughters - I apologize for speaking about our generation - still experience the same problems purely and simply because they are female .
I shall give a number of examples : in education , boys and girls currently reach the same level and that is great progress .
But still far too few girls go in for technical education , as a result of which women fall far behind in the area of new technologies .
The labour market is now made up of about 40 % women and that is great progress .
Fifteen years ago the figure was only 20 % in the Netherlands .
On average women still earn lower salaries and women are much too concentrated in a small segment of the labour market and are therefore very vulnerable to unemployment .
Further action is necessary to remedy these problems .
Combining child care and work has become less complicated for women as the facilities available have expanded .
But the situation is still unsatisfactory .
A recent survey in the Netherlands showed that half of young mothers who initially tried to keep working nevertheless gave up after a few months , with all the consequences that involves for their position in the job market .
And then there is the matter of how many women make it through to top positions in policy-making .
I myself was a minister for five years in a cabinet with only three women ministers .
There are four female ministers in the current Dutch government .
So the advances are very small and that does not apply only to the Dutch government , it actually applies to all governments .
The same applies to the top positions in the civil service , in business , in the trade unions and in social organizations .
The European institutions also project the wrong image here .
The number of female Commissioners is not encouraging , and nor is the number of female directors-general and directors .
And that is worrying because the European Commission really ought to set a good example , otherwise criticism of the Member States is not really credible .
I should like to ask Commissioner Flynn whether he will consider the position of women in the institutions in his future annual reports .
The situation for women as the year 2000 approaches is therefore a bit better than 25 years ago , but the problems have still not been resolved and a number of additional problems have even arisen .
I believe it is a good thing that the Commission will be issuing annual reports in the future .
Attention to and action on the role of women in our society will still be necessary for years to come and women must therefore show solidarity in this regard with the men who help them .
Because , in my view , equality between men and women in this world makes for a better world .
Mr President , like other speakers , I would like to emphasize how important it is that this debate is taking place this morning , with time at our disposal , and that we have the opportunity to discuss and to develop very important issues , which warrant special attention .
I would particularly like to mention Mrs Kokkola 's report , which urges the Commission and the Member States to act on two fronts , simultaneously promoting a policy of equal opportunities for men and women and measures of positive discrimination on behalf of women in sectors where women are still in a minority . The rapporteur states that we should invest much more , especially in terms of financial resources , so that we can develop support structures aimed at allowing women to play a much more active role in the world of work and chiefly at facilitating professional reintegration of women who , for reasons which apply only to their own sex , have been forced to interrupt their careers .
Among many other extremely important proposals , the rapporteur wants all departments responsible for implementing the principle of mainstreaming to appoint an employee to monitor the implementation of mainstreaming criteria and to submit proposals for improvements .
As has already been recognized , the report is extremely detailed and well-researched , and it deserves our full attention and support .
Mrs Kokkola is right to ask for the appropriation of funds in order to achieve equality and to insist on the establishment of a working group to ensure that , in every Community activity , regard is had to equality between men and women .
As stated earlier in this Chamber , we can talk all we like , we can propound all the theories we like .
Words are fine and they can be written down or spoken aloud , but if the finance is not there to implement the policies , then words are just words , and we have all had occasion to witness that reality , especially where women 's issues are concerned .
So we have no alternative but to agree with her that , if mainstreaming is to be implemented , these necessary preconditions must be in place .
At the same time , however , long-standing prejudices and ideas about the participation of women in the creation and development of our society must be swept aside .
Now is not the time to expand on them : we all know very well what we understand by the meaning of prejudice .
Because , as was mentioned a short time ago , nobody can claim that there is real equality between men and women , especially as far as work opportunities are concerned , either in the countries of the European Union or , more generally , in the countries of the western world : all those countries we regard as particularly civilized but which in reality fall short on basic issues of civilization , such as equal opportunities for men and women .
Should anyone be in any doubt about the need for this debate , they might try thinking back to recent news pictures of political life in the broad sense .
There were the pictures from the negotiations on the Amsterdam Treaty - 15-30 men deciding and signing ; NATO enlargement : the same - men making the decisions again .
The senior democratically elected politicians are men .
If we look for prominent women in the recent period , we are struck by the departure of two people : Mother Teresa and Diana , Princess of Wales .
The role of women is Florence Nightingale or the beautiful princess , sadly so tragically killed .
In other words there is a long way to go to equality .
If we look at our own ranks , things are a little better , but they are not good , as was also mentioned by the two rapporteurs , whom , incidentally , I would like to thank warmly for their work .
A little has happened , but it is far from enough .
As a woman of my age , and as someone who has been directly or indirectly involved in feminism all my life , I have to ward against lapsing into weak helplessness , also mentioned by another speaker .
We have said it all before .
It is well-known that no good comes of helplessness , so I want to be optimistic and take pleasure in what we have achieved .
Looking back , a lot has of course happened , even if it is not enough .
The most important thing that has happened is that , in spite of everything , we no longer discuss - not in public at least - whether women and men are equal .
But if they are now equal , why is that not reflected more clearly in the figures ?
That is the current debate .
Is there still an invisible glass ceiling , in other words , is it true that women are still not accepted in certain positions , or are there reasons which have to do with the practicalities of life , such as families and children ?
It is still a mixture of both , unfortunately , so the problem needs to be tackled from both angles .
In any case , we women should realise that power is never given up voluntarily and that we shall never have true equality unless we women also give up some of our power .
Mr President , we are taking part once again in a debate on equal opportunities because it is always our intention to contribute to making equality a reality and also to add a male voice to the voices of the women Members who are calling for it and demanding it .
In the very short time we have available , we want to make two comments , also very short .
The first is to highlight the fact that this debate is being held today , this Tuesday , and not on a Friday morning , as has unfortunately been customary for this issue and the others that are also exiled to that morning . The second is that this is the result of some positive signals at the institutional level , with the inclusion , in Amsterdam , of new Article 6-A and with the addition to Article 2 .
As Mrs Kokkola has emphasized - and we would like to compliment her on her work , together with all the other rapporteurs - they must not represent just new advances in theory , with no practical effects , and there must no longer be just a few fine words like those about mainstreaming , but quantitative and qualitative ex-ante and ex-post evaluation .
We are also delighted with the proposal for proper definition and translation of mainstreaming , which reflects a necessary sense of universality , and we agree with the Portuguese words for ' action for equality ' .
And action is what is needed !
Mr President , the Amsterdam Treaty certainly provides new tools for improving equality , and must be regarded as a gain for women in general .
But what Mrs Dybkjær said is quite right .
The same view is apparent in the management of the European Union .
The family image of the European Union is still a bunch of men in grey suits , with Queen Beatrix in the middle and a couple of female foreign ministers , and that is all .
The right tools are needed to improve equality , as many speakers have mentioned .
One means of improving equality is to have all companies and public institutions produce an annual equality plan .
This could include the idea of imposing temporary quotas to ensure better representation of women or of the under-represented gender .
Furthermore , training plays an essential part in improving equality in companies and public institutions .
Close attention must be paid to these issues .
They must be studied and that is precisely why mainstreaming is a doubleedged sword . It requires a great deal of careful attention .
It will not implement itself .
In preparing for monetary union it is especially important to promote equality and the status of women , because , as Mrs ' Kokkola 's report states , adapting public finance to EMU conditions may hit women badly .
Jobs will be cut in the public sector , which is largely the domain of women .
Finally , I wish to remind everyone that the Council of Europe drafted a proposal in 1992 for Member States to organize daycare places , and progress must be made on that to enable women to go out to work .
Mr President , the inclusion of equality of opportunity between women and men as part of Community policy and action is laudable , and I would like to congratulate Mrs Kokkola , the author of this excellent report .
The content of the report and the efforts of the Commission are reassuring .
The principle of mainstreaming underpins all the actions and all the policies of the Union , at all levels .
It therefore involves all the parliamentary committees .
So the goal of equality between men and women has become an issue governing all our actions , and we can but rejoice .
Nevertheless , there are still grounds for concern .
How can equality of opportunity apply unless there are measures of positive discrimination in favour of women , if real equality is indeed the aim ?
Their absence suggests a degree of ambiguity , and that worries me .
Our rapporteur seems to be aware of this in asking for the introduction of measures along these lines in fields where women are still disadvantaged .
Such fields , alas , are all too numerous , and at all events significant both in the economic and political field .
Rare indeed are the women who occupy decision-making posts .
In the fifteen Member States , women do not even occupy one position of responsibility in five , and we can just about take heart at the fact that 25 % of decision-making posts are occupied by women in the Commission .
Of course this is remarkable progress , but we need to go much further still .
I therefore believe , ladies and gentlemen , that the principle of mainstreaming should be a priority as far as women are concerned .
The inequality which is the subject of this debate affects women more than any other form of inequality .
The current situation requires the introduction of compensatory inequality , the only principle likely to lead to real equality between men and women !
Mr President , as a Deputy of the People of France , I would like to make it clear that in this instance - namely commenting on Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens ' report - I am acting as spokesperson for my wife , my four daughters and my two colleagues on the Regional Council of Midi-Pyrénées .
I would like to add that I worked for fifteen years in a company in which half the employees and 70 % of management were women .
My wife , my daughters and my female friends have told me with finesse and humour , not to say irony , that they absolutely do not want the sort of equality extolled by Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens .
They told me that women outlive men by ten years on average and that is how they like it !
They told me that French women do not want to do all the men 's jobs and that they do not harbour any socialist yearnings to become pneumatic drill-wielding soviet-style labourers .
They told me they want nothing to do with this condescension and breach of the principle of egality amongst citizens which , according to Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens , would specifically assist women entrepreneurs and that they find the policy of compulsory quotas grotesque .
French women have absolutely no need to seek out their dignity , reputation and influence in sad boardrooms where 50 % of the seats are compulsorily set aside for them .
They expressed horror at the demand for , and I quote , ' the women 's dimension ' - that pathetic and vulgar expression of a debate which , according to them , was about equality of barbarity rather than anything else - to be taken into account in everywhere .
They burst out laughing when they read the denunciation of the drop in women 's participation in decision-making procedures except in the Nordic countries .
They told me to say that French women simply do not care about the model referred to , about the Danish post office or the Swedish authorities , and that they reject this clumsy imperialism bent on changing the political culture , since their own political culture , rooted in three thousand years of Graeco-Roman and Christian civilization is that of the great heroines of our people , from Antigone to Joan of Arc and Saint Genevieve to Mother Theresa , and of the myriad talents in all the domains of the spirit , the arts and literature .
They told me of their consternation at reading a text which mentions neither femininity nor maternity , but sees fit to refer to ' disadvantages ... in the cases of pregnancy , childbirth and breastfeeding ' with detestably masculine vulgarity .
As if the balance and beauty of human nature were not achieved in the splendour and harmony of the two complementary principles that are femininity and masculinity , as God intended .
As if the transmission of life until death after the joy of conception were not reserved unequally and magnificently for the woman .
As if - barring some tragedy - it were not she who is first and best able to cradle , protect , love , console and bring up her child .
As if the work of Blanche de Castille in bringing up the future Saint Louis were not the most splendid of vocations , that of motherhood .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we welcome the concept of mainstreaming in the Committee on Women 's Rights and in my parliamentary group because , I believe , we have a massive task ahead of us .
This debate is crucial , but we do not make the newspaper headlines .
We must establish the concept in people 's consciousness , and that means we must proceed on two fronts .
We must have positive measures for developing women 's opportunities , and this cannot happen without quotas .
We must also establish equality of opportunity in other political fields .
I want to talk about the budgetary procedure because it is very interesting .
In last year 's budget we established feminization for the first time and raised the subject of women and gender-specific issues in all the reports .
We were successful in introducing reports on the structural funds and major programmes like Phare , Tacis , Meda , and so on .
As a result of detailed contacts with the Commission directorates general we achieved a result which clearly shows how well mainstreaming can operate in individual cases , but also how badly it operates in other fields such as , for example , industrial policy , where mainstreaming is still very unsatisfactory .
Great efforts are being made in regional policy , whilst in information policy there are many opportunities .
A working document I presented to the Committee on Women 's ' Rights sets out the detail clearly .
We must create a climate of awareness . As the annual report of the Commission has stated , if we go on establishing equal opportunities at this rate , it will take about another 100 years before they are finally achieved .

There is an interesting model in Sweden .
There , all senior managers have to undergo gender training before they can occupy a senior position . Even ministers - all ministers - and bishops , for example , have to be trained .
I think this is the right path to follow .
So we shall fight to establish the concept of equal opportunities in people 's consciousness , and to get it incorporated into all policy areas and all regulations .
I particularly ask men to support women in this matter .
Mr President , I could quite easily live with Mrs Kokkola 's definition of mainstreaming .
It just misses one small point , in that the actual meaning of the term mainstreaming is to join the mainstream and not be marginalized .
I feel that concept is still absent from the definition but apart from that I could accept it .
The report we are debating today is important for men and women .
The implementation of the principle of equal treatment in all sectors of society is quite obviously necessary , but in practice it does not occur in the least .
Let me tell you a true story . It is not a joke , this actually happened last week .
There was a meeting in the Netherlands where the question of why women do not rise from middle to top management , and one senior manager of a large multinational in the Netherlands asked another : " Do you like seeing women in your top management ? '
And the other senior manager replied : " I like seeing them , but not hearing them . '
As long as senior managers are still saying things like that , there will be no question of equal treatment and equal presence of both sexes .
So the action the European Commission has taken is all the more necessary , and I have every respect for it .
But it will be more difficult in practice .
Fortunately , the Treaty of Amsterdam has given the initial impetus to achieving a mature policy .
It provides the basis for the necessary legislation to integrate equal opportunities for men and women in all areas of policy .
I would stress that the treaty also opens up the possibility of taking specific measures in the professional field that can be a particular stimulus for a group that is discriminated against or under-represented .
So positive action indeed .
I should just like to examine the amendments .
The amendment by Mrs Thyssen is naturally close to our hearts because it refers to a group which has really been left in the lurch by the Council , despite great expectations : assisting spouses .
Everyone is naturally sympathetic to Mrs Cederschiöld 's amendment because it is self-evident .
She points out that expertise is an obvious criterion for appointing either men or women .
Obvious , but , surprisingly , only regarded as particularly important for making appointments when equal representation of women in certain functions is at issue .
Expertise in men seems to be an accepted norm , but we know better .
I would recommend voting against this amendment because in essence it discriminates .
Expertise is an obvious requirement for appointing women , but the same goes for men too .
That has never had to be stated before , so why should it be stated when it comes to women .
With regard to the amendment to point 20 of the resolution , we would recommend just voting against the last part .
It is good that everything mentioned in Amendment No 20 - transport , education , etcetera - is being looked at , and the financing considered , but not all women need financial support .
I think the structural funds should be used where they are needed , not just as a matter of principle .
Point 14 calls for assessment .
I would make this more specific .
The term ' benchmarking ' is used in business .
It means establishing a yardstick by which to compare your own performance against that of others .
Commissioner Flynn , perhaps you could establish some benchmarking criteria for assessing the results of mainstreaming ?
Finally , thinking of the candidates for membership from eastern Europe , I maintain that emphasis must also be placed on equal treatment in terms of to the acquis communautaire .
Agenda 2000 says nothing about mainstreaming in central and eastern Europe .
One last point : the European Parliament needs to have a look at its own staffing policy .
We point the finger at everyone except ourselves .
I can find no women in the top parliamentary service positions .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the commission 's first annual report on equal opportunities for women and men is , in itself , a positive step forward .
I believe that use will be made of it in the planning and implementation of future developments in equality , although it is obviously regrettable that the report still does not contain the thorough evaluation and analysis required to speed up the process .
I hope that the excellent measures outlined in the report will also be implemented .
The participation of women in the decision-making process at all levels must be promoted .
I believe that interim quotas are an effective tool for achieving this goal , and when there is natural equality of representation in the decision-making process the system of quotas can be ended .
I believe that experience of quotas in the Finnish Equality Act will show the way .
I really must bemoan the fact that , despite Community legislation and national laws in many countries , the implementation of equal pay is still a long way off .
The pay gap must be closed once and for all and vanish from the various labour markets .
Similarly , effective methods for job evaluation must be adopted to enable us to reassess jobs in the underpaid , female-dominated sectors .
Furthermore , women are clearly under-represented in regional development .
The result of this is that femaledominated projects and companies will not be part of regional development programmes or enjoy structural funds support . So the proportion of women on decision-making bodies must also be increased immediately at the regional level .
Mr President , I too wish to applaud the fact that part of a Tuesday morning debate is being devoted to the issue of equal opportunities .
This means that what the Committee on Women 's Rights and Parliament has been saying is not only beginning to be taken into account , but is also becoming one of the central issues for the European Union , alongside others .
We are now talking about two important reports .
The first , by Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens , on the Commission 's annual report on equal opportunities for women and men , looks at the progress made over the last few years in implementing equal opportunities , increasing the visibility of Community policy on equal opportunities , encouraging discussion of future strategies and reaching a vast public , because the data that emerges from this report makes it clear that women 's awareness of their rights , and the importance and possibility of having those rights respected , is still very limited .
The annual report is divided into six chapters and substantially follows the approach of the fourth action programme .
That is positive ; it means there is continuity in the choices made and the policies followed during the last few years , and they are taking concrete form ..
Overall , and on this I am in agreement with the rapporteur , the report provides a vast quantity of information which demonstrates that , notwithstanding the progress made , the principle of equality of opportunity is far from actually acquired .
I would like to give some examples , starting with work .
Despite the increased feminization of the labour market , extremely strong occupational segregation of women persists , both horizontally and vertically .
Women have a higher recorded rate of unemployment , especially long term unemployment .
In addition , despite national and Union legislation , there is still a gap averaging around 20 per cent between women 's pay and men 's pay .
Another example is the need for balanced participation of men and women in decision-making processes .
Here too , while forward steps have been taken - the Beijing Conference , the Commission communication - there has been little progress for women in the European Union on average , though of course the level varies depending on the Member State , despite the significant development in the contribution of women and their role , again varying considerably between the different countries .
But there is no follow up of all the information we have on these various issues in terms of precise analysis and , in particular , careful assessment of impact on policy .
That is why I invite the Commission to take account of the rapporteur 's suggestions , so that the next annual report is slimmer , perhaps more broadly usable and also more responsive to the proposals the European Parliament has been making for years in its various reports , richer in examples of good practice and specific instruments .
The Commission should also make mainstreaming , the issue specifically dealt with in Mrs Kokkola 's report , the true guiding principle of all the policies of both the Union and the Member States .
Mrs Kokkola has carried out a very lucid examination of the principle of mainstreaming , highlighting not only the positive aspects , but also all the shortcomings that still exist , and she makes a number of suggestions which I think the Commission should take into account in a committed way .
Mainstreaming is not an alternative to positive action : given that we are far from genuine application of equal opportunities , both must be taken forward .
Mainstreaming should be applied in all policies , so responsibility lies both with the Commission and the Member States .
The Commission should be able to play a more compelling role in terms of Member States ' training programmes , as it has its own responsibility for the training of staff who apply equal opportunities .
Compulsory elements must be incorporated during the debate on the revision of the structural funds , so that Member States respect this principle or face financial penalties .
The guidelines which have emerged so far must become binding elements and concrete instruments of a genuine equal opportunities policy for the European Union .
Mr President , I am ashamed that I will not be able to quote Voltaire and Proust as Mrs Lulling has so eruditely done .
I want to join my colleagues in saying how wonderful it is to have a whole morning to celebrate the advances that women have made in the European Union as well as raise our very serious concerns about the attitudes and the lack of effective action on the part of the governments and the European Union when it comes to the disadvantages that women still face .
I warmly welcome my two colleagues ' reports .
Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens ' report rightly applauds the fact that for the first time we have an annual report in the European Union on equal opportunities for women and men .
This annual report can be an instrument to clarify and explain equality policy to the European Union 's public , especially women , who have long called for a recognizable structure through which they can make sense of its progress , timetable and decision-making .
The Commission 's annual report is a serious and significant contribution to the European Union 's equality debate at the end of the Twentieth Century .
Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens is also right , however , to draw attention to the shortcomings of the Commission 's report , such as the need for greater analysis and evaluation , the disregard for important European Parliamentary work on equality and the lack of attention to major topics of discussion close to our hearts such as violence against women and the possible impact of the Intergovernmental Conference on equal opportunities as well as the impact of enlargement .
On the issue of mainstreaming I congratulate my colleague , Mrs Kokkola , on her report .
Mainstreaming is a very serious attempt by the European Union 's institutions to bring about a cultural shift in attitudes across policy areas .
That cultural shift is going to take time .
It has been complained that only a small group of interested people , of experts , of those in the equality business if you like , understands what mainstreaming is .
If it is to work and if women are to really get a fair deal in European Union policies , the Commission and Parliament must endeavour to promulgate mainstreaming from now until the Twenty-first Century .
Mr President , the Commissioner has deservedly received a number of eulogies today , eulogies which must also be extended to the two rapporteurs , and I add my own .
This is an important discussion , both because of the issue and because of the comprehensiveness of the debate , and it is important not just for us .
It is immensely important because of the support it can give to the designated equality institutions : the Member States , the councils and the associations .
I would like to emphasize certain points in this discussion , first of all the validity of this annual report .
It is a valid instrument because of what it already represents today and , in my opinion , because of what it can mean , especially in terms of the visibility of the problem - given that only 20 % of women are aware of the existence of the equality policies either of the Community or of the Member States .
After all , if we really succeed in activating it , this report can become an observatory of progress in overcoming the difficulties faced by equal opportunities policies .
Now , because of the very importance of the instrument , the Commissioner will appreciate the emphasis placed upon it by the committee and the very pertinent signposts the rapporteur , Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens , wished to erect through her report , especially when she talks about the need for a strategic vision .
What does ' strategic vision ' mean ?
It means the report should take a position at the intersection between Community and national policies , and between the various equal opportunities issues debated within the Community .
So this certainly involves a new understanding of the objectives of the fourth programme - in the end , if they were not topical today , that would mean we had made a mistake about the objectives themselves - but it also means picking up on everything significant that happens in this area in the Community and the Member States , not forgetting aspects which are sometimes dramatic and unforeseeable .
For example , if we also had the Waddington report , we would have been able , in a sense , to appreciate the anomaly of the modern slave traffic not being mentioned in the report .
A second point , finally , especially on Mrs Kokkola 's report .
I believe the core of this strategy must be the good example the Community succeeds in setting , particularly in one respect : the relationship between equal opportunities and European Community social and structural funds , both at the time of the programming - it is true that , as far back as April 1997 , the Commission explicitly stated why equality must also be introduced in the Member States , but we know this is only a guideline which has yet to be implemented in practice - and especially when the structural funds are revised .
We believe a simplification of the objectives could allow systematic inclusion of equal opportunities and , at last , an impact assessment of the parity dimension in all policies .
Coincidentally , this afternoon we will be talking about the observatory for small and medium-sized enterprises , where this kind of assessment will take place , and that could be significant ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , modest advances have been made within the European Union in achieving equality of opportunity between men and women , as can be clearly seen from the Commission 's annual report for 1996 and Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens ' report .
There are still considerable shortcomings , both at community and national levels .
The preceding speaker has correctly pointed these out .
However , mainstreaming is an important idea for securing long-overdue equal rights , provided that it is included in all concepts and measures of the European Union , and not tucked away in corners and areas of secondary importance .
To achieve positive change over the longer term , special programmes are required to cover areas ranging from information and awareness programmes to qualitative analysis of programmes and actions .
The Amsterdam Draft Treaty has strengthened the legal basis for equal rights measures .
At one time it was only mentioned in Article 119 .
Now Article 2 has been extended to include equal rights .
So the Community has a duty to remove inequality and ban discrimination on grounds of gender .
Also , as we in the Committee on Women 's Rights were pleased to discover , the Social Protocol and the Employment Chapter contain important amendments .
Mainstreaming concerns everyone , both men and women , as the rapporteur , Angela Kokkola , put it in forthright terms .
A change of mental attitude by men , abandonment of old-fashioned traditions , and a readiness to accept change are all unavoidable .
That is obvious in professional life , where top jobs continue to be occupied on genderspecific lines , despite every evidence of high qualifications and expertise produced amongst women .
On the job market women continue to be a reserve available as required .
In good times they are sought after , only to be sacked when times are hard .
They have no security or long term prospects .
There is still a scarcity of retraining programmes , for instance , to improve professional qualifications , enter the technical field - heaven knows , still a typically male-dominated area ! - or return to work after pregnancy .
The report recommends criteria for assessing equal rights and quite rightly supports studies on the effects of mainstreaming in Member States .
The numerous ways in which women 's participation in the structural funds can be increased , from pilot projects to raising the proportion of women , are also on our common list of requirements .
Mr Commissioner , we are confidently relying on the motivation and authority of the European Commission .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking all those who have contributed for their very strong support for our new instrument - the annual report .
It has been very well received and I am very pleased with that .
I would like particularly to take the opportunity to thank the rapporteurs of the Committee on Women 's Rights , Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens and Mrs Kokkola , for their very great work in the preparation of the reports on the Commission 's 1996 annual report on equal opportunities for men and women in the European Union and on the Commission communication - incorporating equal opportunities for women and men into all Community policies and activities .
I am certainly very pleased to note that they warmly welcomed this first annual report of the Commission on equal opportunities for women and men .
Since its publication the report has been very well received by the press and also by the European Advisory Committee on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men , by the Economic and Social Committee and by many of the other equal opportunities organizations as well .
Many of the suggestions proposed in the report by Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens for the Committee on Women 's Rights are very constructive and very useful to us , and we will try to take them into account as much as possible in preparing the next report .
The first report aims to respond to three main goals : visibility , strategy and convergence .
The rapporteur considers that the aim of strategy is not yet fully developed .
This is something we are going to work on and which will be further developed in the future .
I welcome the suggestions on subjects to be included in the next annual reports , and we will take them forward as very useful proposals .
The forthcoming reports will certainly be more devoted to developments in the year in question .
As far as the chapter on implementation of the Beijing Platform by the Member States is concerned , this was written on the basis of information gathered from the Member States and it covers the period up to June 1996 .
Further information on the implementation at national level of the platform will be included in the 1997 report , which is already in preparation .
As requested , that year 's report will include more information on developments at national level .
So , as Mrs Van Lancker said , we have a very useful instrument here in the annual report ; it can be termed a kind of measuring instrument , and we look forward to improving it in accordance with your wishes as we progress .
Concerning the report on mainstreaming drawn up by Mrs Kokkola , I am pleased to note the similarity of views between Parliament and the Commission on this essential issue of the promotion of gender equality and the integration of a gender perspective into all Community policies .
It is a goal which can only be achieved if all European institutions recognize it and commit themselves to taking concrete measures .
Her report highlights a series of important issues , which the Commission has already included in its fourth action programme , such as the need to change structures and attitudes and to develop policies if progress is to be made towards equality between women and men .
The Commission has already taken concrete steps towards mainstreaming equality in all policies and , in particular , in labour market and vocational training policies , as highlighted in the report .
In this context , a strategy document has recently been adopted outlining measures for future action . These include the strengthening of inter-service cooperation , the development of procedures and guidelines for gender-impact assessment and the monitoring of results .
These measures also reflect some of Parliament 's main concerns .
Twenty-nine directorates general and horizontal services are involved in the implementation of this strategy within the Commission itself .
I note with satisfaction that the rapporteur stresses the link between mainstreaming and the participation of women in the decision-making process .
Commission personnel policy on equality between women and men is designed in such a way as to achieve real change in this particular direction .
I wish to welcome in particular the emphasis placed on the importance of adopting a dual approach incorporating both positive action and mainstreaming activities , the need to increase women 's participation in the formulation and implementation of the structural funds and to improve statistical data on the use of structural funds by women and men and , finally , the need to make mainstreaming policy an important element of our enlargement negotiations .
The Commission will take into account Parliament 's concerns and try to intensify its effort towards the objectives prioritized in its report .
A number of Members made reference to the interpretation and definition of the term ' mainstreaming ' and to the confusion that sometimes surrounds it .
This term was not an invention of the Commission but came from the women 's movement itself .
It is quite clear to all of us here , and indeed to the institutions of the Union as well , that what we mean by this term is really integration into other policies and funding mechanisms .
Mrs Crawley summarized it very well when she said that we need a culture shift here .
The wider definition can be summarized as follows : a more active and encompassing strategy to promote equal opportunity by mobilizing , not only positive action in its own right , but also mobilizing all general policies and measures to this end .
We will concentrate our efforts on delivering on real progress in integration of equality concerns into the practical implementation of all the relevant actions .
That is the key ; whatever definition and understanding we have , we should certainly have some action .
It was mentioned that perhaps it might be useful for our next report to have a glossary of terms commonly used in discussions on equality matters .
Such a glossary would perhaps remove a lot of the confusion about what precisely is meant by the particular terms we use .
I am recommending that perhaps we might do that on the next occasion .
Mrs Maij-Weggen was very supportive of the annual report and I thank her for that .
But she did make a very specific point about women in senior positions in the Community Institutions .
That is something we should certainly pay very close attention to .
The Commission , Mrs Maij-Weggen , has made some good progress here that I would like to tell you about .
Between 1 January 1994 and 1997 , the number of women at A1 and A2 level , the highest levels we have in the Commission services , more than tripled from 5 to 18 .
That is a very good improvement in that area .
It is not enough but it is quite a substantial improvement , and I would sincerely hope that we might be able to have the same kind of progress in the other institutions as well .
Mrs Van Lancker made a particular point about the job summit and what we can do there .
I am very concerned about this .
I want to assure you that equal opportunities will be included in the employment guidelines that I will be proposing to the Commission in the very near future , I think that should be seen as very good news .
The Commission is sincere in its commitment to implement the mainstreaming strategy .
We are committed also to a long-term strategy of mobilizing all the policies and measures to achieve equality between women and men .
There is very limited experience to draw upon in so far as mainstreaming is concerned but as we go along we can improve that .
We have started well , I believe , in what we have done today .
I am optimistic for the future .
Gender mainstreaming should , from now on , be pursued as a principle which forms part of the new draft Treaty and we certainly have some positive movement there as well .
This should allow us to undertake much more significant steps in the future .
Your contribution in this respect is very important .
I thank you all collectively for it , in particular within the co-decision process , wherever that is appropriate .
Progress has been made and we should recognize that .
Over the years it has been quite substantial but the issues raised require our constant attention and we have to raise the level of awareness and the profile of this equality issue everywhere .
Having the meeting here today , on the Tuesday , gives a significant boost to what the Commission and Parliament would like to do in this regard .
Our annual reports and our programme implementation will be our constant concern and will continue to be the top priority of my term as Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken today at 12.00 noon .
Violence against women
The next item is the report ( A4-0250 / 97 ) by Mrs Eriksson , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , on the need to establish a European Union-wide campaign for zero tolerance of violence against women .
Mr President , there are not many people here , but that does not mean that this issue does not concern a great number of people .
I am sometimes sceptical when I hear that phrase in this House : it is a issue which concerns a great number of people .
However , in this case I know that it is one , because for a whole year now I have had the opportunity to work on this report and also to meet people who have themselves been subjected to physical violence , or who work to support people who have .
Sometimes we are astonished that we have wage discrimination and so few women in decision-making positions , which we were talking about only a moment ago .
What is the cause and what is the effect ?
We can only point out that we have come a little way since Aristotle asserted that woman was a defective and subordinate being whose only purpose was to give birth to more men .
However , there is still a lot of Aristotelian thinking in the societies we live in .
In short , we live in a patriarchal structure where man is superior and woman is inferior in all areas and in every way .
Even we women perceive ourselves as inferior to men .
And as long as we do , we will still be living in the age of Aristotle .
The ultimate consequence of these social structures is the physical violence which is carried out against women .
This includes rape and other sexual attacks , beating , sexual harassment , prostitution and pornography .
These are the ultimate consequences with which we live .
In my homeland of Sweden , a women dies every ten days because she has been badly beaten by a man who is close to her .
Last summer we had several rape cases before the courts where we could directly see the mirroring of pornography in real events with so-called gang rapes of solitary women .
Violence in the home is still regarded as a private matter .
But we now know that it is not .
We do not know how much in financial terms this large-scale violence against women costs the taxpayer , not only in the EU , but all over the world .
In this report , we on the committee also point out that it is perhaps time for us to look at the size of this cost , so that we can discuss it with those who are only able to discuss things and consider problems in terms of money .
I think the report we are presenting in this part-session is a good one .
We have discussed it several times .
However , at this last moment , I would like to discuss something which has not been included , and which is an issue where I have had very bad luck .
It concerns pornography and prostitution and the criminalization of the clients of prostitutes instead of the prostitutes themselves .
This proposed amendment is not included because of very bad luck in the administration .
I therefore entreat the House to allow me to present it as an oral amendment and take a recorded vote on it .
This is an issue of the highest importance , not least to the whole combined feminist movement of the European Union .
I think it would be fair to put the issue on the table and discover the extent of the disagreement in this House , so that we know how to deal with such issues later .
Since we have Commissioner Gradin here , I am naturally curious to know how this report was received by the Commission and , as usual , what the position is in terms of financial opportunities and resources for making 1999 European Year Against Violence Against Women .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Eriksson for her excellent report and Mr David Martin for bringing this idea to the House in the first place .
I would like to give you five reasons why we need a Europe-wide campaign against violence to women .
Firstly , there is a need to raise awareness of the prevalence of violence against women in every country , every city and amongst all social classes .
For example , ten studies quoted by the Council of Europe this year found a remarkable consistency in that 25 % of women have experienced domestic violence and between 6 % and 10 % of women suffer violence in any one year .
Secondly , it is vitally important that all Member States should be invited to review the legal , economic and social support systems for the victims of violence and the protection that is provided against further attacks .
Women who have suffered violence - and a majority suffer in silence - and their children need to have the confidence to report attacks , secure in the knowledge that they will be provided with effective support .
Thirdly , violence against women should be universally regarded as unacceptable .
Public authorities should make a commitment to zero tolerance and public education campaigns should be undertaken to shift the view which is still held in many quarters that violence against women in the family , for example , is a private and minimal matter .
Fourthly , non-governmental organizations with expertise in supporting women and combatting violence should have the opportunity to share ideas and exchange good practice .
Some excellent and innovative local campaigns against violence could have a wider impact on the European stage .
Fifthly , more research is needed into the causes of violence and how we can prevent it ; how we can educate our children , boys and girls , to solve disputes without violence ; how we can address bullying ; how we can develop mutual respect for the human rights of men and women and how the attitudes and behaviour of violent men can be changed .
I hope that this House and the Commission will support the call of the Committee on Women 's Rights for a Europewide campaign against violence to women .
I hope that 1999 will be a year that we will remember , when Europe as a whole began to combat violence against women and show respect for human rights .
Mr President , in the absence of Mrs Banotti , I should like to take up a little of your time and my own to speak on behalf of myself and my group .
First of all , I want to thank Mrs Eriksson for her thorough and detailed report on the need for an effort of solidarity and tolerance , and for positive action against violence against women and children .
This report is another cry for help .
How many more will be needed before grand and eloquent speeches are turned into effective changes in the attitudes of European governments to the violence ?
The Beijing Conference gave a clear definition of specifically sexual violence - threats , insecurity , physical and psychological torture , assault , misery , coercion , mutilation , incest , sexual harassment , abuse , the traffic in women and rape - and these things are happening every day in a democratic Europe which upholds human rights and freedoms .
The victims are mainly women and children in the family - the hidden location where most of these attacks take place .
The causes are poverty , alcohol abuse , drugs , overcrowding and an extensive and growing trade based on pornography , prostitution and paedophilia .
Guidelines in the search for solutions can be obtained by identifying the causes which encourage violence : social isolation ; lack of support , awareness and parenting skills ; and , above all , bad childhood experiences .
The majority of these families have been categorized as high-risk right from the start , but even today domestic violence is a private affair , an invisible crime which the victims are too frightened to report .
What social policy measures should be adopted to achieve prevention in the first place ?
Most Member States have taken steps to address sexual violence within marriage , and have classed it as an offence .
There is not much information available but it is known that for women living with a male partner , the most common risk of violence is from that man .
There have been improvements in the legal status of women , and advances in the labour market too , but there is still a vast imbalance in terms of power .
The rapporteur denounces the taboo which discourages women from talking about violence and reporting the sexual harassment or unwanted attentions that many women , especially the youngest , suffer in the workplace .
Because of the lack of national statistics on these matters , it is very difficult to know whether the perceived increase in violence against women and children reflects a real rise , or whether more cases are being reported due to increased information about and awareness of the problem .
What is certainly true is that violence against women , which was originally thought of as a question of human rights , has also been recognized as a serious public health problem .
The European Women 's Health Network which was created in Vienna in 1994 included violence against women among its six basic health concerns , and although such violence has no sociocultural , religious or racial boundaries , the most vulnerable are young , migrant , poor women , and children .
There have been very few studies on the physical and psychological effects of this violence , but there is a constant increase in the need for psychiatric treatment and in the suicidal feelings of many battered women .
Injuries range from death to unwanted pregnancy , disease , sleep and eating disturbances , feelings of guilt , and fear - a great deal of fear .
There are reports which indicate that in some European countries one out of every three girls under the age of 16 has suffered harassment or rape .
The rapporteur demands , as do I on behalf of my Group , a coordinated interministerial approach and specific , obligatory training for all lawyers , judges , police and health-service personnel , both male and female , about violence , prostitution , traffic and pornography . We also call for increased effectiveness in those services concerned with the victims and their protection , shelter , counselling and rehabilitation , working in coordination with nongovernmental organizations .
Free telephone help-lines need to be installed throughout Europe , and reliable statistics must be collected to expose the problem .
Mainstreaming of non-violence in education and advertising is also necessary .
Commissioner Flynn has left , but I hope Mrs Gradin will ask him to incorporate non-violence , please , into all the policies and actions for equal opportunities .
We have high expectations of the Daphne programme .
We do not have much money to deal with such a serious problem , but we will try to get the budget increased for next year .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , who could dispute the benefits of a European campaign for zero tolerance of violence against women ?
While the terrible events recently disclosed in a number of Union countries have thrown light on the need for vigorous combat of pornography and paedophilia , whether involving young boys or girls , it is increasingly apparent that prostitution and related operations are one of the facets of organized crime - possibly because drug traffickers are afraid wider decriminalization of drugs might result in a less lucrative trade in them . They therefore use women as a currency of exchange , as a sort of single currency before the event , women being far more profitable as a means of payment in the traffic of stolen goods .
A woman on the pavement as payment for a stolen car brings in far more money than a lump sum , however well invested , and this also sidesteps the difficulties of money laundering .
On the other hand , violence in the home and in wedlock is still very poorly identified , still taboo .
Women who are the victims of violence carry their tragedy as a secret within them , either out of fear of reprisals , or out of a sense of shame with regard to those close to them .
A European campaign might make it possible , as was the case with paedophilia and incest , to free victims , to make them understand that they can speak out and be listened to , and perhaps even be really heard .
Reliable statistics in this field would give an idea of the scope of the problem and would help women who have suffered violence to speak out .
However , it seems to me that Mrs Eriksson 's report does not place sufficient emphasis on the problems of children who daily witness the violence suffered by their mother .
However , all the existing studies reveal the extent to which today 's perpetrators of conjugal violence have either been victims or have witnessed violence in their childhood .
Too often , mistreated or beaten women do not disclose their situation , because they think that is the way to protect their children .
The report proposes setting up many more refuges for such women .
I do not think that is the real answer .
As a local councillor , I have often had women come to me for help , perhaps because I am a woman .
The institutional response I can make , offering them accommodation in a refuge which is often some distance from their home , is not a solution that these women accept .
They do not wish to add to the trauma of violence the trauma of uprooting their children , cutting off links with their families and their schools , and the loss of their homes .
It is truly unjust that the victim and the victim 's children have to leave the home , and put distance between themselves and the aggressors .
I think this is something that we need to think about , something that has not been sufficiently explored . This should , perhaps , be the subject of a forthcoming report .
Mr President , although rape within marriage has now finally become a punishable offence in most Member States , there is still a fearsome array of taboos , ignorance , lack of understanding and unwillingness to put violence against women high on the political agenda .
Most violence occurs within the walls of the family home .
Helplines and refuges often do not exist or there are too few of them .
Training for police officers and judges is often lacking .
What can the European Union contribute here ?
In the first place it can stimulate awareness , knowledge and a change in attitude , extending that to the central and eastern European candidate countries as well , so that those lagging behind can adapt their national legislation because harmonization is neither desirable nor possible .
Secondly , it can wholeheartedly adopt the rapporteur 's proposal to designate 1999 as European Year Against Violence Against Women .
Then the most successful elements from the national campaigns must be identified and processed into a European campaign to be set up on a decentralized basis and adapted to national requirements .
Thirdly , the statistics must finally be brought out into the open .
In the Netherlands , violence against women has been included in the annual survey by the Central Statistical Office .
I have heard that this year Finland is undertaking a large-scale survey .
The Commission must encourage this everywhere , then we shall know just what we are really fighting against .
Because there are often no refuges and no helplines because they are too expensive .
I would point out that such initiatives actually save money for national budgets .
The Danish Women 's Centre in Røntofte has calculated this and everyone should do the same .
Through those initiatives alone , the Women 's ' Centre has saved ECU 1.8 million in local housing services .
That would be a phenomenal saving for national exchequers throughout Europe .
My group thanks Mrs Eriksson for her excellent work , but we must now turn to action .
The ECU 3 million in the 1997 budget should not just be a fashionable reaction to a distressing Belgian situation .
A structural approach is necessary .
At least ECU 5 million in the next budget , and let us not forget to involve eastern Europe closely .
Mr President , increasing violence against women is one of the serious problems of contemporary society .
Many women live in uncertainty and fear just where they should feel safe - in their own homes .
Some even die there as a result of illtreatment , or are murdered in front of their own children - 54 women in Spain last year .
The tragedy of these situations is viewed , if not with complicity , at least with tolerance .
Some women 's lives could have been saved if their appeals for help had been heeded , and this shows that the problem of violence against women is related not only to domestic situations made difficult by marginalization or poverty ( there is violence against women in all social classes ) , but also to deep-rooted social values which make allowances for the attacker .
It must be assumed that the causes of violence are present in society itself , and therefore actions are needed which go beyond the punishment of the attacker and the support of the victim .
Of course , both these measures are needed ( both to discourage other attackers and to alleviate the victim 's suffering with psychological support ) but something else is needed .
The extent of the problem must be realized . It is multi-faceted , ranging from violence in the home to rape , sexual mutilation , and sexual harassment at work .
The proposals presented in this report , such as those on refuges and protection of women 's rights , which should constitute a condition for reaching agreements with third countries , are ways forward , as is the designation of 1999 as European Year Against Violence Against Women , and our Group supports them .
But above all , there is a need to adopt real and effective measures to eradicate the violence , so that it ceases to be a topic for parliamentary debate . Substantial legal changes in the definition of violence and its prevention should be considered .
Mr President , eleven years ago , in 1986 , we adopted the last report in this Parliament on violence against women , the report by Mrs d 'Ancona .
It must be said that in those eleven years violence against women and girls may have become less of a taboo subject , but violence still occurs extremely frequently .
It has been said here many times that violence against women is mainly perpetrated within the family or by friends or acquaintances .
During these eleven years , women 's refuges and NGOs involved in combatting violence against women have been under constant financial pressure .
So it is not surprising that we are now calling for a Europewide campaign against violence against women and for a year to be devoted to this campaign .
But we should make no mistake .
Violence against women is not perpetrated exclusively within the family or by friends .
Governments have also played a part .
Just think of the enforced sterilizations that have been so much in the news in the last few weeks .
Not in one Member State but in many Member States .
And there are also Member States where it has not been in the news , but goes on just the same .
This legislation is still in force in some countries although its implementation has perhaps been put on a back burner .
These governments bear a considerable responsibility , especially as all European countries have signed the UN Convention on the elimination of discrimination against women .
And there is also a great deal about violence in that UN Convention .
So governments bear a considerable responsibility and they really should bring these sterilizations to an end .
Mr President , our intention in this debate today is to encourage governments to make violence against women a higher priority , and for this topic to be raised to the level of a major political problem .
A recent UNICEF report gives an idea of the extent of the problem .
According to this report , one woman in six , worldwide , has been the victim of rape once in her life , and this violence against women is not restricted to the developing countries .
It is estimated that one woman is beaten every ten seconds in western countries .
However , there are some countries in the world which have not legislated to make it a crime to commit violence against women , particularly when that violence takes place in the home .
So , ladies and gentlemen , I believe it is urgent to adopt a multi-institutional approach .
At all events , the costs of these actions will turn out to be less than the expenses entailed by violence in terms of health , accommodation and social services .
Furthermore , without aspiring to general harmonization throughout the Union , it has become apparent that stringent and uniform legislation is needed to provide a framework of sanctions against those responsible for such acts , while establishing appropriate assistance to victims in both the material and technical fields .
An information campaign is a priority which will help make women more aware of their fundamental rights .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , violence against women and children is surely one of the most despicable crimes in our society .
Although violence per se is unacceptable , many groups in the population take the view that violence within the family is , in the final analysis , a private matter .
This is the only reason why it is possible for children and women to be abused within their own four walls over many years .
Neighbours , relatives and friends all too often close their eyes to evidence of violence , because there is the feeling that problems with the police or the law are to be avoided at all costs .
Only seldom do victims have an opportunity to escape their misery .
Social institutions , such as women 's refuges , which might offer a chance of escape , are usually concentrated in conurbations and they are frequently financed privately .
So the women who do try to escape often face financial ruin .
For these and many other reasons , a campaign which completely outlaws violence against women is to be welcomed , and hopefully efforts will be made to enter areas , like the family , which have hitherto remained private .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that violence is also an issue that must be considered by women .
This Parliament is finally discussing women 's rights on a Tuesday : that means that at least there is a high level of consideration for the issue in this House .
The prevailing attitude , which is obviously what leads to violence , is also linked to equality .
Unfortunately we are still backward , and much needs to be done to achieve equality .
There are preconceptions and prejudices surrounding sexual violence which have yet to be dispelled .
Many people undoubtedly make the excuse that the woman 's attitude is to blame and that certain types of women consent to certain types of violence .
This is really serious .
Society 's attitude needs to start changing .
Prostitution , pornography and rape are not the only source of violence .
We know what giving a certain message in a certain way means .
Much more needs to be done .
Domestic violence is still regarded as a private matter , as has already been emphasized .
Only one woman in five reports what goes on at home , inside four walls .
Something very odd happened in Italy recently : in Venice a husband called the police because his wife would not have sex with him .
That certainly is quite incredible : it means we are still faced with an attitude to what goes on in family life or , rather , in a relationship between people , which is not based on anything very different .
A great deal of violence is not reported , simply because women feel afraid and ashamed ; they are afraid and ashamed because society denies them freedom of self-expression , so they have to fear the social consequences .
We need European strategies for setting up shelters and refuges ; we need to look at what is happening and make comparisons at European level ; and to some extent we need to review the legal systems as well .
The fact is , a culture of equality , education and information is needed and much remains to be done to recognize the situation .
Mr President , the report by my Swedish colleague , Mrs Eriksson , which we are now debating concerns a fundamental problem .
I would like to thank her for a very good report .
Violence against women is unfortunately a part of the welfare state and can affect all of us regardless of age , environment and social class .
In Sweden alone around 18 , 000 cases of attacks on women are reported each year .
In almost every case it is a man who lives or has lived with the woman who is involved .
However , this is only a fraction of the true number of cases .
It is a myth that only certain people are affected .
It is moreover a dangerous myth which we usually believe to protect us from recognizing the problem . Many people say ' it won 't happen to me ' until they come across the problem in their own close family or circle of friends .
Often it is fear , shame , silence and feelings of guilt which are the greatest allies of violence .
Violence against women is a hidden crime , and if our battle against it is to succeed , we must make the violence visible .
Only then will we have the chance to bring about change .
This battle must be fought on all levels .
We need laws which protect women and punish the perpetrators , whether they are husbands , pimps or rapists .
We also need preventative work by voluntary organizations , etcetera .
Often these organisations seem closer and easier to contact than the authorities .
For that reason , we in the Socialist Group have also decided to support these organizations and include them in the report .
Attacks on women affect all of us . We must work for the safety of women in Europe .
I would also like to support Mrs Eriksson in her request to be allowed to present her oral amendment in this part-session .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , of course acts of violence against women are a result of a complex of reasons , of a system of values and actions tolerated by society and its institutions .
Violence against women would not exist without the connivance of each individual man and without society 's tolerance for each individual act of violence .
It represents the most widespread violation of human rights worldwide . The latest UNICEF statistics on abuse of women are shocking .
Shocking details are given about the abuse of women in the United States of America , in India , and in Africa - where 2 million women a year are sexually mutilated while 130 million have suffered horrendous torture .
But we cannot regard ourselves as beyond reproach in Europe either .
The latest horrifying data from Belgium confirm that .
Research has shown that in the west , as in the east , few women reach adulthood without having undergone some form of violence , indecent assault , rape , incest , sexual harassment , beatings or even torture .
However , violence against women does not manifest itself only through physical abuse .
Other serious forms of violence are : discrimination and sexual harassment faced by women in the workplace and their virtual exclusion from public office and from political decision-making centres ; the commonplace refusal of men to support their children morally and materially after divorce ; the abuse of women through advertising and the media ; pornography and prostitution .
Of course violence against women is a wall of shame in our male-dominated society and action must be taken at an individual , collective and institutional level to eradicate it .
So a massive Europe-wide campaign is needed and sufficient resources must be made available .
The ECU 3 million that were made available during 1997 on the occasion of the events in Belgium are obviously not enough to tackle the phenomenon .
We need services to provide aid and shelter , special units for the eradication of the crime of violence against women and children , a campaign of information , programmes of prevention , research and studies on the economic and social costs of male violence .
I support the motion of the rapporteur to designate 1999 as European Year Against Violence Against Women and I congratulate her on her recommendation .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , oppression and discrimination against women have been the order of the day for far too long .
It is time to match action to the many words and do something about the problems .
So it is gratifying that we have now allocated ECU 3 million a year to combat violence against women .
Violence against women is the brutal and unhappy consequence of a lack of equality between the two sexes , and the fact that there is still a great deal of violence against women in today 's Europe is a sign that there is still a long way to go before we have a society where the two sexes have the same rights and opportunities .
So to combat violence against women , it is absolutely necessary to work for more equality on a broad front .
I would also like to make a few comments on the next report .
The lack of equality between men and women is most noticeable in the world of advertising .
In that world a woman is still a stay-at-home housewife or a sex object .
All too often advertising agencies crudely attempt to entice people to buy products with the help of pictures of naked or semi-naked women .
It is degrading both for the women who appear in the advertisements and for those who are forced to look at them .
And it contributes to maintaining an outdated pattern of sexual roles .
The world is getting smaller and smaller these days .
Cross-border media such as satellite TV and the Internet are increasing in importance .
So we need international rules in this area , unless the sector begins to practice self-regulation .
If the advertising agencies are incapable of drawing the line themselves , we politicians must intervene , and in that context we are sending an important signal from this Parliament by adopting the reports by Mrs Eriksson and Mrs Lenz .
To make further progress and combat violence against women , more of our male colleagues ought to have shown solidarity by being present in the House during this debate .
It would have become them .
Mr President , violence against women is a major social problem .
It is basically a human rights issue .
Violence against women is the most extreme expression of the lack of equality which exists between women and men .
Physical violence is one of several strategies of oppression .
Put simply , it is a question of men 's power over women .
I therefore welcome the fact that today the European Parliament is devoting a proper debate to this important issue , and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Eriksson , on her thorough report .
For a long time violence against women was looked on as something private .
The general view was that women who were beaten and raped were themselves to blame .
The situation has now changed .
Now violence against women is internationally seen as a real problem .
The Vienna Conference on Human Rights in 1993 established that human rights are also women 's rights .
This represented a real breakthrough and led , among other things , to a special rapporteur being appointed on the issue of violence against women .
The United Nations Conference in Beijing also took up the question of violence against women .
The Beijing Platform maintains that violence against women is an obstacle to achieving the goals of equality , development and peace .
In 1993 the UN General Assembly adopted a declaration on the abolition of violence against women .
In the resolution , the General Assembly stresses that violence against women means that women are being forced into a subordinate position relative to men .
The issue has also been raised in other international contexts .
In this regard I would like to praise the European Parliament for the work it has done in this area .
As early as 1986 Parliament took up the question of women and violence in a special report .
This has been followed up by several resolutions and now we have the Eriksson report on a campaign against violence against women .
It is an important report .
I would particularly like to emphasize the excellent proposal that 1999 be designated European Year Against Violence Against Women .
Mrs Eriksson , I sincerely hope that the Committee on Women 's Rights takes the initiative for a special budget item next time so that we also get the resources to be able to finance and jointly implement that year .
The problem needs to be highlighted and explained before progress can be made .
A campaign is one way to get public opinion behind action against violence .
Action against violence against women must take place simultaneously in different areas and on different levels .
We must ensure that we help women who have been subjected to violence and support the voluntary organizations working in this area .
Everywhere , women 's organizations have been the first to have set up homes for battered wives and support them and their children .
When we discuss violence against women we should not forget the role which men have .
We concentrate on the women because they are the victims .
But women are not the source of the actual problem .
When I was the Minister for Equal Opportunities in the Swedish government , I realised that we would make no further progress on equality if we did not involve men too .
I therefore set up a men 's group which used seminars and studies to encourage men themselves to start discussing the role of men .
It turned out very well and led to increased interest among men in discussing their own role in relation to women and children .
Of course , this is also important at European level .
We need more research into men and violence .
We also need men 's groups which themselves tackle the question of their own male role .
Let me stress that the Commission will continue to do what it can within its powers to combat violence against women .
The modern slave trade in women is one form of violence I have done a lot of work on in recent years .
Increasing numbers of young women are being brought from the countries in central and eastern Europe to western Europe to be forced into prostitution .
It is a serious problem involving large sums of money .
Trafficking in women has clearly become a lucrative business for international organized crime .
Since I presented the action plan against the slave trade , we have been working on a broad front .
We are making efforts under the third pillar , but also in other areas .
The slave trade in women , like all violence against women , is a problem we must tackle from several directions at once .
We now have a number of projects under way in the Stop Programme .
These are aimed at judges , lawyers and others who , in their work , come into contact with women who are victims of the slave trade and sexual exploitation .
The aim is to increase awareness and knowledge of the problem and to learn from each other .
We have ECU 6.5 million for the programme which runs from 1996 to the year 2000 .
Also in the European Drug Unit , the basis for Europol , which has not yet been ratified by the Member States , a project is under way to prevent trafficking in women .
This year , thanks to the initiative of this Parliament , we have also been able to set up the Daphne programme .
As you know , this is intended for voluntary organizations working with issues of violence against children , adolescents and women .
All of us who have worked on these issues for many years know that women who are victims of violence often prefer to turn to a voluntary organization than to the authorities .
We have had a good response , and the day before yesterday I received a summary of all the projects which are now ready to be implemented .
A second round of applications is also taking place out in the community .
We will soon be able to start projects to support women and children who have become victims of violence .
We have projects for immigrant women , for cooperation between the police and women 's organizations with regard to female rape victims , for the setting up networks and exchanging experiences and models of good practice .
Men 's groups are also included in the latter project .
I hope that the pilot project within Daphne will provide useful experience for everyone working against violence against women and children to build on .
I hope Parliament will continue to support this initiative so that we can continue the practical and concrete work on a broad front .
Obviously , the need is great .
If we have the money , we can also make important contributions of this kind .
Many of the recommendations in Mrs Eriksson 's report are directed at the Member States .
It is important that continuous work takes place both locally and nationally .
At the same time we are studying with interest the recommendations directed at the Commission .
It is important for the Commission to work actively against violence against women and for this to be done in a way which complements the work of the Member States .
As I said earlier , I think that the proposal for a European Year Against Violence Against Women is an idea which deserves full support .
It would focus attention on the issue of violence against women and also provide real support for all those within authorities and voluntary organizations who work against violence .
Mr President , now that the debate is over , I have a small request . It is freezing in this Chamber and I hope this is not part of some strategy to keep the women super-cool during this debate on women , and stop them getting too heated .
But could you please do something about the temperature ?
Mrs Larive , the services responsible have heard what you said and I trust they will act as soon as possible .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.00 noon .
Discrimination against women in advertising
The next item is the report by Mrs Lenz ( A4-0258 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , on discrimination against women in advertising .
Mr President , to return once more to women .
This , too , is a question of discrimination : this time it is discrimination against women in advertising .
Take the example of a distiller 's advertisement : a picture of a woman - and a black one , at that - caught in a net , with the caption : ' Wouldn 't you like to open it right now ?
Which one , the bottle ? ' .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Women 's ' Rights has opened the bottle labelled ' Discrimination against Women in Advertising ' .
There have been a number of articles on just how close the report has come to striking at the sensitivities of the advertising profession .
Actually , this has always happened , even when we presented a report about women and the media ten years ago and it contained a section called ' Women and Advertising ' .
Surprisingly , the first words of criticism came from the ranks of the German Advertising Council , even though it was itself responsible for control . Compared with international standards these instances were not bad , as is shown by the examples it quoted for criticism or condemnation .
Are these cracks in expensive monoliths ?
I think the question is justified .
Over the years , advertising has become both more strident and more earthy .
The examples make that clear . The depiction of women - and of men too , as I have seen - which many women perceive as debasing , and which frequently bears no relation to the product being advertised , or is punctuated by more or less offensive remarks , is simply hurtful to women .
It encourages either discrimination against women as available sex objects or , in less harmful cliché situations , a role for women which is unacceptable in the modern world .
The majority of protests to advertising standards bodies concern pictures of women , and the fact that only few official reprimands have been issued is not significant : 90 % of the pictures criticized were previously withdrawn .
In recent weeks we have learned just how the media push ahead , and no end is in sight .
We cannot act as if there were always a clear division between such things .
Women 's rights are human rights .
Both the Beijing Women 's World Conference and , in particular , the Vienna Human Rights Conference have shown that .
National advertising laws and advertising control organizations in individual Member States are very different .
National and EU legislation does not protect against unworthy depiction of women in media content .
Television guidelines , for instance , give no definition of gender discrimination .
The increase in cross-border broadcasting of commercials and the depiction of violence raise new challenges to for traditional advertising control mechanisms .
The report calls for greater clarity and recommends closing gaps in national advertising control , convergence in advertising controls across the European Union , and long term evolution of the existing amalgamation of European advertising control bodies into a genuine European control organization .
The report also recommends the creation of an advisory European Media Council consisting of representatives from the European Commission and the European advertising industry , which could draft a code against discrimination in advertising .
Incidentally , that is something which has certainly been raised before in this House .
The proposal for an ethics committee under each national television council also falls within this context .
We should also like to urge , as we have done before , the establishment of a prize for the best European advertisement meeting our standards , in order to develop a realistic image of women .
Women in advertising should also make an effort to gain greater influence over the production and decision-making processes , and establish alternative agencies producing innovative advertising . They would thus contribute to a gradual transformation of the image of women in advertising along the lines of the variety , originality and creativity of modern woman , and to a final goodbye to the myth that naked flesh makes the best salesman .
We are aware that this report will not please everyone , and I also know that this is a sensitive area . But we on the Committee on Women 's Rights - and we have also heard from many others this morning - should take up these themes and make people aware that these things must no longer happen .
There are so many ways of depicting women - their variety , their abilities .
The advertising profession , with its budgets of millions and billions , should also give that a thought .
Mr President , women are not goods for anyone to buy , although that is sometimes the impression given .
It is not the product , but naked flesh that is displayed for advertising purposes .
As long ago as 1995 I tabled an amendment calling for a report investigating discrimination against women in advertising .
The Committee on Women 's Rights has taken steps to achieve this in its Lenz Report .
We are not concerned with morals , I want to make that quite clear , and certainly not with censorship ; we do not wish to censor the advertising profession , but to ensure that certain minimum standards for the protection of women 's dignity are maintained .
We are concerned with the implementation of the UN agreement banning all discrimination against women .
We need a code of conduct - Mrs Lenz described it - that goes further than self-regulation within the advertising profession .
In a market of over ECU 250 billion worldwide , the danger is it will exceed all bounds , disgusting pictures and naked flesh will be shown , and anything will be justified as long as it brings in a slice of the cake .
However , we saw the power of women consumers In the case of a worldwide mineral water producer in Belgium .
The company had displayed three bare-breasted women on huge billboards , with just their nipples covered by the firm 's bottletops .
As a result of protests from the Committee on Women 's Rights and a threatened boycott by European women 's associations the advertisement was withdrawn by the firm .
As I said , women consumers have considerable power .
But we in Parliament also have considerable responsibility .
The non-discrimination clause in the Amsterdam Treaty will present us with a further need to act .
We have the opportunity of intervening - and the Lenz Report is only one element here - and of achieving equality of opportunity in the general concept .
We must also extend our activities into other areas of the new media .
It is not just advertising that must observe the basic law against discrimination , but the other areas as well .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , advertising that misuses sexist stereotypes and women 's bodies to market products is discriminatory , because it debases the dignity of women .
The pointed double meanings of offensive texts and the provocative display of the naked female form cannot be tolerated , although the boundary between eroticism , with aesthetic photographs , and pornography cannot always be clearly defined .
Amongst Member States of the European Union there are varying standards for what may be said , printed , or shown , based on varying cultural views .
But that cannot absolve us from finding common European rules , even if our efforts are denounced as prudish , unenlightened or perhaps outmoded .
I think reducing women to the role of an object in advertising is outmoded .
Women have long fulfilled a variety of functions with great competence , from psychology in everyday life , through leadership qualities in the professions , to engagement in politics , culture and society .
It would be an exciting task for advertising to prepare this reality in an interesting way , and it would underline the message more convincingly .
There are regulations at national level for those involved in advertising and communication .
Although not always voluntary , they still incorporate guidance and monitoring functions .
The German Advertising Council , for instance , which has just celebrated its 25th birthday , has made effective contributions to self-regulation , including measures for public condemnation and warnings against repetition .
Further legal regulation can be dispensed with if control is effective .
There is no European code of ethics , however , and there are no agreements at national level .
Advertising that discriminates against women must be stopped before it is broadcast or printed .
For this reason those who create advertising must be sensitized .
I was in creative advertising for more than 20 years .
We tried to give a positive impression , design product concepts and communication content appropriate to the target audience , achieve identification with and acceptance of the products , clarify , and initiate a buying response , but without using clichés , without causing embarrassment or offence , and without being defamatory .
That was , and is , the intellectual challenge of creative contact with customers .
The excellent and detailed report by Marlene Lenz , and the hearing initiated by her in the Committee on Women 's Rights , have clearly shown that we must keep up the fight against discrimination .
That is particularly true after the adoption of important passages in the Amsterdam Draft Treaty .
Mr President , I will say right away that I am going to rock the boat .
But before I get my eyes torn out , I want to make one conciliatory remark .
I am of course lined up with the majority , I support all action to promote equal opportunities and I oppose any instrument or act of violence that harms women .
I think it is even more important to make that statement as a man , to avoid any suspicion of corporatism in these matters , as other speakers have observed .
But I am also against any escalation of the problem and it seems to me that this report runs that risk : in the title itself , for example , by mentioning discrimination , but especially in the tone and in some of the arguments .
I would say that such muddled and violent shooting goes way beyond the target .
This is violence against violence and that seems paradoxical .
This is a case and an area where the word discrimination can be interpreted from at least two points of view : first , women are discriminated against as the active subjects of certain advertising , it is said .
That may be true , in fact it undoubtedly is true .
But at the same time this action discriminates against men as passive subjects , stupid subjects , of this discrimination against women .
The second point of view is this : men are increasingly players in identical active messages .
Think of those androgynous beauties , think of the hairy chests , think of the well-muscled , increasingly ostentatious monsters .
So the premise in the report , stating - and I quote - ' The clichéd view of men as bread-winners , business-like and productive , whereas women are portrayed as domestic , dependent and passive , does not reflect the social reality in Europe ' is at least dated .
But it does not reflect advertising reality either .
Do look at some modern commercials and let us get away from the Middle Ages of advertising !
So , even in this case , equal opportunities are defended to the end .
Where vigilance is actually needed , obviously , is where certain messages offend good taste and cross the boundary to pornography .
But this applies equally to everyone , women , men , and children .
Nor does the presence of the female shape in advertising always involve violence , because women are , after all , free to accept or reject roles offered to them .
Instead , there is a queue - look outside any advertising agency - of women seeking to engage in this profession .
So , I repeat , it is up to them to decide how to do so and with how much good taste .
In addition to these reasons , in the end , where women know how to combine beauty with intelligence they emerge victorious .
If you notice , both in the distance relationship between message and television viewer and especially in the division of roles in the commercials , it is always the man who comes across as incompetent , represented as letting himself be ensnared in the dazzling trap of some portion of the female epidermis , always shown artfully , true , but also sometimes with grace , and that needs to be stated calmly .
The idea that men can only make a choice because a woman discloses a bit of epidermis does , I think , make the male the ridiculous figure .
So , Mr President , if I may close with a hint of irony on an issue which , I recognize , is actually very serious , I call for a report on discrimination against men as involuntary victims of discrimination against women in advertising .
I hardly think Parliament will agree to that request , but there is nothing wrong with proposing it .
Mr President , the rather heated atmosphere of the original Lenz report has largely disappeared and that is a good thing .
I can hardly imagine advertisements for lingerie , for example , without women in them and as Mrs Ewing said to me just now , the fact is women look nicer than men .
However , I find a great deal of advertising , soap powder for instance , pretty tedious and many people agree with me .
But is it the task of the advertising sector to undertake pioneering work to break down stereotypes ?
I think each country gets the advertising it deserves .
And if that advertising does not keep up with new developments or behaves unworthily , then the consumer is woman enough to give it the brush-off , because more than half of all consumers are women .
For liberals , the boundary between press freedom , and freedom of speech , and discrimination is violation of human dignity and the unnecessary exploitation of the human body .
These are moral limits , but there is also a plethora of legal limits .
National legislation , self-regulation , European legislation , the code of the International Chamber of Commerce , EASA , Article 19 of the UN Convention on Civil and Political Rights .
These meant that the infamous Perrier advertisement was rightly banned .
So is the Lenz report dealing with a non-issue ?
Partly , but it is nevertheless a good thing for the European Parliament to draw attention to the question . However I do not think we need new legislation or harmonization of national legislation .
I do not think we need a European Media Council dealing specifically with discrimination , or ethics committees , so my group is voting against paragraphs 15 , 20 and 23 and we have submitted amendments to them .
The appeal made by Mrs Lenz to the advertising sector is right : more women in decision-making , greater accessibility in national rules , improved complaints procedures and the EASA must as a real European selfregulating body , drawing up European minimum standards for non-discriminatory advertising and upholding them .
Then we shall not need any extra legislation .
If the advertising world really listened to the consumer , I mean , to all those women , then decent advertisements that meet the requirements of responsible modern men and women would be produced as a matter of course without legislation and all kinds of rules .
Mr President , first of all I should like to say that I consider it an initial sign of mainstreaming that the debates on women are being followed not only by one Commissioner but by several Commissioners and that we are also getting responses from other Commissioners .
As far as women in advertising are concerned , I must nevertheless say that it is a great virtue of the women 's movement that in the last few years sexy men have also appeared .
Chippendale-type men have appeared in advertisements .
It is extremely doubtful whether that is a true image of men , because you do not come across Chippendales every day .
There are plenty of men in this Parliament , but you have to look pretty hard to find a Chippendale !
To put it briefly , advertising gives a very distorted picture of reality and of course that is also the aim of advertising .
I must honestly say that I do not think censorship of advertising would be appropriate .
It is true that stereotypes of women are still shown a great deal , but some improvement has occurred .
Perhaps those stereotypes have receded a little , but it would be going too far to say that the advertising world does not have trail-blazing work to do .
Of course the advertising world can undertake pioneering work and it would also be a good thing if women were actually a lot more involved in advertising and themselves made a contribution to changing the image of women in advertisements .
So I am not in favour of censorship but of self-regulation , and codes of conduct .
I think we can continue to make progress in that way .
And progress really is necessary because the situation in advertising is still not good enough .
Mr President , at the threshold of the Twenty-first Century women 's bodies are used , often gratuitously , to sell goods in order to make money for other people .
Ask yourself exactly why Diana , Princess of Wales , was pursued everywhere she went : to make money for others .
Women are still portrayed stereotypically even if a few new stereotypes have been added .
This is a European matter .
Satellite and cable television have ensured that .
Most European countries are bad and some are appalling .
We heard from a citizen of one of them earlier on .
Much advertising goes well beyond the erotic to the pornographic with overtones of violence and sadism .
This advertising cheapens all women .
It cheapens every one of us and our daughters .
It takes away our individuality and our humanity .
Stereotyping of women is much more dangerous than stereotyping of men .
It incites women to a pursuit of perfection with consequences like eating disorders .
We know of a recent victim .
The current legislation and self-regulation are inadequate .
All the various pacts and conventions are inadequate .
Mrs Lenz 's proposals will do something to improve that situation .
Colleagues , when you introduce moral issues into the process of money-making , it is never welcomed by those making money .
They do not want to hear about moral issues .
But moral issues matter to those people that we represent .
I hope , therefore , that this will be taken seriously and Mrs Lenz 's report will be supported by all groups .
Mr President , this report affects freedom of expression .
Indeed , it advocates not only professional self-regulation , which has been in existence for a long time incidentally , but goes further by stating that freedom of expression might have to be limited to protect public morality .
What is this notion which , to boot , does not appear in the European Convention of Human Rights ?
What is this willingness to punish , not clearly identified violations of decent behaviour , but the breaking of a mere social convention , supposedly forbidden according to the definition of some political body or other at European level , whereas sensitivity on these matters differs from north to south .
In the past in Europe , and now today in many countries , this is how the intolerance associated with fundamentalist thinking both arose and continues to arise .
Finally , this report seems to me to have been somewhat overtaken by events .
Women are not the only ones whose image is used . So is men 's .
The latest Daewoo advertisement showed a man and a woman in exactly the same position and the same state of near-nakedness .
Today , even in Belgium , Crédit Lyonnais has advertisements showing the naked body of a man in the newspapers .
Here too , we need to adopt a more relative or qualified approach .
It may be irritating for women , all women , not to be Botticelli 's Venus , but it is just as irritating for men not to be Michelangelo 's David , or the Apollo of Praxiteles . The illegitimate use of outward beauty , when abused , is criticized , sometimes to a ludicrous extent .
But outward beauty has and always will be a motive for action in many circumstances ..
I would like to end by referring to a passage from Amélie Nothomb 's book ' Attentat ' . She writes that when Quasimodo falls in love with Esmeralda , he longs to cry out to the beautiful lady : look beyond my outward appearance !
But what has Quasimodo himself done except go no further than the outward appearance of this beautiful creature .
He should have fallen in love with a toothless old woman .
Then Quasimodo would have been credible .
But his heart has been stopped by the splendid appearance of a beautiful gypsy girl who is only too easy to fall in love with .
Fortunately this report will not change the face of things .
Mr President , I would also like to add to the appreciation already expressed by other Members of the President 's decision to debate all four reports from the Committee on Women 's Rights together on Tuesday morning , thus giving the issues dealt with a very high profile .
That sends a very positive signal : it certainly means that the work so many of us have done for so long , undervalued and opposed , is beginning to bear fruit and these issues are attracting more attention , in fact the feminist position is becoming common sense and received opinion .
This is not yet the case when it comes to images of women - as we have heard - in advertising and the mass media in general .
Despite the recommendations of the Council of Europe , the resolutions of the European Council and the European Parliament , all based on fundamental principles affirmed in international documents and agreements , despite the militant commitment of women 's associations , and the decisions taken on equality mechanisms by our countries , ministries and committees , the use of the female body to sell consumer goods , that stereotype of the presumed traditional role of women , continues to infest the walls of our cities , television broadcasts at every hour of the day , and the pages of newspapers and magazines .
In Italy , two intellectual weeklies and a left-wing periodical have both persisted for years in the bad habit of chasing high circulation by showing naked women on their covers . In fact , recently , an editor controversially explained that trying a naked man had caused a drop in sales .
Meanwhile - and this is the other side of the coin as regards the women / mass media report - it continues to be difficult if not impossible for the associations and even ministries working to affirm women 's rights to raise awareness of what they are trying to do .
Even here , today , in spite of the politically correct timing of this debate , as we can see , some of the broadcasters who cover important debates are not present .
The rights of half of all Europeans are not important enough for the European communications media .
Perhaps if some of us , young and beautiful of course , had spoken in the nude .... ! Perhaps !
So Mrs Gröner has made a very timely effort to draw the attention of the European Union to this wholly unresolved problem , and in her scholarly report , Mrs Lenz , whom I congratulate , quite rightly calls for legislative initiatives by Member States and codes of conduct on the part of advertisers , and presents a series of important proposals to the Commission which I trust Commissioner Flynn will wish to respond to promptly .
Mr President , from a scientific point of view , semantics today accepts that the language of advertising constitutes an extremely effective message .
Today more than ever , we have to realise that this advertising message is planned , conceived and broadcast to seduce , to be assimilated , to make millions of people react in a specific way .
We must bear in mind that these images and slogans are carefully thought out and planned to have an effect , to make a psychological attack , to have an impact , and when confronted with them we human beings tend to be passive , defenceless subjects .
So in one sense , they could be described as an imposition using the wonders of images , sounds , colours and stimulation of the senses .
Today , in an era ruled by the media , advertising is all of this .
Advertising today can do wonders , but it can also commit atrocities .
It is a very powerful instrument , as we know , and the important thing is that this powerful instrument should not contravene certain principles .
In fact , this instrument should also be used to further the worthy aims of the human race and - why not ? - to counter discrimination against women .
Beware , ladies and gentlemen of the Commission , because it is incomprehensible that we should spend so much time perfecting legal documents and guideline texts , and yet allow a poisonous , discriminatory message to be conveyed by attractive advertising and injected into the veins of thousands and millions of Europeans .
Also , we must remember that the repetition of discriminatory messages effectively perpetuates discrimination .
Therefore , this is a good moment to progress beyond unwanted moralizing and criticism , and say that when it comes to things that affect people , not everything is acceptable in this Europe ruled by merchandise , where some people try to turn women into a commodity .
We have political mechanisms to enable us to say no !
So this report is a magnificent initiative by the European Parliament to set up a policy which should be active , non-discriminatory and in favour of equal treatment .
Mr President , I should like to take the opportunity to thank the European Parliament for this initiative and Mrs Lenz in particular for the excellent work she has done .
The Commission is fully aware of the importance of protecting women against discrimination in advertising and of the need to strike the right balance between respect for the fundamental right of freedom of expression and respect for human dignity .
The report highlights a number of important issues , which I welcome .
It makes very constructive proposals , most of which are in line with the development of the Commission 's policies and activities in this particular field .
Parliament , along with the Commission , insisted on the need for a non-discrimination clause to be inserted in the new treaty and called in particular for discrimination against women to be included in the categories of discrimination .
Article 6 ( a ) of the draft Amsterdam Treaty responds to this request and provides for possibilities of appropriate action in the afore-mentioned field .
I should also like to remind the House of Council and Parliament Directive 97 / 31 adopted in June on coordination of television broadcasting activities , which represents the most important European instrument for television advertising .
This directive provides that advertising shall not include any discrimination on grounds of sex .
The integration of a gender perspective in media policy is one of the Commission 's priorities within its gender mainstreaming policy .
Concrete measures are laid down in the fourth equal opportunities programme .
The Commission encourages the exchange of information and experience between the Member States and between relevant national bodies .
It also encourages a balanced participation by women and men at decision-taking levels of the advertising industry and the media , in order to strengthen the influence of women in this field .
A meeting has been planned for later on this year , bringing together major participants , experts and NGOs in the media sector in order to build on good experience .
Mrs Lenz 's proposal to include advertising in our studies is noted .
The Commission supports an overview study of the image of women in advertising and the media and the encouragement of cooperation between professional associations , women 's organizations and project leaders active at Community level .
We cannot reply positively to the request for a European advertising prize but the NIKI Prize supported by the Commission , which aims to improve the portrayal of women on television , will be awarded again this year for good practice in the advertising sector .
Finally , the Commission will examine carefully the proposal to set up an advisory committee for all media with the aim of drawing up a code for the advertising industry to stamp out all forms of discrimination .
In this respect , I should like to remind the House that the recent TV directive provides for the creation of a contact committee chaired by the Commission and composed of representatives of the competent authorities in the Member States with the task of facilitating the implementation of the directive .
The Commission could examine the possibility of creating a subgroup within the committee to prepare such a code and this would be a good example of gender mainstreaming .
We all know that equality in practice will not become reality until there has been profound change in many areas , not least those of ideas , attitudes and images in the media .
So , the Commission will continue and strengthen its action in this direction , taking into account your suggestions .
I thank all those who have contributed to the debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12.00 noon )

VOTES
In order to explain why I am putting forward an oral amendment , I said in the debate that this is due to an administrative misfortune .
That is why I sincerely hope you are now listening very carefully , and will support my proposed amendment .
I would also like to point out that both proposed amendments are controversial , and not just in this House ; they are also being followed with great interest by our electorates outside the House in all Member States .
With my proposed amendment , paragraph 14 would read as follows : ' Calls for the programmes planned by the Commission with the aim of combatting trafficking in women for purposes of sexual exploitation and combatting violence against women not to be confined to campaigns to provide information about and to prevent prostitution , but also to include support for projects to rehabilitate victims and action against pornography and prostitution ' .
This adds the words ' and action against pornography and prostitution ' which is my oral amendment .
Mr President , there was detailed discussion within the Committee on Women 's Rights , and I do not feel that we can accept any oral amendment in the part-session .
If Parliament has no objection , I will put the rapporteur 's oral amendment to paragraph 14 to a vote .
( The President established that more than 13 members opposed the oral amendment which was therefore not put to the vote , under Rule 124 ( 6 ) )
Paragraph 17
With my proposed amendment , paragraph 17 would therefore read as follows : ' welcomes initiatives in some Member States to develop , in addition to effective sanctions , programmes for perpetrators which result in men taking responsibility for their actions , and calls for greater commitment from all Member States to adopt such initiatives ' , and then my addition , ' for example , criminalization of the customers of prostitutes ' .
If Parliament has no objection , I will put the rapporteur 's oral amendment to paragraph 17 to a vote .
( The President established that more than 13 members opposed the oral amendment which was therefore not put to the vote , under Rule 124 ( 6 ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
This proposal to modify the directive on to misleading advertising so as to include comparative advertising , satisfies me in more than one respect .
This proposal for codecision is the result of fruitful work between the Commission and Parliament .
The text aims at a necessary harmonization in the field of advertising , and the final result of this decision appears to me to be balanced .
The introduction of comparative advertising should make it possible to give better information to consumers , and this is the reason why I have always fought for it .
The amendments proposed by Parliament and accepted by the Commission will limit abuses , and be reinforced in this respect by the provisions on misleading advertising already in existence .
As the Commission has refused to include the establishment of a European control body in the directive , it is important for consumer protection organizations to be involved in checking up on tests at the Community level .
Political leaders in the various Member States have a responsibility to encourage independent approaches along these lines .
In the near future , the issue of the European control body will need to be raised again .
Commission proposal on the wine market
I am going to vote against this document .
I believe a support system for the wine market is fundamentally flawed in any case .
Our group has submitted two amendments to the Commission 's proposal .
The Commission wanted to eliminate assistance for production of rectified concentrated musts in wine-growing zones C III .
The Languedoc-Roussillon , Provence-Alpes-Côte d 'Azur and Midi-Pyrénées production regions were directly concerned .
Our group is delighted at the vote on these two amendments , which were adopted virtually unanimously by the Members of the European Parliament , and regrets that the Commission wishes to make fundamental amendments through an apparently anodyne regulation .
Does the Commission need reminding that we are still awaiting to a new text for the proposed reform of the COM in wine from the Commission ?
In the spring of 1995 , the European Parliament debated , voted on and amended the Commission 's original proposal .
In its proposal , the Commission has sought to reopen the debate on chaptalization and the enrichment of rectified concentrated musts .
At the time this was first discussed , the Commission replied to the Council that it was awaiting the opinion of the European Parliament before amending its proposal .
The European Parliament as a whole has been vigilant and has rejected this proposal from the Commission .
The Europe of Nations Group can only rejoice at the outcome , and we thank the Members of the European Parliament for supporting these amendments .
Simpson recommendation ( Á4-0271 / 97 )
The common position we are preparing to adopt is acceptable for the public service .
It opens up the way to a degree of liberalization in the field of postal services , and hence enables some opening up to competition , which the consumers and companies wish for .
It nevertheless sets aside important domains , such as cross-border mail and advertising mail , which are left to monopoly public postal services .
In its deliberations , Parliament has respected the delicate balance achieved at the Council .
Indeed , the majority of the post office ministers have been more favourable to the public service than the Commission .
Hopefully the Luxembourg Presidency - in the person of Mrs Mady Delvaux , to whom I pay tribute for her clear and frank attitude in support of the public service in the postal field - will speedily wrap up this dossier , and conclude procedures in the Council .
Finally , it is worth raising the question why the all-powerful wave of liberalization championed by the Commission has slowed when confronted with the postal services .
I believe one of the essential reasons for this is the importance of the postal services in terms of social cohesion and land-use planning in national territory .
In many cases the postman is still out there , whereas most public services have been withdrawn for reasons of cost and productivity .
It has to be hoped that this pause in liberalization and deregulation will give decision-makers time to reflect , and the postal services the ability to work ever harder to serve customers .
I have voted for the report .
I think the rapporteur 's amendments substantially improve the Commission 's proposals , but I would like to clarify one point .
The provision of postal services is a public service .
Experience from other businesses shows that deregulation does not result in increased efficiency , but instead more often results in unemployment and increased regional inequality .
Scapagnini report ( A4-0268 / 97 )
Nuclear energy is a non-renewable source of energy .
Serious nuclear power accidents have occurred at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl .
The problem of waste from nuclear power has not been solved .
Following a referendum , Sweden has decided to phase out nuclear power .
A reactor in Barsebäck is going to be shut down before the general election in Sweden in September 1998 .
The Centre Party has been a driving force for phasing out nuclear power in Sweden .
The decision to shut down the nuclear power station at Chernobyl will be carried out .
In our opinion , the EU should not subsidize the construction of other reactors as compensation for this .
We therefore oppose EU aid for the Khmelnitsky 2 and Rovno 4 reactors in the Ukraine and that is why we have voted against the resolution .
On the other hand we support efforts at national and EU level which improve the safety of existing reactors .
The energy system must switch as soon as possible to renewable and sustainable sources of energy .
Azzolini report ( A4-0252 / 97 )
I should like to express our group 's support for the Azzolini report , since the cultural field encourages direct and indirect employment , promoting the survival and creation of small and medium-sized enterprises connected with the cultural sector , and offering prospects for the creation of employment .
I should also emphasize that tourism and culture reinforce each other and , with our help , can increase the effects of structural funds intervention on employment .
Regrettably , the cultural projects financed by Community structural policy only represent 3 % , which is too low if you consider the influence of culture on regional development and the achievement of economic and social cohesion .
So the new Treaty on European Union should include a section to promote explicit support for cultural projects , and increase the number of Community regional development initiatives which have cultural aspects , with the aim of strengthening the link between the structural funds and cultural action itself .
Finally , I should like to stress that local and regional bodies should continue to play an important role , to ensure good results from the European Union 's development strategy , based on culture and the creation of employment .
We are voting for the Azzolini report on the link between cohesion policy and culture and the promotion of employment for a number of reasons , and we highlight the following :
1.For the first time an effort is being made to have a more systematic and coherent approach to the enormous potential in conservation of cultural and natural heritage , whether rural or urban , national , regional or local , and cultural investments in general , for sustainable development , defence of identity , and to combat desertification and exclusion.2.The current foot-dragging over this approach and the inadequate funding - specifically funding of structural measures , still dogged by an inadequate and indeed restrictive regulation , moreover - are recognized and there needs to be a change as soon as possible , and preferably in the current financial framework .
This must all be done without prejudice to the presentation of proposals and guidelines with a view to improving awareness and empowering synergies between cohesion policies , culture and employment.3.The importance of preventing excessive interpretation or identification between the tourist industry and the promotion of cultural policies is recognized , but we would like to stress this to make it even clearer .
Without prejudice to a desirable and useful link between tourism and culture , it would certainly be perverse and profoundly limiting if support for cultural promotion were to be conditioned by and / or subordinated to the strategies of the tourist industry.4.Attention is drawn to the consequences that the budget cuts required for fulfilment of the nominal convergence criteria are likely to have by weakening or reversing the growth trend in employment in cultural activities , as these depend , at least in part , on government finance , whether national or regional.- Kestelijn-Sierens report ( A4-0257 / 97 )
I am not particularly impressed by this report which is full of clichés .
It goes without saying that no sensible person would oppose equal rights for men and women .
But just as obviously I am not in favour of all kinds of quota regulations that all in all are rather degrading to women .
When , for example , I hear several speakers in the debate this morning complaining about the fact that there are still far fewer girls than boys in technical education - and that something must be done about it - then I do wonder whether we actually know the difference between ' equal opportunities ' and ' equal treatment ' .
With regard to combining family and working life , my party in Flanders has for many years been arguing in favour of a proper carer 's wage that would give one of the two parents the opportunity to bring up and take care of the children at home .
It should be a real choice , based on real free will and no longer on financial necessities .
Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens report goes a long way in many respects , but as far as parental leave is concerned , it gets stuck in the well-worn paths .
That of course has everything to do with the fact that bringing up children in the family may nowadays no longer be considered as valuable and socially essential work and that women who - voluntarily - choose this path are actually regarded with some pity .
Essentially , I regret that the very important section on work and family life has got bogged down in political correctness .
Kokkola report ( A4-0251 / 97 )
On the Kokkola report ( A4-0251 / 97 ) on the Commission communication on incorporating equal opportunities for women and men into all Community policies and activities and on the KestelijnSierens report on the Commission 's annual report on equal opportunities for women and men in the EU 1996 ( A40257 / 97 ) .
I and many British Conservative Members of the European Parliament wholeheartedly support the principle of equal opportunities for women and men and agree that mainstreaming is a valuable tool in helping to put that principle into practice .
We welcome the increasing recognition of the problems experienced by women in particular and the increasing efforts being made at all levels to remedy the situation .
We are not convinced , however , that the best way to achieve an equal representation of women in decision-making , for example , is through artificial discrimination of the sort proposed in both the Kokkola and Kestelijn-Sierens reports .
The fixing of temporary quotas , though perhaps attractive in the short-term , is not the answer .
We consider the suggestion in the Kokkola report that Commission working groups and expert committees should be made up of equal numbers of men and women to be particularly impractical and unhelpful .
We firmly believe that appointments to such positions should be made on merit and qualification .
To impose so-called positive discrimination in the way suggested may have the short-term benefit of increasing the figures of female representation in decision-making bodies .
In the long-term , however , it could only be detrimental to the position of women in general .
The proposal in the Kestelijn-Sierens report that the Commission should include a gender-impact assessment in its proposals for legislation is equally impractical .
What is needed is practical concrete measures to give women the opportunities to achieve the qualifications and freedoms which will allow them to compete on a fair and equal footing with men on the jobs market and in the decision-making arena - not airy statements of the likely implications of proposed legislation , which in most cases are impossible to define or quantify with any degree of accuracy .
Improvements are needed in many areas , not least with regard to the difficult task of combining work outside the home with family responsibilities .
However , to suggest , as Mrs Kokkola 's report does , that social services , such as care for children and the elderly , school meals and public transport , should be financed by the structural funds , is nothing short of ludicrous .
I am glad that Parliament as a whole voted against this proposal , although I note that British Labour MEPs voted for it .
We also do not believe that it is the Commission 's role to decide how fiscal measures and social security benefit can be used to help bring work in the family into the official economy .
These are all matters which should be dealt with at national , regional and local level in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
The Kokkola and Kestelijn-Sierens reports rightly highlight the difficulties involved in achieving equal opportunities for men and women today and contain some very salient points .
I and my colleagues will vote for these reports because their ultimate aim and motivation is to the benefit of women in Europe .
We nevertheless wish to place on record our regret that they contain some suggestions which are unlikely to help women , and risk bringing the EP 's work for women into disrepute .
Eriksson report ( A4-0201 / 97 )
Mr President , I speak from local experience of the zero-tolerance campaign run in Thurrock in my constituency .
Colleagues from the South Essex Rape and Incest Crisis Line tell me that posters in shops , public houses and at bus-stops enabled the issue of violence against women to be discussed in the open and validated the private experiences of many women for the very first time .
This local project fully supports the extension of zerotolerance campaigns to other European countries , backed up by rape crisis telephone helplines , also absent in many of our countries .
Another local women 's project in my constituency - the Southend Women 's Refuge - also supports this initiative .
I helped them recently to open their new ' dove ' project - an open drop-in counselling centre for women who are victims of domestic violence .
In just a few weeks five new women a day came forward for counselling .
These two local examples show how far sexual violence is a reality for women today .
They fully justify today 's parliamentary decision to respond with a European-wide campaign .
In the multicultural and pluralistic European Union , people clearly find it difficult to show respect for different opinions .
With laughter and scorn , Parliament rejected the opportunity to vote on Mrs Eriksson 's two oral amendments to support active work against pornography and prostitution and to welcome initiatives from Member States concerning the criminalization of the customers of prostitutes .
These are amendments which we would naturally have supported .
That prostitution and pornography are the reason for the misconceptions about women which often lead to rape and beating etc . , is something we are convinced of , and we regret that Parliament did not have the courage to reach a decision on the proposed amendment .
We would also like to stress how important it is that society gives vulnerable women and children help in the form of national legislation , and also in the form of help to take on a new identity , a new area to live in and a new job , and thereby the opportunity to escape their tormentor .
We also call on Member States to give financial support for women 's refuges and for legal aid .
Violence against women is basically a matter of human rights , something which most people claim to defend .
In spite of this , violence against women takes place all over the world and in all social classes .
Making 1999 an EU campaign year against violence against women should focus attention on the problem and help make the issue a topical one in the Member States .
However , this requires sufficient funding to be allocated in the EU 's next budget , and we hope that will happen .
Lenz report ( A4-0258 / 97 )
Mr President , I congratulate Mrs Lenz on her report calling for an end to discrimination against women in advertising .
It is a call that is ignored , derided and considered old-fashioned by the advertising industry .
The advertising industry believes that as long as a sardonic quote or a look can be incorporated into the advert , it is open season for portraying women 's bodies in any derogatory way , to sell anything from cars to underwear .
In my local paper , the Birmingham Mail , I am told that an advertisement is going to be unveiled in Birmingham this week in the form of an electronic , 20-foot-high billboard showing a woman taking off her clothes continuously .
The AA , the Automobile Association , is warning that it could be a source of distraction and could lead to accidents .
I quote this as an example of the lengths to which the advertising industry in Britain is going at present in order to sell products : women in chains to sell cosmetics , women who are overweight portrayed in the most derogatory terms .
Mrs Lenz 's call for self-regulation is a laudable one but I fear that the industry will ignore it .
The European Union institutions must use their combined forces and recognize this as a growing problem in the 1990s .
They must act to provide a Europe-wide code of conduct for the advertising industry in order for this discrimination to be stopped .
Mrs Crawley , I happily allowed you to exceed your time because your previous experience over a number of years as chairman of the Committee on Women 's Rights and your activity in this Parliament give you the right to justify exceeding your speaking time , when the Chair can allow it , and I was very pleased that you were able to complete your remarks .
The Danish Social Democrats are voting for the Lenz report on their own initiative .
Because the media operate across borders , it is necessary to take up this issue at EU level .
It would be desirable for the advertising sector to exercise more self-regulation and to recognize that it is discriminatory to show naked or semi-naked women in advertisements .
If the sector itself is incapable of setting and maintaining certain guidelines for good marketing , it could become necessary to regulate this area at EU level .
That completes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Draft budget for 1998
The next item is the presentation by the Council of the draft budget for 1998 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Commissioner , as required by tradition and by the budget procedure , it is my responsibility to present to this House the draft budget for financial 1998 , as drawn up by the Council on 24 July last .
Mr President , I would like to emphasize that , from the start , this budget procedure has - and I am delighted about that - been marked by excellent and open cooperation between the three institutions .
Before the Council drew up the draft budget , the three institutions undertook to enter into a real and open exchange .
Each wished to show its willingness to listen to the other , and even to go some way down the other 's path , on every occasion possible .
The budgetary procedure laid down by the treaty is a highly significant moment in the collaboration between the three institutions .
The 1993 interinstitutional agreement established the framework .
Since then , the interest in and the need for such cooperation have become clearer from one year to the next .
The launch of the budgetary procedure in 1998 has been , in our view , exemplary in this respect .
Hence , the trialogue on the likely priorities for the forthcoming financial year gave rise on 21 April to in-depth exchanges of views between the Presidency of the Council , the Parliament and the Commission with , as a corollary , the introduction of milestones leading to a number of points of convergence of views .
Subsequently , the trialogue of 26 June last ensured that the Council was in a position to understand Parliament 's principal wishes better .
This further exchange was extremely valuable for the concertation meeting of 24 July , the very day of the Budget Council .
This meeting enabled the parties to set out the points they considered essential , and grapple with the specific difficulties they regarded as inescapably important for this particularly difficult and tough financial year .
Your representatives , Mr President , drew our attention to their priorities for strengthening the measures aimed at encouraging job creation , research and development , preparation of candidate countries for membership and programmes intended for youth and culture , the environmentalization of the budget and the ongoing restructuring of Community administration , in order to ensure greater efficiency and more flexibility in the allocation of resources .
On behalf of the Council , I had the opportunity to emphasize that the institution which I represent was preparing , in the 1998 draft budget , to adhere to the same principles of budgetary rigour as those imposed on themselves and their citizens by the Member States in pursuit of the effort already broadly undertaken in 1997 .
This ad hoc concertation made it possible , in my view , to bring about a significant if not complete convergence of views between the two branches of the budgetary authority , with the help of the Commission , particularly as regards agriculture and fisheries expenditure .
In a word , in my view , these contacts were extremely useful .
As regards the CFSP , and over and above the consensus on the total amount of funding recorded in the 1998 budget , we agreed to continue the consultation which was provided for under the institutional agreement signed on 15 July last .
In the light of the results of this meeting , the Council , as required by its obligations , drew up its draft budget for 1998 .
In order to meet the inescapable requirement for rigour and budgetary discipline , the Council believed that a number of fundamental measures were indispensable .
These were : maintaining the funds in the preliminary draft of the budget under Category 1 of the financial perspectives ; taking into account the current agricultural legislation regarding arable crops and the price package for the 1997-1998 financial year ; a reduction of ECU 1 billion in payment appropriations , as compared with the preliminary draft budget , under Category 2 , ' Structural Action ' ; significant reduction in the payment appropriations for the whole of headings 3 , ' Internal Policy , ' and 4 , ' External Actions , ' with a consistent expression of these in terms of commitment appropriations .
Finally , a very rigorous approach towards administrative expenditure .
Mr President , in the Council 's opinion , all these measures add up to an indissociable whole .
And by the words ' indissociable whole ' , I mean the symmetrical handling of both agricultural expenditure and structural expenditure which , taking into consideration the priorities and concerns of the Council , is and will remain essential .
The Council fundamentally expects and relies on Parliament 's adherence to this strategy .
In this context , the Council noted with satisfaction that , in its orientations regarding budget procedures for 1998 , Parliament recognized and underwrote the need for budget headings to be made in a spirit of maximum realism .
The measures proposed by the Council in its draft budget tend towards that very thing : restricting budgetary allocations to what is strictly necessary , taking account of the realities , but without interfering with the essential policies of the Community , all the while respecting commitments , and in particular those of the Edinburgh European Council .
Mr President , I shall now deal briefly with the essential components of the draft budget drawn up by the Council at first reading .
I shall begin with agricultural expenditure .
In this field , the Council made major changes to the Commission 's preliminary draft .
First , under the overall strategy of making savings which I have just outlined , the Council has decided to maintain the spending envelope planned for the 1998 budget , at the level proposed by the Commission in its preliminary draft budget , that is , ECU 40 , 987 million , an amount which is some ECU 2 , 276 million below the guideline , including the monetary reserve .
Agricultural expenditure is set at ECU 41 , 487 million , a very limited increase of some 0.44 % over the current financial year .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this decision implies a certain number of deeply incisive measures .
To take into account the agricultural regulations in force , the chapter relating to arable crops has been increased by ECU 1 , 353 million , the increase of ECU 55 million arising from the decisions on the price package for the 1997-1998 financial year .
In order to comply with the overall spending envelope , the Council then decided on an across-theboard reduction of some ECU 1 , 408 million on all lines of agricultural expenditure .
It was also decided to place ECU 329 million in the B 040 reserve for additional savings identified by the Commission within the framework of a first updating of forecast expenditure for 1998 .
The Council has thus implemented the provisions discussed at the meeting of 24 July .
The Council most earnestly urges the European Parliament to underwrite this approach .
I say this with all the more conviction as these measures have been taken while awaiting the presentation by the Commission of a rectificatory letter in the autumn , taking into account the updated forecasts of requirements .
I now come to the field of structural actions .
The Council has recorded all the commitment appropriations proposed by the Commission under the structural funds , that is , ECU 3 , 482 million , in line with the final decisions of the Edinburgh Council .
This amount implies substantial growth of 6.14 % .
On the other hand , this is a point which has been widely discussed and debated with representatives of your Committee on Budgets during the ad hoc concertation .
The payment appropriations for this Category have been reduced by ECU 1 billion , a Council decision introducing the second part of its overall savings strategy .
In so doing , the Council wishes to state that such a measure - due to the major difficulties with which we are familiar - should in no way call into question the proper operation of the essential policy financed by such funding . All the more so as the payment appropriations recently made in various sectors .
This is the reason why the Council decided not to entertain the slightest reduction in regard to objectives 1 and 6 of the structural funds and the disadvantaged regions .
The countries which have joined the European Union most recently will therefore not be affected .
The funding decision represents growth of 2.95 % compared to 1997 .
If this is not enough to de-escalate the debate , I would add that the Council has agreed not to touch the cohesion fund .
The cohesion fund was not involved in the across-the-board reduction .
Indeed , the Council accepted all provisions in the preliminary draft budget for the cohesion fund , that is , ECU 2 , 871 million in commitment appropriations , and ECU 2 , 649 million in payment appropriations , hence an increase , as compared with 1997 , of 4.40 % in commitment appropriations , and 13.88 % in payment appropriations .
As regards Community initiatives , the Council decided that the additional allocation of ECU 100 million in commitment appropriations , proposed under the Peace initiative , that is , for the Northern Ireland peace process , would be covered by the envelope of commitment appropriations intended for Community initiatives .
Consequently , the Council deleted the negative reserves written into the preliminary draft budget .
This issue , whose political impact requires no further emphasis , was also the subject of a considerable degree of mutual understanding at our meeting on 24 July .
For all these structural actions , the amounts entered into the draft budget were ECU 33 , 461 million in commitment appropriations and ECU 27 , 400 million in payment appropriations , which have increased by ECU 1 , 980 million or 6.3 % , and ECU 1 , 100 million or 4.18 % , respectively .
In conclusion , Mr President , on structural policy , I invite the European Parliament to adopt an approach directly in line with that of the Council .
As regards internal policies , this year the Council has once again placed the emphasis on the two priority policies of the Community , research and the transeuropean networks .
Hence , the Council accepts all of the commitment appropriations proposed by the Commission for sub-section B6 , i.e. ECU 3 , 476 million , virtually equivalent to the status quo in 1997 .
As regards payment appropriations , the Council decided , in the light of budget constraints , to reduce the proposed amount from ECU 3 , 216 million to ECU 3 , 066 million , an overall reduction of ECU 150 million distributed between the Common Research Centre , in an amount of ECU 5.6 million , and the fourth framework program , in an amount of ECU 144 million .
As regards the transeuropean networks , within the framework of chapter B5-7 , the Council accepted the preliminary draft budget allocations of commitment appropriations for the financial support of transport networks , in an amount of ECU 475 million , a considerable increase over 1997 of ECU 123 million or 35 % for recorded payment appropriations .
Although ECU 27 million below the amount proposed in the preliminary draft budget , the appropriations increased by 56 % .
As regards energy networks , the draft budget is ECU 2 million below the preliminary draft budget for payment appropriations .
In the telecommunications field , the draft budget is slightly down , in both commitment and payment appropriations .
For amounts under this Category as a whole , the Council has recorded substantial amounts , ECU 560 million in commitments , and ECU 413 million in payments , a rise of ECU 95 million in commitment appropriations or more than 20 % , and of ECU 86 million in payment appropriations , or 26 % .
In so doing , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council very clearly expressed its determination to give preference to these two major policies , and to these two major lines of Community action directly influencing growth and hence employment .
Consequently , as regards other internal policies , the Council has been faced with the need - and this you will understand - to make extremely hard choices .
Hence emphasis has been placed on only those policies which are truly important , such as education , vocational training , and youth , which have been granted ECU 325 million in commitment appropriations , and other social actions , which have been allocated ECU 118 million in commitment appropriations .
Priority was also given to policies which are now well established , such as the environment , with ECU 135 million in commitment funds , a rise of 2.45 % ; consumer protection , with ECU 18 million and ECU 16 million , and the internal market , with ECU 207 million and ECU 188 million .
The margin , and this will certainly be of interest to you - as the Parliament from the outset made a tight connection between the margin under Category 15 , for agricultural expenditure , and the expenditures under headings 3 and 4 - the margin left by the Council under this financial prospects Category amounts to a substantial ECU 619 million .
The Council earnestly hopes that the other branch of the budget authority will approve similar measures , and hence adopt the Council 's approach , which restricts itself to realistic budget spending headings , and devoting European taxpayers ' funds solely to those policies which hold out the promise of concrete results .
I now come quickly to the last of the major Community policies financed by the budget , i.e. external actions .
For the whole of sub-section B7 , the Council , aside from its reserve for emergency assistance , has allocated ECU 5 , 476 million in commitment appropriations , and ECU 4 billion 207 million in payment appropriations , a reduction of ECU 145 million in commitment appropriations and of ECU 341 million in payment appropriations .
These overall figures include different special provisions .
In effect , in this field , the Council believes that the budget authority cannot escape its responsibility for restricting the use of the Union 's financial resources strictly to genuine priorities .
So the Council has accepted all the commitment appropriations set out in the preliminary draft budget for the central and eastern European countries , and for third party Mediterranean countries , namely ECU 1 , 125 million and ECU 1 , 142 million respectively , an increase of 15 % , in accordance with the conclusions of the Cannes European Council .
In relation to international fisheries agreements , and in the light of the further information supplied by the Commission in the course of the concertation procedure on obligatory expenditure , the Council accepted a reduction in the amount planned for commitment appropriations of ECU 5 million , the justification for which was exclusively an overestimate in the forecast .
For fisheries and for obligatory payments , the amounts agreed are ECU 292 and ECU 297 million , a payment appropriations increase of 5.7 % and 20.6 % .
Spending in the field of cooperation with Latin America , Asia , and Southern Africa , including South Africa itself , amounted to ECU 730 million in commitments , and ECU 334 million in payment appropriations .
As another essential arm of the policy of cooperation with the independent states of the CIS , these countries were granted ECU 510 million in commitment appropriations , in line with the preliminary draft budget , and ECU 460 million in payment appropriations .
The share for Tacis amounts to ECU 480 million in commitment appropriations , as provided for in the preliminary draft budget , and ECU 445 million in payment appropriations .
Cooperation with former Yugoslavia has been allocated ECU 259 million in commitment appropriations , in accordance with the preliminary draft budget , and ECU 180 million in payment appropriations .
Furthermore , and once again , the draft budget largely accords with the request of the Commission regarding other cooperation actions , ECU 315 million being allocated to commitment appropriations , particularly for actions for the defence of democracy and human rights , both in central and eastern Europe , and more particularly in Yugoslavia , or in the newly independent states , as well as in Mongolia , Latin America , and the Meda zone .
So while on the one hand the Council has been determined to preserve the fundamental policies under Category 4 , by voting for considerable commitment appropriations , it has believed it to be both necessary and its duty to call for further contributions in respect of the payment appropriations required for 1998 , while ensuring respect for the requirements of the financial settlement and the interinstitutional agreement , particularly as regards the costefficiency ratio , the possible payment of the funds voted , and , of course , the existence of the appropriate legal arrangements .
As regards foreign and security policy , the Council has adopted a new nomenclature , using six headings in chapter B 8.O1 , following the interinstitutional agreement between the European Parliament , the Council , and the European Commission , relating to provisions for the finance of the common foreign and security policy , signed on 16 July .
The Council has accepted the funds proposed in the preliminary draft budget , namely ECU 30 million in commitment appropriations , and ECU 20.25 million in payment appropriations , which were the subject of an exchange of views on 24 July last .
The Council has transferred these funds from reserve B 0.40 to the budget lines of the new nomenclature , by application of the interinstitutional agreement .
The remaining margin , under Category 4 of the financial perspectives , amounts to ECU 725 million in the draft budget .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , finally I come to Category 5 of the financial perspectives , that is , expenditure relating to the administrative operation of the Union institutions .
The Council 's decisions in this field are based on the following principles .
Firstly , zero growth for all expenditure relating to Category 5 of the financial perspectives , although this does not necessarily exclude quite unavoidable exceptions to the principle ; there is also a refusal in principle to create new jobs , except when required for enlarging the Union , while functional requirements must be met by the redeployment of existing resources .
The Council has set total administrative appropriations for all institutions , European Parliament and mediators included , at ECU 4 , 301 million , an increase of ECU 18 million , or 0.42 % above the funding agreed in 1997 .
Excluding Parliament 's budget , the overall amount is ECU 3 , 386 million , a reduction of ECU 9.7 million , or 0.29 % compared to the 1997 budget .
Mr President , the Council has held an exchange of views on the impact of funding relating to pensions within the Commission 's operating funds .
The Council is of the opinion that , with the support of the two branches of the budget authority , pensions expenditure should be appropriately shared between the institutions .
Indeed , it is not equitable to abide by the negative growth of 2.4 % for the administrative expenses of the Commission alone , as this is the result of rising expenditure due to the redemption of pension rights accruing under institutional arrangements , but charged to Commission services .
With the delegation led by Mr Detlev Samland , we held in-depth exchanges on this question which , if it were to lead to an agreement between the Council and the European Parliament , would in fact restore to the Commission an amount of some ECU 20 million for the 1998 financial year , on the understanding that the principle of zero growth , as decided by the Council for the other institutions would not be called into question .
Following on from the work of the Council , the margin below the ceiling of Category 5 amounts to ECU 239.7 million .
Here I would like to recall the Council 's wish , already expressed at the time of the budget meeting of 24 July last , to see Parliament become broadly convinced of the need for the rigour which has guided the Council , and to see the administrative expenditures adopted , if possible , at a single reading .
So , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , those are the main elements of the draft budget drawn up by the Council for 1998 .
There is no need to remind you that this final draft , as presented , is shaped by the rigorous measures that the Council has decided upon .
This draft , ladies and gentlemen , is the very opposite of an easy option .
Sacrifices have had to be made by all the Member States , but it must be recognized that the sought-after balance has been achieved through measures which now appear best suited to that major objective , which the Member States are called on to pursue in the domestic field , with a view to the introduction of economic and monetary union .
Furthermore , the Council is perfectly aware of the fact that close collaboration and understanding with your Parliament is essential for the implementation of the balanced budget effort that the Council is proposing .
Mr President , the Presidency will make every effort , throughout the budgetary procedure , and alongside Parliament and the Commission , to finalize a budget which will best serve the interests of the Community .
In conclusion , let me thank all those who have worked in this direction and who will continue to do so in the months to come .
By this , I mean those in the ranks of the Parliament , Mr President , and in particular members of the Committee on Budgets , notably the chairman , Mr Detlev Samland and the two rapporteurs , Mr Tillich and Mr Tomlinson .

On the Commission side , I would also like to thank Mr Erkki Liikanen , in particular , and the departments with responsibility for the budgets , for their excellent collaboration , which the Presidency has been fortunate enough to enjoy throughout the last few weeks .
So , Mr President , that is the summary of the key points of the draft budget for 1998 .
The Council and above all the Presidency remain at the disposal of Parliament to reply to any questions that may be raised .
For my part , Mr President , I thank you for giving me the floor , and for your attention .
Mr President , Mr Fischbach , just a few remarks with regard to the draft Community budget for 1998 .
In general , the Dutch and Luxembourg Presidencies have been , and will certainly continue to be , serious in their efforts to contribute to a rigorous and solid Community budget for 1998 .
The draft budget , however , falls somewhat short in both respects .
The most important sector - agriculture - looks rigorous but relies on changes in estimates .
In other parts the provisions are not sufficient given the commitments of the Union .
As far as agricultural spending is concerned , the key factor in strict budget discipline for the Commission was the proposed cut in per hectare aid for cereal producers .
I can only repeat my regret that the Council has been unable to agree on this or any equivalent real saving measure .
Of course , the Council did not receive much encouragement from Parliament either .
Without any real savings , the efforts of the Council are reduced to cuts in estimates .
At least there is the agreement between the institutions on a rectifying letter before the end of October .
This will make it possible to improve the estimates on the basis of the most up-to-date information .
With regard to payment appropriations for structural funds , the most recent information available to the Commission confirms the amount entered in the preliminary draft budget .
The implementation of the 1997 budget is very high and the available information from Member States indicates ambitious spending targets for 1998 .
With regard to categories 3 and 4 , Parliament will obviously express its own priorities .
The Commission is ready to work with Parliament and the Presidency of the Council to find the most effective contribution the Community budget can make to the November jobs summit .
Nevertheless , the overall outcome for the budget should leave no doubt that all Community institutions accept and support the budgetary rigour which is a prerequisite for the successful start of economic and monetary union .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commissioner 's last remark prompts me to follow on straight away , although I actually intended to deal with this as my final point .
So that the ladies and gentlemen present do not get lost in the Council 's maze of budgetary items and gain the impression that we in the Community will be spending more money in 1998 than in 1997 , I should like to make a few facts clear : the Commission 's budget proposal is about 1.15 % of Community GNP !
For 1992 , six budget years ago , this figure was about 1.20 % as a maximum spending limit .
And the Council has now managed to bring this down from 1.15 % to 1.12 % , thus making it clear that the challenges the Community will face as from the 1998 financial year are really not economic ones .
In the same breath the Commission lays before us Agenda 2000 , in which it presents the introductory phase of the eastward enlargement beginning in 1998 .
The Council furthermore accepts additional cuts for that same financial year , and to top it all the Council tells us : Dear Commission , if you are very good and go along with a proposal to cut funding in Category 2 of the budget - structural policy - then we will give you back ECU 20 million for administrative costs .
Now this is a game that goes beyond the mendacious , and has nothing , absolutely nothing whatever , to do with the challenges facing the Community .
Let me now come to the point I actually meant to start with .
I wanted to praise the President-in-Office of the Council .
The Luxemburg Presidency has been diligent and active . But it is clear from the results of the vote on the first reading of the budget that it does not matter how diligent and active anyone is : if there are some people sitting on the Council who will not agree - and the majority of them will not - then the result is what we have now , namely an inadequate response to the challenges facing the European Union , both from within and from outside the Union .
Mr President-in-Office , I should like to comment on some of the points you raised . First , agricultural policy .
We made you a fair offer which did not come easily to us .
That was not simple on our side of the House , because the budget and agriculture experts have different views .
But we offered to make a cut in expenditure which was not just done with a lawnmower moving horizontally across the agricultural policy expenditure line , but was aimed at the resources that have always been underspent in recent years .
What could be a better solution , than to examine recent years for evidence of where the budget has been consistently unrealistic in the past ?
You had neither the courage nor the willingness of your fellow opposition in the Council to undertake such a cut in expenditure .
You agreed merely to do the simplest thing budget-makers can do , namely , make a horizontal cut across all budget items .
I welcome the fact that you have created a reserve , and we invite you to continue to maintain that reserve , because we wanted it .
We wanted a reserve and we should like it if the reserve were even to grow a little during the months leading up to the second reading of the budget in the European Parliament .
A third point . You have had a field day in that 20 % of the expenditure is where you wanted it , just as it is every year .
That was no surprise to us ; that was nothing new .
We know the budget items after all , including those to be cut ; when you cut Leonardo or Socrates , or when you cut the new voluntary service for young people , none of that is any surprise .
The problem you present us with , however , is that you behave as though you were this European Union 's radical savers .
Where it hits the citizen hardest , that is where you are the radical savers of expenditure !
But here , where the citizen is most indirectly affected , you show the courage to cut expenditure by a thousand million .
When I compare agricultural expenditure and cuts , and compare that with expenditure on youth policy , then in youth policy you are showing 24 times the courage you are showing in agricultural policy !
Mr President , Parliament cannot take that line .
Nor can we take it at the first reading of Parliament 's budget .
We realise that we shall have to apply corrective action to show those we represent that the European Parliament stands for the interests of people .
For us , saving is not an end in itself , but is actually used to achieve the priorities this Parliament has established . That sentence bears repeating .
Throughout the whole debate , whether in my homeland or in the other Member States , whether in relation to monetary union or regardless of monetary union - because we would still have to make savings if there were no monetary union - throughout this whole debate , discussion has only been about saving .
I would like to see the savings discussion at last turn into a discussion of financial management .
After all , saving , in itself , has absolutely no value , whereas there is a lack of an orderly management of the budget , a form to the presentation and implementation of the budget .
You have made it very easy for yourselves by adjourning the debate until next year or the year after , just by drastically reducing the financial resources .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , Mr President of the Council , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
The Council passed its first resolution at its first reading on 24 July following our coordination meeting , and the Council Presidency has today tried to sell us its allegedly good product , as any good PR man should .
But it is not a good product and the objectives of the Council , unlike those of the Commission and the European Parliament , are stamped with the aim of achieving zero growth at all costs .
So far so good .
However , even the Council knows that this concept contains risks .
No other interpretation can be placed on the formal declaration by the Council that , should the budget for 1998 be insufficient in certain policy areas , particularly payments , it would look favourably on a supplementary budget proposal from the Commission .
I beg leave to say that that is very unusual and has nothing to do with serious budgeting .
The Council proposal differs from the Commission proposal for payments by minus ECU 1.8 billion .
For this reason , the European Parliament has asked the Commission for a position statement to see if there is any legal way in which Parliament could accept the budget under these conditions , as in our view there is a real chance in some areas that budgetary provisions for policies arising from the relevant treaties could not be financed .
The individual specialist committees must state their views , hence the reason for this appeal to colleagues in the House .
In 1985 this was the reason for rejecting the budget , and the situation then was similar in every respect .
The Commission said yesterday at the meeting of the Committee on Budgets that there were no basic doubts from their point of view , but that in the area of Category 2 - structural policy - doubts certainly continued to be felt .
On the subject of Category 1 - agricultural policy - Mr Samland , the committee chairman , has already made a firm statement , so I shall not comment on that again .
Just one more thing for my colleagues on the Committee on Agriculture , and for you as President of the Council : in April we came to an agreement regarding agricultural expenditure , and we know that that ad hoc procedure has yet to be concluded .
There is still a lot needing negotiation here , including the resources you have placed in the general reserve .
Now to Category 2 . You spoke about it at length , Mr President-in-Office .
We cannot and will not accept the cut of ECU 1 billion in structural funds payment appropriations .
As long ago as April this year the Commission proved that the outflow of funds had long overtaken the arrears from previous years , and that we were now almost within the budget figures .
The Commission made no secret of the fact that it doubted the legality of its measures regarding cuts in the payment appropriations .
In the tripartite talks on 6 October we expect from you , Mr Council President , and above all from the Commission , a binding proposal on how we should proceed with the peace initiative for Northern Ireland .
Neither the Commission 's proposal nor the proposal from the Presidency of the Council - is acceptable to Parliament .
In the meantime the Commission has also adopted this view and is ready to issue a proposal whereby , regardless of existing initiatives and other programmes , that is , without offsetting against them , appropriations which have not been spent may be made available .
We all want the same thing : to help the people of Northern Ireland in a normal way .
Turning to Category 3 , Mr Samland said of the general situation that every year it is the same , but it is just a little worse this year .
That puts it in a nutshell .
At Amsterdam stress was laid on the need to inform citizens about the Euro and the Treaty of Amsterdam , but these funds appear in the budget marked " reminder ' - which means , for the benefit of those in the public gallery , that the figure is zero .
Had you used this " reminder ' in general information policy , we might have been able to understand it , but you used these funds in the reserves for the Prince initiative , which is concerned with the campaign on the Euro and the Amsterdam Treaty , and thus reduced them by about half .
That is incomprehensible .
I would remind you of a decision you yourselves made in Amsterdam : the European Council emphasizes the paramount importance of providing citizens and business with unlimited information about the single market .
You have cut funds for the single market by ECU 17 million and those for public information , section B-33 , by 50 % .
The same goes for social actions .
On the one hand the European Council stresses yet again the major importance of supporting employment and reducing the unacceptably high level of unemployment in Europe , particularly amongst young people , the long term unemployed and the less skilled . On the other , you promptly cut social action by 25 % !
As regards Category 4 , one is left in principle with the impression that , here too , initiatives have been neglected in favour of zero growth , instead of having a balanced policy for the whole world .
There is no other way of interpreting the fact that you limit your priorities solely to the Mediterranean countries and central and eastern Europe .
In general one may say that the initial attempt , at the end of the debate on the 1998 budget , to target zero growth has become redundant .
Despite the fact that your first reading took place after the Amsterdam Summit , I note that there is no reflection of the importance of employment policy in the premises of the draft budget .
I should like to invite you , as well as the Commission , to join us in searching for solutions .
I know that the Luxemburg Presidency supports that .
So I call on the other 14 Member States : this affects the credibility of us all , after the resolutions you made in Amsterdam .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , I should first like to welcome Mr Fischbach .
I am sure he will understand if I say to him that I welcome him more than I welcome his message .
I learned at an early age that it may sometimes be necessary to kill the message without shooting the messenger .
In the discussions we had at the trialogue I made one undertaking on behalf of Parliament , one that Parliament had already committed itself to .
That was to honour the arrangements we had always informally agreed to , namely that Parliament would not take more than 20 % of Category 5 appropriations .
Last night I had a discussion with Parliament 's Bureau and we concluded the modalities by which that will happen .
There will be a cut of some ECU 4.5 million in the first reading of Parliament 's budget that will secure the necessary cuts and will take Parliament , as we always said we would , below the 20 % of Category 5 appropriations .
Those cuts will come principally in Chapter 11 of Parliament 's budget and the principal contributory factor will be the beneficial impact of exchange rates between the ECU and the Belgian franc which makes substantial savings possible .
Having said that , the budgetary problems facing us as a Parliament are largely the consequence of decisions taken by the Council itself .
If we look at Parliament 's budget and why we ever had the problem about going above 20 % of Category 5 appropriations , we must look at those three places in Europe that have one thing in common - Edinburgh , Maastricht and Amsterdam .
The rather ludicrous decision taken at one and reaffirmed at another are now encapsulated in a draft treaty at the third which says Parliament shall meet like gypsies round Europe and which forces us to create a surplus of hemicycles , an abundance of offices at public expense .
These chaotic and expensive organizational surpluses are something the Council has to accept responsibility for .
Over and above that , when we sought to make the provision of those necessary buildings at the lowest possible cost , Council itself produced the obstructions to us doing so .
The fact that Parliament will have to buy its D3 building in Brussels by using a special purpose vehicle might be to the advantage of the Luxembourg taxpayer who will receive certain benefits from the additional taxes we pay in Luxembourg , but it will cost the European taxpayer about ECU 1 million more in year one than if we had followed the Commission 's proposal of direct Community financing of the acquisition of our buildings .
So , the acquisition of buildings in consequence of those decisions has been one problem , but of course in our budget for next year the disposal of our surplus buildings is the other side of the same problem .
I suppose , as rapporteur on Parliament 's budget , I have felt precious little like a budget rapporteur and rather more like a peripatetic estate agent , trying to dispose of our surplus physical assets on whoever might be interested in them .
Certainly , as far as Parliament is concerned , next year 's budget is seriously contingent upon our ability to dispose of the leases of Belliard I and II building and of the Van Maerlant buildings .
Parliament will accept that challenge , will do those things , will produce its budget and will live within a 20 % of category 5 ceiling .
Having said that , I do not think there is anybody in Parliament , as we go through the necessary cuts to make that possible , who will weep crocodile tears for those who say that this is a necessary contribution towards those Member States who are having to curtail their expenditure in order to meet Maastricht convergence criteria : many of us see the generosity with which they can treat some of their domestic spending programmes and the rather parsimonious approach they adopt towards Europe 's budget .
Parliament will play its part this year but we do it in the context of a rather boringly constrained budgetary ceiling which is unnecessary if we are going to meet the aspirations of the citizens of Europe .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , I seek the floor very briefly , and do so first to thank Mr Samland and the two rapporteurs , Mr Tillich and Mr Tomlinson , who have spoken in this debate .
Mr Liikanen has replied very concisely and I have nothing to add .
I will just say that the message from the Members of Parliament , the chairman and the two rapporteurs , has come across loud and clear .
But I would like to qualify some of the comments that have just been made .
Obviously I accept that we are arguing very openly , but it must be remembered that even the President of the Council , and all Presidents of the Council , who are either ministers of finance or budget ministers , know perfectly well that the art of budgeting is not to spend more , but to spend more wisely .
I think that this is an exercise to which we are committed on a daily basis in our Member States .
So I do assure you that we are extremely attentive to what you have said .
However I would say to Mr Samland - who is perfectly aware of this , moreover , but did not wish to say so here - that expenditure now amounts to some 1.15 % of Community GDP , whereas three or four years ago , it was around 1.20 % .
It should not be forgotten that the basis of calculation has changed over the last three or four years , and that the GDP of Member States , at Community level , has increased by 2.5 % .
So we must compare like with like , and it should not be insinuated that , in the final analysis , the Community is spending less than it was some four years ago .
We all of us know that constraints have changed , and that in a certain number of fields , the urgent considerations are such , that we cannot indulge in the luxury of making savings to the detriment of the priority interests of the Community , and hence of the European Union itself .
I would also like to tell Mr Tillich that we are well aware of the fact that these deletions from the budget , and even these reductions of payment appropriations are a matter for discussion , but I do not accept that there should be any doubts cast on the determination of the Council to honour the obligations of the European Union .
We made it crystal clear at the Budget Council - and I think Parliament knows this and appreciates it at its full value - that we were prepared to give favourable consideration to any proposal from the Commission , in the event that the payments were not enough to cover commitments entered into .
I think that that is a very important point , and - although I risk the reproach that in the final analysis the Council has made a declaration which does not match its willingness and determination to achieve zero growth in the 1998 budget - I would say that the Council is sufficiently realistic and reasonable to share Parliament 's view of all the legal obligations of the European Union .
I will end by saying that the Presidency of the Council is dependent on the Parliament .
It is now up to the Parliament to shoulder its responsibilities .
I await with impatience the discussions that will take place in this hall on 21 October .
I shall certainly be here .
I shall listen very carefully to Parliament 's message , and we shall then see .
But there is no need to feel sorry for the Luxembourg Presidency : we are very small , but we are quite strong enough to channel the Council 's debate in the right direction .
The debate is closed .
Common organization of the market in bananas
The next item is the statement by the Commission on the position of the World Trade Organization panel on bananas .
- ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the World Trade Organization 's appeals panel recently presented its report on the common organization of the market for bananas .
Following the negative decision of the panel which was set up by the WTO at the request of the USA , Ecuador , Guatemala , Honduras and Mexico , the European Community went to appeal .
The report will be presented to the next meeting of the WTO committee for resolving disputes on 25 September .
I cannot disguise the fact that the European Commission is very disappointed with this report , because in it the appeals panel reaches the conclusion that several aspects of the COM for bananas cannot be reconciled with WTO regulations .
Amongst the measures which cannot be reconciled with the WTO Treaty , according to the ruling , are those intended to meet our obligations to protect the less stable economies amongst ACP states .
Banana exports to the EC are an important pillar of the economy in these countries , and a guarantee of their political stability .
The composition of the import rules , too , which were intended to further the marketing of banana products from the EC and ACP states , were not considered to be in accordance with WTO regulations , as were aspects of our agreement with the most important countries of origin which were part of the agriculture chapter in the Uruguay Round .
The European Commission fears that the appeal panel 's ruling could have very wide repercussions on the interpretation not only of the banana regulation , but of a whole range of important WTO regulations affecting the obligations and policies of all WTO members going well beyond the banana regulation .
The Commission also wonders , with some concern , how the ruling could affect current banana regulations .
The Commission is currently undertaking a careful assessment of the consequences of the WTO process .
Having regard to the European Union 's international obligations we shall then arrive at a balanced view of the content and effects of the ruling .
In this the obligations of the EU towards our own banana producers , the ACP countries within the Lomé Agreement , and the effects of the Uruguay Round on our relations with Latin American exporting countries will have to be given equal consideration .
Mr President , the truth is that Mr Fischler 's words are not very reassuring .
If I have understood his speech correctly , he is disappointed with and concerned about the ruling on the common organization of the market , and he says the Commission is worried , but I think this was the right time for the Commissioner to have told us a little more .
As he correctly reminded us , the appeal decision will probably be ratified on 25 September , and then the Commission has a month to decide what to do - whether to implement the decision or propose some type of compensation .
We would have liked the Commissioner to have given us a little more guidance today , because something he mentioned only briefly seems very important to us . Namely , that the banana regime is not just a deal for the Community and the ACP states .
As he well knows , for many mountainous countries it is virtually the only export , and it has a decisive influence on their social , economic and political structure . So for many ACP states , raising questions about this regime can mean raising questions about their very economy and political life .
That is why it is so important for us to emphasize this .
And we urge the Commission to do something more than worry about being disappointed .
We want the Commission to tell us what solutions it is proposing in order to redress the situation , which is of vital importance for peripheral areas of the Community and for third countries with which we have long maintained relations .
I repeat , disappointment is not enough .
We want the Commission , as the executive , to be able to offer positive responses for the future of something which is tremendously important for the economy and the social and political life of other countries .
We want a little more effort from the Commission on this problem .
Mr President , Commissioner , just as in Chronicle of a Death Foretold by Gabriel García Márquez , we find that the omens which have been hanging over Community and ACP state banana production in recent years are being fulfilled almost inexorably .
It is my duty to report , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , that our group accepts ( indeed , we could not do otherwise ) the appeal panel 's ruling on the common organization of the market for the Community 's banana import regime .
This report contains elements which are extremely negative for Community agricultural and commercial interests - not just for the banana sector - as Mr Fischler himself has admitted this afternoon .
I should also say that we welcome the Commission 's stance , which was made known here at a part-session last May , and its subsequent actions .
Unfortunately , these actions have not been successful in the way that was intended .
And in this respect I must also express our regret that the Commission failed to adopt other initiatives earlier , to change tack in view of the events .
Nobody can deny that the panel of experts which produced the World Trade Organization 's preliminary report last spring was highly qualified technically .
But nor would anybody try to claim that those three experts , from Hong Kong , Switzerland and Australia , were previously pro-Community .
I wonder whether we should not have taken steps to prevent an American citizen very close to the Government of the United States , and previously linked with it , being appointed chairman of the appeal panel on the common organization of the market in bananas .
I am not passing judgement on intentions , Commissioner , only drawing attention to certain facts .
It is only fair to acknowledge now that perhaps more could have been done .
Some of us warned that that was the case , but obviously without success .
However , we are not here today to feel sorry for ourselves .
We must try to be constructive and look for solutions .
We are aware that the common organization of the market in bananas is the result of a complex legislative procedure which seeks a balance between interests which do not always coincide .
We have many arguments in our favour , Mr Fischler .
The current regime has meant that both producers and exporters , including important American distribution companies , benefit from the European market .
The European banana market is the largest in the world , because of both its volume and its prices .
Current guidelines guarantee access of the dollar-banana to markets which were previously closed to it , yielding prospects of considerable growth in the future .
Not only does the maintenance of Community and ACP state banana production guarantee the survival of a source of economic resources and employment for less privileged regions and nations , but any of the known alternatives is worse , and probably more expensive , for the Community budget .
The Commission now has some time - only a little - and several possible courses of action .
It seems reasonable for it to have announced that it is important to have a technical report to assess the consequences of the Geneva ruling before taking any of these .
But the time has come for negotiation . A way must be found for dialogue , to find a point of contact between the content of the COM decision ( especially those parts relating to the licensing system ) , and the maintenance of the banana production and income levels of European and ACP farmers .
In seeking and achieving these aims , Commissioner , you and the Commission have the support of our group and probably of a large majority of this House .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , like the earlier ones , this latest diktat from the World Trade Organization in this banana war is deeply disagreeable in tone , not to say unacceptable to the European Union .
The Commissioner has informed us of the bureaucratic terms of the diatribe , which is his job .
However , as rapporteur for this Parliament on the common organization of the banana market , it is up to me to mention another aspect of the problem , which cannot be reduced to mere economics and law .
Production of bananas in ACP countries , overseas territories and the Community represents more than an item in the trade balance ; it is a crucial factor in general economic and social equilibrium .
The banana is an endemic crop in these countries , it represents the history of the inhabitants but it may have no future if this absurd trade agreement continues to be escalated .
The high cost of production and marketing means ACP bananas are not competitive on the world market with dollar area bananas , predominantly produced in South America and marketed by United States multinationals .
These bananas have a monopoly of the United States market and are also conquering the world market .
In Europe they have 70 % of the market , compared with 30 % for Community and ACP bananas .
At least this has been the case up to now as , with the contesting of the recent common organization of the market , the trend will be to remove even this small portion , which the poorest depended or depend on thanks to the compensation mechanism .
The World Trade Organization states that those who fail to be competitive must stop producing bananas , use them themselves and grow something else .
It is difficult to imagine diversification with such traditional products , and it would also be like changing the cultural connotations , as well as the environmental and economic ones , of entire regions .
In addition , it would legitimize a highly speculative system .
In Ecuador the growers get $ 3-4 a box which is then resold at $ 22-23 .
An ACP box has a cost price of $ 8-9 and is sold for $ 16-18 .
Besides , dollar area bananas also rely on a heavy reduction in duties .
The compensation to ACP countries serves to guarantee the survival of this crop .
I am not even sure if the item involved merits a trade agreement .
Try asking that in Guadeloupe , Martinique , the Dominican Republic or the Canaries .
Finally , Mr Commissioner , Somalia .
Not one of the clauses contained in the COM document approved by this Parliament has yet been applied .
The endemic state of civil war continues to prevent the export of Somalia 's quota .
And the absurd thing is that , on the one hand , we do not help them to be self-sufficient , but on the other we rush to help them with humanitarian aid and even then , Mr Commissioner , it is always the American multinationals who gain .
Mr President , when we endorsed the GATT Agreement it implied that we also agreed to an independent body to settle disputes .
We also knew at that time that certain statements before this panel could turn out badly for us .
That is now clearly the case , but I think there is no alternative but to respect it .
The first question that arises is what the Commission proposing to do .
For my group , how banana producers in the European Union itself will be affected is important .
We feel that these producers must be treated in the same way as other producers of agricultural products in Europe .
The second point , if I have understood correctly , is whether or not this decision adversely affects the Lomé Agreements .
If that is the case , then it is important to know what reference quantity the Commission will use .
The decision says we must use the pre-1991 quantities .
What exactly are they ?
Before 1991 there was no common market in bananas .
How will this quantity be accurate ?
With regard to the Lomé Agreement , it is also important to know what sort of compensation may be available for the ACP countries .
Can they diversify their economies with European support ?
And finally , Mr President , perhaps it is still possible to devote some attention in the Commission 's statement to a point that I also mentioned in May and that is , is it possible to give rather more preference to ' fair-crate ' bananas , bananas which have been produced in an ecologically sound way and in a socially acceptable manner ?
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the United States do not produce bananas , nor do they export them .
So it is to defend the interests of the great banana companies that exploit Latin America and dominate the world market that they have made a complaint to the WTO against the Community banana imports system .
The WTO appeal panel has just confirmed the initial conclusions , by rejecting the Commission 's appeal .
This decision is unacceptable .
It proves once again that , as in the case of hormone meat , the WTO is solely guided by the blind pursuit of free trade , without any concern for the interests of the poorest , the developing countries and Community producers .
It must be accepted that the WTO ruling was favoured by divisions between the Member States , which weakened the Community position .
From this point of view , the German leaders played a very harmful role by disputing the common organization of the banana market , even before the Court of Justice .
Just like German livestock breeders or cereal growers , Community banana producers have a right to have their incomes protected and Community preference applied .
Commissioner Brittan has just called on the Member States to comply with WTO decisions , by accepting the good with the bad .
This is not the position of our group .
In agriculture , be it bananas or hormone meat , there is only the bad and the very bad .
In its proposed resolution , our group insists anew that neither the European Union nor the Member States should give in to the dictates of the WTO , and that they should do all in their power in order to protect the vital interests of the Community producers and the ACP countries .
What do you intend to do , Mr Commissioner ?
For our part , we say we must refuse to change the banana COM , just as we must refuse to pay financial compensation .
By resisting the WTO ruling , it will be possible to open the way to revising the mechanisms of that organization and its procedures for settling disputes so as to take more account of social , health , cultural and environmental concerns .
Mr President , even in 1994 , following the decision of the GATT group of experts , it should have been clear that the common organization of the banana market did not conform to the rules of free international trade .
The GATT and the WTO are blind to the requirements of consumer protection , environmental protection and social standards .
The GATT agreement obeys only the logic of unfettered free trade .
Even in December 1994 , we Greens rejected the WTO Basic Agreement in this Parliament , and were half criticized for it .
So it is nice to see that some of those in the grand coalition of uncritical WTO-sympathisers have in the meantime found their way to a somewhat more realistic assessment of the World Trade Organization .
There are some here in Parliament , and - if Mr Fischler can be believed - there are apparently some in the Commission .
The WTO threatens the development policy aims of the Community .
I am afraid the ruling against the common organization of the banana market will become a precedent for condemning all cooperation with ACP states .
The Lomé Agreement is subject to a WTO exemption only until February 2000 .
Then the World Trade Organization regulations will force a basic modification to the development cooperation of states in the European Union .
I do not mean by this that the banana COM was perfect in every way .
Clearly it did not only serve development policy objectives , but because of the system of licensing allocations , it also fuelled competition for market share between the banana multinationals .
Quotas should be allocated to producing countries , not to importing companies .
Small and medium businesses , and fair trade initiatives in particular , need appropriate access to the European market .
An explicit fair trade quota , as has always been demanded by the European Parliament , must at long last be introduced .
By just such a generously tailored quota for production resulting from social and environmental agreements , EU development policy objectives can be made more visible .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , we were all really eager to see what was going to happen and , following your brief speech , we are all a bit disappointed .
On behalf of our group , I want to express our definite support of any initiative the European Commission may take , whether legal or administrative , in order to be able to maintain and improve the Community banana regime and thereby guarantee the interests of our producers and those of the ACP states .
We must prevent the weight of the North American multinationals , whose only aim is to obtain high economic benefits , from weakening and destroying a sector with as many social repercussions as the banana sector .
This is a sector whose importance for certain regions of the Union ( such as the Canary Islands and the French overseas departments ) and certain ACP countries goes beyond economics and simple profit , since it represents their system of survival .
I sincerely believe , Commissioner , that this aspect should be kept very much in mind .
Mr President , Commissioner , it appears that the WTO panel is preparing to decide against Europe and its ACP partners on 25 September , as regards the Community regime for banana imports . Such a decision would be extremely serious .
It would make perfectly clear , to those who wish to deny it , the scale of the perverse effects of the WTO , which operates as an exclusive club for the rich countries .
This decision would indeed call into question a unique form of cooperation , which is both original and effective , and based on a system of commercial preferences arising from the determination of the European Union to develop the economies of its partners in Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific , by setting great store on high value-added sectors , such as bananas , the spin-off from which has a positive effect on their economies .
We know the conditions under which bananas from South America , which already represent 75 % of total exports , are produced .
They bear no relation to the conditions which prevail in ACP areas .
I am thinking in particular about the French Overseas Departments and Territories , where social standards are those of mainland France .
How can they be compared to the huge South American plantations , which are regularly criticized by human rights associations for their coercive working methods .
The results of an award against the European Union would be disastrous in many respects .
It would call into question the bonds of trust which those involved in cooperation between the ACP and the European Union have forged over long years , sweeping away the obligations that we had entered into as part of the banana COM .
It would cause the greatest difficulty to the whole of the economy of several of these countries , where banana production can represent as much as 60 % of GDP , because the banana regime is a factor in political stability .
The social consequences would be disastrous , both among our ACP partners and among the banana producing territories of the European Union .
So is the Commission going to allow the WTO to dismantle the cooperation that we have built up with the ACP countries ?
After hormones , veal and bananas , will the Commission allow a continuous and systematic undermining of our arrangements by the WTO , or will the Commission begin to ask serious questions about the way the WTO panels operate and the way they are made up ?
I have received six motions for resolutions under Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , the banana story is drawing to a close . But this is not a happy ending .
The story is an example .
It is not just a matter of an import licence arrangement , a purely technical dossier , it is yet another stage in the great transatlantic war for the control of plant and animal proteins , for the control of the food weapon , with all the familiar stages in that war : wheat war , maize war , genetically modified organisms war , meat war .
Sometimes we win , or we gain a little time .
For somatotropin , for hormone milk , the codex alimentarius has granted us one extra year .
For non-pasteurized cheese , we have one extra year .
For mineral water , we have been able to impose our definition , which is stricter than the wide definition in the United States .
The water will really have to come out of the ground , and not be a sort of mineral Coca-Cola .
But on hormone meat and on bananas , well , we are losing .
We know the story : Mexico , Ecuador , Honduras and Guatemala , four states enslaved to the United States , have decided to make a complaint - all the others have made an agreement with us - supported by the United States who have no direct interest in the business , except that these countries are where Chiquita , Delmonte and Dole have taken up residence .
These banana-dollar billionaires say that they are the victims of discrimination .
They dispute the preferential regime granted to the poor people of Africa , the Caribbean or the Pacific , and in so doing they are calling into question the policies of the European Union , and even the European Union itself , which might possibly be the least negative aspect of this whole affair .
So first our cooperation and development policy is called into question .
Lomé IV is being disputed .
This is the preferential regime granted to the Cameroons and the Ivory Coast , which goes back to General de Gaulle in 1960 .
It was also one of the conditions of the Common Market .
All these small growers , who have a low level of technology , only account for 7 % of the Community market , some 850 , 000 tonnes as against the 2 , 500 million tonnes offered to the North American multinationals , and all of this is supposedly getting in the way of the giants .
This is a perfect expression of economic imperialism , which has gone so far that compensation is being rejected .
Even if we were prepared to pay compensation , the United States would not take it .
They want crushing domination .
Our regional policy for the ultraperipheral regions is called into question because we produce at ECU 50 a day in the Canaries , Madeira , Guadeloupe and Martinique , whereas the multinationals produce at a cost of ECU 50 per month , with their slaves .
With regard to Honduras , I would remind you that the Honduras army is in multinational hands , and that when the Honduras tax authorities wish to levy taxes on a crate of bananas , they are forbidden to do so .
Our budget policy is called into question .
Indeed , at ECU 75 of customs duties per tonne , multiplied by 2 , 500 million tonnes , under the pretext of the accession to EU membership of Austria , Sweden and Finland - this all adds up to a gift of ECU 2 billion in banana duties .
I don 't know where Mrs Gradin is , who shows such concern about the financial interests of the European Community and about fraud , but here is a wonderful case of fraud , fraud on the weight of the crates , not to mention the German political parties , who may not be lily-white with regard to Chiquita .
Finally , our sovereignty over standards is being called into question , our legal sovereignty . European law has had judgement made against it in the first instance , and in the second instance , in Geneva , by a small panel made up of Australians , Swiss and British .
The superiority of Community law is called into question , by which I mean the law of the Court of Justice of the European Community , the Costa decision against ENEL in 1963 , where Community law prevailed over national law .
Now Community law is dominated by Geneva law .
This is the victory of globalization over regionalism . And the single currency , may I say with your permission , would not have changed things very much .
We have been despoiled of our national sovereignty , in favour of Brussels .
Brussels is abrogating its rights in favour of Geneva .
What is left of the European Union sovereignty , before it has even been constituted ?
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his comments and I especially welcome those comments which , in effect , suggested that the repercussions will go far beyond bananas .
That is true .
This ruling spells despair for many ACP countries .
They now have a tremendous fear of future WTO rulings .
Unlike some of my colleagues I did not expect too much from the Commissioner 's statement at this point .
The reason I say that is because I hope he is still discussing with his colleagues what approach to take to arbitration on 25 September .
What we need to know is whether the Commission is determined to get as good a result as it can .
We now have to make the best of a bad job .
The ruling has been made , whether we like it or not .
What we now have to do is try to salvage something from it .
When Mrs Kinnock , Mr Thomas and I were in the Windward Islands in May it was quite obvious that the producers there were living in fear - and I mean fear - of the WTO ruling .
Now that it has appeared , goodness knows what they feel like .
They said to us that they accept that liberalization and globalization are inevitable in the future .
But what they need more than anything is time - time to adjust to a very competitive market ; in some cases it will take at least five years and in other cases it will take a far longer period until they can compete with dollar-banana producers .
I therefore ask the Commissioner to take that on board .
It is essential .
If he can get those types of concessions from the arbitration deal on 25 September he will have done the Windward Islands a tremendous favour .
Parliament wants to help .
We want to play our part .
We will do so and we will support you ; but we need a commitment from the Commission that this is a real attempt to salvage something from this deal .
I am afraid that in this case free trade means that those countries are free to see their economies and their democracies actually collapse .
This arbitration outcome is essential .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have been discussing the banana regulations in this Parliament for a considerable time and many of the arguments that have been presented ever since I entered Parliament , rather more than three years ago , have been repeated today .
The debate in this House has moved on a little , however , and I want to emphasize that for anyone who has not entirely grasped that fact .
In May we held a discussion about the first WTO ruling .
Our debate at that time was very heated , and so was the discussion in our delegation ; there were even some who felt that the ruling was unacceptable .
The majority decided , however , not to support the wording that the ruling was unacceptable , and I made sure that the liberal group did not support that move either at that time .
So some movement has entered into the debate .
If you now read the motion by the Group of the European People 's Party , many of you may be surprised that the PPE of all groups is calling for the Commission to present a proposal to amendment the common organization of the market .
Why has this happened ?
Obviously it is primarily due to the WTO .
I believe we have no alternative but to initiate an amendment , because there is no further appeals procedure at the WTO .
Many may perhaps think that we could now offer compensation , but that is certainly not correct .
Those who have complained can make us a proposal for compensation .
If they do not do so - and that appears to be the case - then debating compensation is not an alternative .
The only alternative would be to call the whole WTO into question , but I do not think the majority of this House would want that .
Although the WTO could be further developed , social and environmental standards could be more strongly represented , a majority of this House would not essentially question the existence of the WTO .
For my second point I should like to mention the reason why we should like to see the market regulation amended .
But it is my personal opinion , and there is still heated debate in my parliamentary group about it .
I believe it exhibits important weaknesses .
This is not something I know nothing about : I have investigated the situation in Guadeloupe and St. Lucia , as well as in Latin America .
This is in no way a case of the good guys being in the ACP and European producer states , and the baddies in Latin America .
That is simply not so .
In Ecuador there are more small producers than in the whole of the Windward Islands put together .
In Ecuador 60 % of the bananas are marketed by small producers , and they particularly suffer from lack of access to the European market .
They are coming under even more pressure from the multinationals .
This cannot represent the intention of the initiator .
I feel , therefore , that it is high time for the COM to be amended .
The concept of fair trade as proposed by Mr Miller and Mr Kreissl-Dörfler should in my view receive greater emphasis , regardless of the origin of the bananas , as far as that is possible .
In any case , we cannot avoid an amendment , and I am pleased that here , too , the debate is moving forward .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am sure I need not remind you that the Community regulation setting up the COM in bananas is the result of a compromise respecting a balance between the interests of the various sources of Community supply ( ACP and dollar area ) , and takes into account earlier commitments of the European Union , namely Community preference , preferential access for ACP state bananas , and GATT rules with regard to third countries .
The facts available to us , and your speech , Commissioner , lead to the conclusion that the COM in bananas will disappear .
If such is really the case , it is not just the banana marketing system that is under threat , but the entire Community banana policy .
Aside from the question of Community preference and privileged access for our traditional partners , there is a point that I , for my part , would wish to raise , and which , unless there is an agreement between ourselves and those who are attacking our production , would finally condemn European production . This is the question of the distribution of licences , as laid down in regulation 404 / 93 .
The distribution of licences for imports of the allowable quota was set up to establish a balance , in the European Union market , between different types of operator .
If the basic regulations of 404 / 93 had granted operators import certificates and customs quotas only on the basis of purchases of Latin American bananas made in the three years prior to the COM , B operators , who had never in the past purchased these bananas , would not , on the basis of that criterion , have had access to the import certificate .
By setting out a specific provision , namely the granting of 30 % of import licences for Latin American bananas to B operators , the basic regulations precisely avoided the maintenance in the EU single market of the de facto monopoly granted prior to the COM by operators who had always marketed exclusively Latin American bananas .
The maintenance of this monopoly would have been all the more unlawful as Latin American bananas are less costly and would furthermore have been the only ones under the regulations to benefit from the increase in consumption of bananas in the Community market , due to the restrictions on deliveries of Community and ACP bananas , while the customs quota is adaptable in the light of increase in consumption .
Also , everything must be done to maintain the banana COM in its current form .
Banana producers have a right , under the same heading as other agricultural producers , to support from the Union and to the benefits of Community preference .
Production in the Caribbean , which is regularly hit by natural disasters , will not survive if the principle of distribution of licences is not protected .
I would like to remind you that in the ultraperipheral regions , the banana is the driving force in the economy .
Mr President , the rejection of the European Union 's efforts to retain the banana regime spells utter disaster to small banana-growers in the Caribbean , in Europe and elsewhere .
This decision demonstrates how the world free trade system , which we are building , enables rich and powerful multinationals to destroy the livelihoods of poor but hard-working people .
The producers who have been hit did not represent any threat to the principal banana-growers and suppliers on the Latin American continent .
The plantation workers of Chiquita , Del Monte and the other multinationals will not receive much benefit .
Their remuneration is poor , their conditions are bad and their rights to organize TUs are limited .
At this stage it is difficult to see what can be done to defend the victims of this situation .
I had hoped that the Commission would spell out the options more carefully .
Every possible effort must be made to provide help if the changes go through .
But we should also consider all alternative means of supporting the banana industry in these circumstances .
We should consult the governments and representatives of all those affected and go back to the World Trade Organization and say that this decision is totally unacceptable .
More must , however , be done if this results in the ruination of small economies , increased poverty , a boost to drug production and criminality .
We must seek to put in hand measures to modify the system itself .
The Commission , Parliament and the Council should come together to formulate a programme , perhaps convening a conference and conducting a campaign to safeguard the interests of all small producers at risk , of whom the small banana producers are typical .
And , we must , of course , continue to the end to give every possible support to those people who are the victims of this decision .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the European Union has a priority obligation to defend , at all times and in all circumstances , the interests of the Member States and their regions , and also to honour the commitments it has made with third countries .
This position is all the more compelling when it involves the defence of the interests of European regions which are heavily penalized by negative structural factors in their economies and limited development , aggravated by peripheral geography and territorial discontinuity .
Banana production in European regions like the Autonomous Region of Madeira constitutes the principal and sometimes the only source of income for many thousands of Madeiran families and makes a strong contribution to the environmental balance of the region .
The economic and environmental damage , amongst other things , of having to reduce banana production in Madeira drastically , as a result of complete liberalization of trade in this product , is incalculable .
It will be unacceptable for the European Union not to maintain and defend a policy of quantitative management of the European market .
Especially when - as is widely known - Community producers are not competing under the same conditions as others in a completely free market .
We think it would be appropriate to affirm now that , along with this policy of quantitative management , the European Union must continue to have available a system of income support , already in existence moreover , and that it must not only be maintained but must be fundamentally strengthened .
The policy of cooperation and support to the development of ACP countries established for decades and enshrined in successive Lomé agreements and in the European development fund is a necessary and sufficient basis to make it unacceptable for the European Union not to be able to apply preferential treatment to these countries in the banana sector , when it maintains this same preferential treatment in many other sectors .
For all these reasons and many more , which fall outside these terms of reference , we would like to corroborate and strengthen here the motion for a resolution presented by the Group of the European People 's Party .
And , if possible , we would also like to know the Commissioner 's views .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , no-one would ever have thought , even me , who voted against the GATT agreement , that it would be transformed , in the name of ' free trade ' , into an extremely protectionist organization .
That is exactly the perverse effect that has been achieved .
An oligarchy has been established , dominated by the United States , which is protecting itself .
Increasingly fat , increasingly rich , bent on a trade war without quarter .
This is what the free trade position actually means , and everyone here knew that .
Only 80 or 90 Members voted against .
But I cannot content myself with the disgrace of others and the blunders committed : the truth is this Parliament has no moral authority to criticize , at this time , the very monster that it allowed to be created at that time .
It was this Parliament that gave it strength , it was this Parliament that fed it , and it is this Parliament which now bewails the destruction wrought by the monster it created !
What right do I have , coming from a small country which has an island where there are nine thousand banana producers , to protest here ? ' Nine thousand banana producers ?
Let them do something else ! ' say the Americans .
But what , when there is no alternative ? ' Do something else , or ask the Japanese how to commit harakiri ' .
That is a solution because , in fact , there are no alternatives , there is no protection , no protectionism , at this time , only the free traders enjoy it , because they have judges who are , of course , biassed on issues of this kind .
Mr President , I realize that , because of the delicacy of the issue , Commissioner Fischler has been extremely cautious this afternoon .
Next week the Commission will have to make an important decision , and I think it is a good thing that we have the opportunity to express our opinion to the Commissioner before the Commission makes that decision . I also hope that the Commissioner is taking note of what is being said in this Parliament which , as the Commissioner will see , is composed of a wide political and geographical spectrum , in which not only the banana-producing countries but also the majority of Parliament defend a stable regime .
I should like to draw the Commission 's attention to a point which has perhaps not been sufficiently stressed this afternoon . What we have been dealing with is free trade .
Has it occurred to the Commission or the World Trade Organization that the greatest attack on free trade at the moment is being perpetrated by the multinationals who have turned the world banana market into a cartel ?
The other day I travelled on a plane with some independent producers from Ecuador , who represent about 25 % of the banana production , and they assured me that they have no freedom - they have no choice but to hand over their fruit to the multinationals .
Besides having converted the world market into a cartel and having 100 % of the North American market , which is a very rich market , the multinationals at the moment have 65 % of the Community market .
If current attempts to establish this regime in the name of free trade lead to the loss of the small 30 % of the Community market which is all that remains to Community producers and ACP countries which have traditionally exported to the Union , then we will have done away with free trade .
I believe , Mr Commissioner , that at this moment the Commission has some regulations about free competition under Community law which the World Trade Organization has failed to take into account ; it must be remembered that the World Trade Organization also has powers relating to services . What is being attempted is precisely the destruction of free trade .
Free trade is not being defended .
It is we who must defend free trade against the cartelization of the banana market by the large multinationals .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is important for the European Union to respect international agreements and , as part of this , the rulings of international courts .
It is important for the very reasons that we want Member States of the EU to respect EU rules .
We have entered into these agreements because in many respects nation states are too small and because it pays to cooperate within a common set of rules , even if in some cases we think the rules are against us .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is founded on the realization that free trade benefits the world economy and our own economy .
That is why we participate in the World Trade Organization .
Within that organization we have , like other countries , made certain commitments which must be respected .
If we break them because they do not suit us , other countries will break their commitments when it suits them but does not suit us .
The discriminatory import barriers which we are now discussing were introduced because , if they were given a free choice , consumers would to a large extent prefer to buy bananas from other sources .
Imports should therefore be deregulated also out of consideration for consumers .
Import barriers lead to bananas being more expensive than they would otherwise be .
If this import system did not conflict with international agreements we have entered into , such a price increase might possibly be acceptable , but then only on condition that the import barrier really provided proper support for the development of the ACP countries .
But it does not .
The import regulations are very complicated and have given rise to a trade in licences as a result of the extra money consumers are forced to pay .
To a considerable extent this money ends up in the hands of bureaucratic middlemen .
Therefore the EU must change its current rules on the banana trade for several reasons : because it is in accordance with our international commitments , because it would benefit consumers , and because there are more effective ways to support the developing countries within the ACP in their efforts to find forward-looking structures of production .
If we do not follow the WTO 's ruling we will be exposed to costly counter-measures .
The EU 's credibility , when we talk in the WTO and elsewhere about free trade and respect for agreements entered into , will be damaged .
Mr President , I thank Commissioner Fischler for affording us this opportunity to discuss a very important issue .
I am sure he would acknowledge , as I do , that the clear winner after this WTO ruling is Chiquita bananas .
It is as a direct result of the improper influence which Chiquita exerted over the US Administration that the complaint was originally made to the WTO .
As I am sure he is aware , a Senate committee is now looking at this influence and perhaps will shed some light on what was a rather sordid part of the US presidential election campaign .
The Caribbean producers have been somewhat perplexed at the ruling of the WTO .
They were denied full participation in the WTO , their legal representatives were expelled from the WTO and then , to cap it all , an American chaired the appeal .
If you can call this impartial or if you can acknowledge that this is completely insensitive to the needs of the Caribbean , then I am sure you would wish to do that .
Last week I visited the United States and I was astonished at the number of times I had to remind them that aid is no substitute for trade and that we have a very important development commitment here .
It is one that they are completely ignorant of , and they are completely ignorant of the impact of this decision on the Caribbean .
I would like some clarification from the Commissioner on whether the precedent set by the Japanese agreement of 15 months ago on compliance is one which the Commission will be sticking to .
I would also like to know whether the Commission is aware of the American amendments to our regime which have been drawn up at this moment and whether it intends to object to them , as I hope .
Finally , I would like to ask whether we might have some consistency from the Commission .
Sir Leon Brittan says that we have other irons in the fire and that therefore we must accept the hormone / beef decision and the banana decision .
Commissioner Pinheiro says that we must have very clear development objectives in our international economic relations .
Commissioner Fischler says that we should not implement the hormone panel findings but provide compensation .
He is no doubt right .
So why can we not consider a similar approach to the banana dispute as he has adopted to the hormone panel disputes ?
Mr President , it is hard to do justice to the extreme injustice of this decision in one minute but I will try to portray to Members the conversations Mrs Kinnock and I had in Washington last week .
I have to say that the Caribbean ambassadors were utterly devastated by this decision .
They feel they have nowhere to turn , that they have been heavily penalized and hammered by a large country and squeezed out by multinationals .
We believe that this is unfair .
They represent only 3 % of world trade .
As European consumers it is our right to be able to buy bananas from those areas which represent good value for money and which reflect the democratic rights and good social standards that we expect and promote in those countries .
I believe that the Commission has a very firm obligation to help out those countries .
It is no good saying , as the US has said to us , that diversification is the answer .
They said very glibly ' textiles is the answer ' , but it has to be pointed out that the US is one of the most protectionist countries in textiles in the world .
That is not the answer for those countries .
We want to exercise our right .
We want to ensure that they do have a right to grow bananas , in particular in the interests of the many people involved in banana production in those countries .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12.00 noon .
Chernobyl , Khmelnitsky and Rovno 4 nuclear reactors
The next item is the oral question by Mr Scapagnini ( B4-0519 / 97 - O-0087 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , to the Commission , on the closure of the Chernobyl nuclear reactor by 2000 and the completion of the Khmelnitsky 2 and Rovno 4 nuclear reactors in Ukraine .
Mr President , today our committee would like to put on record that eleven years after the Chernobyl disaster , the problem is still unresolved .
The solution is linked to the will to affirm the role of the European Union in the recovery and development of countries like Ukraine where distortions linked to the move from a state economy to a market economy persist , distortions which are a burden on daily life .
We have heard and you will hear from Mr Adam how this state of affairs continues to weigh down everyday life in those countries .
The European Union has an instrument - pretty limited , true - in the Euratom loans to improve the safety and efficiency of reactors in third countries .
It is also true that we , as a Community , are the principal contributors to what is called ' nuclear safety ' at the EBRD , created to manage G-24 aid to the eastern countries .
The Memorandum of Understanding signed in Ottawa in December 1995 , provided for the closure of the Chernobyl reactor in the year 2000 , completed by a long term energy strategy including , as a least cost investment plan , the completion of reactors K2 and R4 which you , Mr President , have mentioned .
The report , chaired by Professor Surrey of Sussex University , was followed , as we know , by an avalanche of documents , including the Lahmeyer and Stone & Webster report , the subject of analysis by our parliamentary committee .
All this has done no more than create further confusion on the matter and has not indicated a clear route for taking a decision at Community level .
We recall that we have held specific hearings on this issue , we have listened to the experts , we have also analysed the positions of those countries , of the energy committees and agencies , but the plain fact is that nothing has changed .
The EBRD itself has established a series of working groups in order to clarify to what point the conditions of economic viability , environmental viability and nuclear safety are respected in the chosen option - least cost investment - to complete the Russian-designed WWER 1000 megawatt electrical power Khmelnitsky 2 and Rovno 4 reactors , to meet the safety standards approved by whoever originally conceived of these nuclear reactors .
Time is passing and the decision of the EBRD is still awaited .
That is why we strongly urge the European Commission to let us know its own position on this matter and to make it very clear whether we should await the position of the EBRD or not ; otherwise - clearly - we have to assess whether the European Union should dissociate its actions as regards Euratom loans from the activities of the EBRD , whose logic could diverge from the Community 's modus operandi on this particular dossier .
Mr President , despite the multiple difficulties we have faced in getting to the truth of the matter , we are now aware of a range of different interpretations of the facts themselves and we have succeeded in getting a general picture of the situation thanks to the excellent work of Mr Gordon Adam .
As you know , the vice-chairman of our committee has been to Ukraine several times , he has kept us up-to-date on what is going on and will be in a position to summarize it to the House with full knowledge of the facts .
In May he returned with extremely important news , backed up by the interparliamentary delegation chaired by Mrs Erika Mann .
Mr Adam 's excellent report in fact ends with a disturbing analysis of the need for Ukraine to be independent in present and future energy resources .
Mr President , we anxiously await the Commission 's response to this question .
The importance of this issue and the tragedy of a situation , unchanged for eleven years , and capable of having dramatic repercussions on us all at any time , escapes no-one .
Mr President , I am sorry to interrupt this debate , but I am somewhat confused .
I understood that we were to have a response from the Commissioner to the previous debate and that we would not just move on to the next debate .
Do we have to wait until the end of this debate to give Commissioner Fischler the chance to respond ?
What exactly is happening ?
Mrs Kinnock , the Commission did not ask to reply on the last item and that is why I closed the debate , precisely because there was no request to speak .
We are now on another item .
Mr President , first of all I want to apologize for being late .
I would like to go into Mr Scapagnini 's question about Chernobyl and I will begin by giving a brief general picture concerning Chernobyl before dealing with specific questions in more detail .
In December 1995 the G7 decided on a comprehensive programme to support the decision by President Kuchma to proceed with the closure of Chernobyl in the year 2000 .
In 1995 the Memorandum of Understanding was drawn up , containing various measures for the reform of the energy sector in Ukraine with the aim of establishing an energy sector that conforms with the market .
The emphasis is on the implementation of measures to achieve energy saving and greater energy efficiency .
Furthermore , there are also measures to modernize non-nuclear generation and to increase the safety of the existing nuclear reactors .
The G7 has now made considerable progress in the implementation of this programme .
Some US $ 1 billion in the form of loans have been made available for investments in non-nuclear projects and some $ 500 million have been raised for the purchase of equipment , the subsidizing of technical studies and projects relating to the closure of the Chernobyl power plant .
The $ 100 million recently made available by the Commission for the renewal of the sarcophagus also forms part of the sum of $ 500 million .
Important aspects of the G7 policy for Ukraine are therefore the modernization of thermal and hydro-electric power stations , the promotion of energy saving , but also , as rightly stated by the European Parliament , the financing of the dismantling of two nuclear power stations , Rovno 4 and Khmelnitsky 2 , still under construction .
As is well-known , the financing of this project has been the subject of frequent consultation within the G7 .
A number of important points are at issue here .
The agreements in force as laid down in the Memorandum of Understanding must be observed in full .
Because the objective of closing Chernobyl in the year 2000 can in no way be jeopardized .
Particularly as the only reactor still in operation , unit 3 , is in poor condition as was recently confirmed again in a report by independent experts .
Moreover , financing by us offers the only guarantee that the dismantling of the uncompleted plants will take place in accordance with international nuclear safety standards .
As stated in the MOU , the financing of the reactor must take place on the basis of the least cost principle ; however , in practice it has transpired that it is difficult to come to unambiguous conclusions on this point .
Renowned international organizations and experts differ in their opinions on the parameters to be taken as the starting point for studies of least cost .
Future economic developments in Ukraine and the resulting demand for energy , for example , are difficult to determine and estimate .
Taking all this into consideration , after serious and in-depth deliberation with the other G7 partners , the Commission has come to the conclusion that a phased implementation of the Rovno 4 and Khmelnitsky 2 project offers the best guarantee for the implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding .
This implies that after the completion of the preparatory work in the first half of next year , the financing of the first unfinished reactor can be set in motion by Euratom .
The Commission is , however , of the opinion that this can only happen if at that time the other international financial institutions , in the first place , and particularly the EBRD , have also played their part and made a loan available ; if , furthermore , the Ukraine authorities have again confirmed that Chernobyl will be closed in the year 2000 and also if sufficient guarantees are obtained for the dismantling of the reactors on the basis of international nuclear safety standards ; and if , finally , a number of other technical and financial conditions have been met satisfactorily .
That brings me to the more specific questions .
Mr President , I have sensed a certain dissatisfaction in Parliament about the provision of information on this complicated but at the same time politically sensitive subject .
As a result of this I have instructed the Commission departments to send you immediately , Mr President , copies of studies , reports and other relevant material .
I have also in the last few months personally had detailed discussions on a number of occasions with individual members of Parliament concerned about these problems .
With the aid of our Tacis technical assistance programme a safety programme for the two uncompleted reactors concerned has been developed .
Guidelines from the International Atomic Energy Agency underlie this programme .
Independent experts have also carried out a study of the current state of the two reactors .
As you know , they are 70 % completed but the work has been stopped for some years .
The condition of the reactors has therefore deteriorated to a certain degree and some additional work will probably be necessary .
There is close collaboration between the EBRD and the Commission with regard to the preparation of the loan applications , although the criteria and procedures for the EBRD on the one hand and Euratom on the other hand do differ from each other .
The EBRD in particular has not yet prepared a final judgment on the loan application submitted to it .
We are also awaiting , I believe , a final study by the European Investment Bank before the Euratom loan can be finalized .
The Commission recently responded to the report by the European Court of Auditors on activities of Tacis in the field of nuclear energy in Ukraine .
On the basis of this report , a number of mainly administrative measures have been taken .
The report , however , did not contain any explicit reference to the two unfinished nuclear reactors .
Finally , I would point out that there is no direct involvement of the EBRD nuclear safety account in the implementation of the R4 / K2 project .
As far as I know , this programme is being implemented with due regard to the content of the relevant Council decision .
Mr President , few countries in the world have more difficulty producing , importing and using energy than Ukraine .
I quote from the International Energy Agency 's report on energy in Ukraine which was published very recently .
We are faced with a mix of economic and political issues on a grand scale .
First of all , the Ukrainians are very concerned about their energy dependence .
They are very dependent on Russia for oil and gas and they do not want to become any more dependent than they are at present .
The prospects in their own coal industry are not good so it is not surprising that they have decided to carry on with their nuclear industry .
I have to say that I do not think there is any likelihood of the country giving up its nuclear option .
That is something we have to come to terms with .
It becomes a question of what sort of safety culture is going to operate .
Is it going to be the old Russian standards , or is it going to be the safety culture we have developed here in Western Europe ?
The other problem they are facing is the question of introducing a free market , in particular in electricity .
Private customers are not doing badly in paying their bills but the large industrial consumers are still trying to barter .
There is not an electricity market in anything like the sense that we would understand it . We cannot expect it be done in five minutes .
After all , it took our own European Council six years to work out how it would have an internal electricity market here .
Energoatom , the company which is managing a privatized nuclear industry with considerable funding from the European countries is now operating under a new chairman and under a new energy minister but it has a long way to go to fulfil anything like the conditions that are set down .
This is the sticking point .
We have not been able to make the financial provision .
Study after study tells us what has to be done on both the thermal and nuclear side but we seem to be incapable of making the financial arrangements .
If I understand the Commissioner correctly , what has now been decided is that the two reactors are going to be completed with funds from Euratom and the EIB and that the EBRD is going to have no part of that .
I find that a bit surprising because the whole tenor of my argument was going to be that the EBRD had to make its mind up as quickly as possible .
That is where we need clear-cut decisions so that we can see where we are going .
The Ukrainians want to have us as their friends .
We have to show greater willingness than we have in the last two years .
Commissioner , as Mr Adam said , we would like to have firm information and not just guesses about whether the EBRD is going to respond or not - you still don 't know - and whether Euratom and the EBRD will finance these two reactors if Ukraine makes certain promises .
We are always talking and doing studies , yet the question is so simple .
We are not talking about whether there should or should not be nuclear power , nor are we deciding the energy policy of Ukraine ( which only the Ukrainians have the right to do ) .
We are saying that the whole of Europe , and the Ukrainians most of all , want all the Chernobyl units to be shut down , especially unit 3 , which is currently operation , the sarcophagus to be repaired , and the necessary efforts made .
As Mr Adams rightly said , the economic situation in Ukraine is still extremely difficult .
The regime and situation are still the same as when they were under socialist control . Either we give them real technological assistance or help them economically , or it will all continue to be just empty words .
In truth , as Mr Adam also explained to us so well , they do not want to depend any longer on Russian gas .
They find it very difficult to pay for , because many customers also do not pay for it .
Also , many people do not receive their pay , and the economic and social chaos in the countries of the former Soviet Union makes life very difficult . That is the reality , but that is not what we are talking about .
So , Chernobyl must be shut down .
But they have to produce electricity somehow , until they can use less . It should be very easy to save electricity in Ukraine , because they waste it .
But , Mr Commissioner , you know better than I that it is very expensive . Saving energy requires enormous investment , starting with the introduction of metres to measure electricity , then creating a market , renewing equipment , replacing power stations and doing all sorts of things .
Surely nothing requires more investment than saving energy , even when it is absolutely necessary .
Therefore , since we all want Chernobyl to be shut down , the Ukrainian Parliament has said that if the Khmelnitsky 2 group and Rovno 4 are not completed - and soon , I should imagine - they will start up another of the inactive Chernobyl units .
Do the Ukrainians want to take risks ?
Well , of course not , but we all know - at least those of us who understand the sector - that they need electricity to get out of the extremely difficult situation they are in .
All in all , it seems to me that the Union 's support is essential for really working out how to save energy . It may perhaps be as simple as installing electricity and gas metres in homes so that people can pay for it , even if it is at a very low price .
There is no better way of persuading people to save energy than giving it a reasonably appropriate price . It is also true that for that method to work , people will need to be paid , which in many cases does not happen .
But this programme to re-equip new power stations , which I think is excellent , should deliver more . $ 1 , 000 million have been given .
It is true that much more is needed .
It is also true that the Chernobyl sarcophagus needs $ 700 million - it has been an effort for the Tacis programme to contribute $ 100 million .
But something else will have to be done , Mr Commissioner , because the whole of Europe , not just this Parliament , not just the Members , not just the representatives of the people , but the people themselves , think the Chernobyl problem must be solved once and for all , and this involves measures from energy-saving and safety to the remodelling of the sarcophagus .
And , above all , the Ukrainians are tired of our criticisms ; they beg us to criticize them less and help them more .
Unfortunately , that is the situation .
Mr President , we are all agreed , Chernobyl must close in the year 2000 .
But that was clearly linked to taking the least cost principle as the starting point for dismantling the two nuclear power plants .
That was agreed in December 1995 between the G7 and Ukraine .
And that principle has now been abandoned , by the Commission as well .
The EBRD panel is well aware that dismantling the two existing nuclear power plants is a poor use of funds .
So the principle has been abandoned .
I do not think that the phased implementation of the two nuclear plants under construction to be the best way .
We disapprove of this and we understand from the Commissioner that next year the Euratom financing for the two existing nuclear plants will commence .
That means that $ 410 million will be provided by Euratom , $ 340 million by the EBRD and $ 200 million by the G7 .
That is money badly spent , not accounted for to the voters .
I should like to ask the Commissioner if the Commission can still turn the tide to some extent by only supporting either K2 or R4 financially , and I hope it can .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I will not repeat what my colleagues have said because I think we concur .
We are naturally in agreement on closing Chernobyl , and we agree on increasing safety generally .
However , Mr Commissioner , please allow me to widen the issue a little .
What are we planning for beyond the millennium ?
The year 2000 is very close .
How many nuclear power stations are there in existence or still being built in Eastern Europe , installations using old technology , dangerous nuclear technology , and to what extent will we be committed to them ?
For how many years will we be committed to them and to their poor safety conditions ?
That , I think , is the big problem .
The second problem , and I agree entirely with Mr Eisma , who emphasized it , is the cost .
As we ask economics students at university , is there an alternative to this very high cost ?
Is it possible for us to accept such a high cost , which will , in my opinion , have controversial results , and not examine alternative uses for these funds for future energy solutions that will be safer and , in the long term , possibly more productive ?
That is the essential point , Mr Commissioner . I know that I am moving away a little from the specific question about Chernobyl , but I believe we need to think again about the whole issue .
Thank you very much , Mr Papayannakis .
The debate is adjourned .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is question time ( B4-0520 / 97 ) . We will take questions to the Commission .
The Commission has examined Mr Escudero 's question very carefully .
It is a question which obviously has implications which go beyond the Kaleidoscope programme , since it indirectly affects all the cultural programmes which have just come into force .
These programmes provide for projects involving all the various activities to be presented at periodic meetings , and for these to be made public .
As a result of these meetings , the Commission receives many projects from the cultural organizers - projects which need to be evaluated throughout the selection process .
For this process , the Commission can seek the opinion of competent individuals within the cultural sectors . These experts have a purely consultative role and take no decisions about the finance awarded to each project .
It is the Commission 's responsibility , in accordance with what has been agreed with Parliament and the Council , to finalize the list of those projects which it considers should receive Community support .
In appointing these experts , the Commission can accept names proposed by the appropriate national authorities . But it can also , when appropriate , call directly upon acknowledged experts in the various cultural sectors .
The Commission is careful to rotate the experts , so that opinions are not always sought from the same people .
It tries to bring in new experts , and ensures that their report is arrived at completely independently and in accordance with objective criteria .
On behalf of the Commission , I should like to inform Mr Escudero that the names and professional qualifications of the experts consulted in this way are available to Parliament and the Council .
I therefore place the names of these experts at his disposal , and that of Parliament .
As I said , they rotate over time , because we believe that they should not always be the same , in accordance with the two criteria I mentioned a moment ago .
Mr President , I should just like to thank the Commissioner for his reply , which has clarified things greatly for me .
The fact that the experts are changed periodically seems to me a very important point .
When it is convenient , I should like to avail myself of the Commissioner 's kind offer to let me see the names of the experts who have taken part .
I just want to say I can give Mr Escudero the list of these people immediately , in the form he has mentioned , so that he can make use of it as he sees fit .
Mr Commissioner , I have two questions : first , the extent to which the advancement of minority groups and / or minority languages , perhaps better called ' languages less often used in the European Union ' , play a part in Kaleidoscope ; and secondly , what role is played in Kaleidoscope by the eastward enlargement and the preparatory process for the candidate states .
First , I want to tell you that I have an enormous respect for all languages .
Obviously , some are less used than others because of the number of people who speak them , but the Commission clearly demonstrates the importance of every language , and not just the official languages but also those other languages which , while they may not be the official language of any State , are used in a certain community or region .
The Commission bears all these aspects specifically in mind .
As regards your other question , I should particularly like to thank you for having raised it because , on various occasions during the structured discussions which we hold with countries which have applied to join the Community , the question has been raised as to what extent they can participate in the cultural sphere .
As you know , in many of the proposals this is covered by some existing Community programme which can allocate resources , such as the Phare programme itself , but the choice is theirs .
Something I try to encourage in my discussions with these countries is that they should not just use the aid for strictly economic purposes , but should also use it for cultural matters .
I believe that is very important .
Although these countries can still have problems with the development of a market economy or the application of Community patrimony , nevertheless there is no doubt that they can contribute to the final composition of the cultural sphere .
Question No 23 by Birgitta Ahlqvist ( H-0596 / 97 )
Subject : The ' Television without frontiers ' directive
Following the Commission 's rejection on 14 February 1996 of the amendment to Directive 89 / 552 / EEC ( Television without frontiers ) , the purpose of which was to prohibit advertising directed at under-twelves , Commissioner Oreja promised that the Commission would conduct a wide-ranging study of the effects of advertising on children .
On Wednesday , 9 July 1997 , the Court of Justice ruled in the De Agostini case that Sweden could not ban advertising aimed at children carried by TV channels broadcasting from other countries , such as TV3 or Kanal 5 .
Sweden does , however , have the right to take action against misleading advertising broadcast by the same TV companies .
The Court 's judgement could be contradictory because , as pointed out in the Swedish National Board for Consumer Policies ' study of children and advertising , " younger children in particular often take literally what is said about various products ' .
If that is true , then advertising aimed at children must be deemed to be misleading .
What progress has the Commission made with the study it promised , and when is it planning to brief Parliament on its findings ?
The ' Television without frontiers ' directive was approved in 1989 , as Mrs Ahlqvist well knows .
We are now in the process of revising the directive and hope that it will soon be able to come into effect as a result of its transfer to the various Member States .
It has taken us nearly two years to make the leap from the previous to the current directive .
Well , that ' Television without frontiers ' directive , as approved in 1989 , contained two articles about the protection of children . Article 16 established effective , concrete , specific resources designed to prevent advertising from harming children morally or physically .
Article 22 of this same directive established general resources designed to prevent television broadcasts from damaging children 's physical , mental or moral development .
The Court of Justice , in its rulings on these measures and certain well-known cases ( the Agostini affair and TV Shop ) describes them as a complete set of measures specifically designed for the protection of children from television programmes in general and television advertising in particular .
Also , the Court of Justice makes a clear distinction between misleading advertising and television advertising designed to attract children 's attention .
So these are two clearly separate questions .
Therefore , the Commission is not worried about the possible contradictory effects to which the honourable Member refers .
We have carefully examined the honourable Member 's question , but we do not believe these contradictory effects occur .
In fact , by modifying the 1989 directive with the adoption of this new directive , the measures in question are strengthened , but without going as far as prohibiting television advertising directed at children .
In fact , neither Parliament , the Council nor the Commission felt that such a prohibition was necessary or justified . The three institutions actually reached agreement on that in the end .
Nevertheless , taking account of a petition from a delegation to the Council , the Commission did promise to carry out a study into the repercussions of television advertising and telesales on children , with a view to re-examining this question when the directive underwent its first revision .
As you know , the directive has several years of life , so to speak , before being revised again .
When I took up this portfolio in 1994 I found that the time-limit had expired , and that is why we carried out that revision , and there will be another one soon .
We are certainly going to pay particular attention to this matter .
I should like to tell the honourable Member that I am extremely aware of the matter she has raised , and I share her concerns .
But I believe that we have found an answer in the directive itself , and we will continue to be very vigilant . It is for precisely that reason that we want to carry out the study on the effects of television advertising and telesales on children .
As I say , the Commission is going to carry out that study in plenty of time , bearing in mind that Article 26 of the directive states that the Commission has to present the report on its application by 31 December 2000 at the latest , with proposals for its alteration , if necessary .
And of course , the European Parliament will receive a special briefing on the report .
I would like to thank Commissioner Oreja for this answer .
I am very pleased that you are positive about carrying out a study on children and how they react to children 's advertisements .
However , I also received the same promise from the Commissioner in the Committee on Culture in February .
I was under the impression , in fact , that the Commission had started this study .
I therefore hope that a start will be made as soon as possible , since this is a major problem , not only in our country , Sweden , but throughout Europe .
Children should not be a means of making profits .
Nor should they be exposed to these sales messages which they cannot properly interpret because of their lack of experience .
I shall keep coming back with this question until this study is started , which I hope will be very soon .
Consumers in Sweden have , by the way , reacted very strongly against the unrestricted children 's advertising found in Europe .
Mr President , I should like to inform Mrs Ahlqvist that the study has already started and there is no reason why it should not be discussed even before it is finished , probably within the framework of the Committee on Culture rather than the part-session .
And it will be very valuable for the Commission to follow up the various viewpoints which may be expressed , so that in the end we can present a text which I hope may be acceptable to everybody .
I come from the same country as Mrs Ahlqvist and I am not particularly happy with this answer .
As I understand it , you expect to have an answer by 31 December 2000 at the latest .
That is a very long way off .
At least , that is the impression you gave me just now .
The choice of media is growing very fast .
There are more and more TV channels , and advertising is taking greater and greater liberties .
I think it would not be out of place perhaps if we received a somewhat more definite answer about when this study will be completed since it has been one and a half years since the issue was first raised in this Parliament .
The answer which was then given was that a study was under way .
I think that the answer could be made more precise than simply giving a date in the Twenty-first Century .
Mr Lindqvist , I should like to point out that Parliament has already expressed its opinion on this matter , because there was an amendment , and that amendment did not receive sufficient votes when the ' Television without frontiers ' directive was debated .
So the current position has had the backing of Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
I put it to you that you are now trying to alter something which was approved by Parliament only a few months ago , when the transfer of the current directive has not yet come into force in any country .
We are therefore talking about the future , about what the law ought to be .
This is a subject to which the Commission is particularly sensitive . As you well know , we have not been content with just a directive but we have also brought out a Green Paper in which we tried to respond to the important problem of the protection of children .
Thus we do not believe that the existing legislation is enough , but rather we want to investigate what can be done in the future .
I want to show you that there is no lack of interest on the part of the Commission .
Parliament made its decision , and there was an amendment along the lines of what has been suggested by the two Swedish representatives here .
That amendment did not get enough votes and that is why it has not been included in the directive .
That , therefore , is the situation currently in force - the law as it stands .
What I can assure you of is that the Commission is keen , and that is why we are carrying out a study .
There is no need to wait for the study to be finished before it is made known to Parliament . Instead , we can exchange our views within the framework of the Committee on Culture .
It will be very valuable for us to hear your ideas , the experiences you have had , and the examples you can give us .
We have not finished the study ; we have hardly started it .
Your contributions will therefore be very useful to us .
At the moment I cannot tell you what the outcome of the study will be .
I understand the honourable Member 's impatience , because he wants a quick answer and I can not give him the final answer at this moment . We will know it at the end of the study .
What I can tell him is that we are not going to carry out this study in isolation , but in collaboration with you . And not only with you , but also with those members of the European public who have something to say to us on this matter .
It is a matter which interests and concerns us , and which we want to get right . So I can assure you that we will act together , we will listen to your ideas , we will make progress within a few months .
I hope to be able to go to the Committee on Culture and tell you how far we have progressed in our deliberations and , finally , on the agreed date , the Commission will formally present the document .
Question No 24 by Mr James Fitzsimons ( H-0676 / 97 ) will not be taken because it is on the agenda for the current part-session .
Question No 25 by Irini Lambraki ( H-0563 / 97 )
Subject : Agreements between airlines
What action does the Commission intend to take to protect the European public against agreements between airlines which infringe IATA safety rules and EU competition rules , as in the case of the agreement between Sabena and Virgin ?
The Commission is satisfied that agreements between airlines have not resulted in violations of existing safety rules .
All Community carriers possess the appropriate licences and operator certificates under the terms of the 1992 Council regulation on the licensing of carriers .
If an agreement between air carriers results in substantial change in their activities , the air carriers concerned must notify those changes to the national licensing authorities .
Those licensing authorities are therefore in a position to monitor the possible consequences for air safety of any agreement entered into between Community carriers and , of course , they fulfil that duty .
As far as competition is concerned , air transport within the Community is subject to the competition rules of the Treaty on the basis of the 1987 Council regulation .
Under Article 85 of the Treaty any agreement between air carriers which may affect trade between Member States and which results in the restriction and distortion of competition within the common market is incompatible with the common market and is therefore prohibited .
The exception to that rule , as provided for in both the 1987 and the 1993 regulations , is those agreements which may ultimately result in better services for consumers when such agreements have as their purpose the joint planning and coordination of schedules , the joint operation of services on new or low-density routes , the holding of tariff consultations and slot-allocation and airport scheduling .
Mr President , I am sorry but I do not entirely agree with the Commissioner because , as a passenger , I have experienced distortion of the regulation .
As a passenger travelling from Rome , I felt I was being exploited , first because half the people on the same flight had paid a reduced charter rate , while I had paid the normal price because of my Sabena ticket .
Secondly , my ticket was issued by Sabena , a company which is a member of IATA , while I was travelling , without my knowledge , with a company which was not a member of IATA .
I think it would be worthwhile for the Commission to investigate these matters seriously because , in my opinion , this represents clear violation of the competition rules .
Secondly , I feel even more strongly that it is a question of passenger safety and , at least now that so much is heard about airline companies , we must bear in mind the safety of thousands of people who travel both in Europe and elsewhere .
For my part , I will study the regulations that you mentioned , Mr Commissioner , and I will come back , but I think it would be a good idea for you to investigate the particular case that I referred to in the question .
I should like briefly to respond to what is obviously a genuine concern of the honourable Member .
Firstly , unless the airlines involved , like all other air carriers in the European Union , satisfied the safety rules , they simply would not have licences .
Consequently , if the honourable Member has identified what she believes to be unsafe practices , then I hope that she will be able to provide evidence of that , which I am certain both the airlines concerned and the regulatory authorities would want to assess .
Secondly , the honourable lady is obviously entitled to her view as a consumer and passenger and entitled to make complaint .
That is her right .
But what is not appropriate is to make an allegation about distortion of competition when , basically , her complaint appears to be about the quality of the flight that she is offered in return for the price she has paid .
I would invite her to take that matter up specifically with the airlines concerned - as I am sure she will - and , if she wants to convey their response to me I will be happy to reflect upon that .
What I hope that she is not going to do - and I know that she does not have any lack of responsibility in this matter - is to confuse her complaint and allegations of discomfort experienced as an air traveller with the possibility that either there are severely uncompetitive practices or that safety is somehow compromised ; clearly , neither I in the Commission nor the national regulatory authorities would accept that for one moment .
Question No 26 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0598 / 97 )
Subject : Competition policy and cartels
The Commission has been championing a competition policy which seeks to ensure maximum transparency while combatting cartels and dominant positions . The Commission has claimed that this year 14 cartels are being investigated .
Which are they ?
It is certainly true that the Commission always has a whole series of investigations in progress regarding cartels , agreements and possible abuses of dominant positions .
I gave a figure about this the last time , if I remember well , when we had a debate in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
But I hope that honourable Members will understand that when we are dealing with such investigations , we must comply with the rules and the procedures that naturally prescribe that such investigations be conducted discreetly .
For example , when an investigation is started up when inquiries may be made on the spot , it would be completely irresponsible for statements about it , on our part , to be circulated or indiscretions to be organized with regard to the material that is found .
That is simply necessary because the Commission really fulfils a kind of judicial function here .
It is only at a later stage that the Commission can come outside when the investigation has been completed , when the conclusions must be drawn and where appropriate sanctions must even be imposed and the Members of Parliament know that when that time has come , I am always the first to inform Parliament about it .
So in conclusion , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to ask you to take account of the fact that the basic rule is that such investigations must take place discreetly , also with regard to company and business secrets and so on , because if the Commission does not do that , then the companies concerned can of course take us to court and rightly so because we do not respect their rights as affected parties .
That is how it should be in a democracy and therefore I would once again call on your understanding that we cannot provide more information until the time when the investigation is completed , the necessary conclusions can be drawn and I am very willing to keep the respective parliamentary committees or Members of Parliament informed on this subject .
Commissioner , I was not asking for details of the cartels .
I was simply asking which they were - nothing more .
I notice that this matter is still approached with care , since the 26th report on competition policy also said that the Commission will continue the task of modernizing its legislation and increasing the transparency of its policy . It also added that it was actively investigating 14 cartels - I only wanted to know which ones , not the details - and that the Commission receives an increasing number of complaints about attempts by companies in dominant positions to prevent new operators from entering their market .
In your introduction , Mr Commissioner , you emphatically said that the fight against these secret cartels continued to be at the forefront , and that you hoped to step up the fight even more in the future .
We realized that this was a very good aim , and therefore we tried to encourage you in this action , although we asked that it might be done in a transparent manner .
Very briefly , first of all , sometimes the companies where on-the-spot visits take place make them public , and by making them public indicate that something is going on .
We do not do that ourselves , for the very good reasons I have just explained .
From time to time it is known that we are investigating cases and that the Commission is pursuing a case from the point of view of cartels or dominant positions .
It would be improper for us to reveal cases which we are looking into on our own initiative and there are very good reasons therefore to stick to our policy .
I can mention one case which has been made public by the companies concerned .
We heard complaints from publishers of newspapers that the price of newsprint was going up very rapidly and they suspected some kind of cartel .
So then we started investigations , which were made public by some of the companies where on-the-spot visits took place .
So it is well known that we are looking into this case .
But if the companies concerned do not reveal that , we do not do so on our own initiative .
Question No 27 by Ludivina García Arias ( H-0605 / 97 )
Subject : The privatization of the Spanish Steel Corporation ( CSI )
Does the Commission consider that , as part of the process of privatizing the Spanish Steel Corporation ( CSI , S.A. ) , the acquisition of a third of its share capital by a major European enterprise , and its business management , constitutes a European merger as well as a transfer of the decision-making centre to another enterprise in which institutional and public investors of another Member State have a majority shareholding ?
In accordance with the relevant articles of the ECSC Treaty , has the Commission looked at the effects of this operation on the European market ?
Has it ensured that the shares that were sold off were properly valued , in accordance with the European Union 's competition policy ?
On the basis of the information currently available to the Commission services , I believe that the acquisition of 35 % of the shares of CSI by the ARBED group will give rise to a concentration that will have to be examined under both the merger regulation and the relevant provisions of the ECSC Treaty .
As the details of the operation and in particular the relationship between ARBED and the Spanish companies which are negotiating for up to 50 % of the capital of CSI , have yet to be finalized , no notification has been made to date and no investigations have been carried out in relation to the concentration .
So , we are still waiting for the relevant documents to be tabled .
Only then can we start investigations .
As far as the proper valuation of the company is concerned , prior to its sale , it appears that ARBED paid the full market price for its shareholding , as its offer was made in competition with other steel producers .
I am sure you are very well aware of the fact that a lot of people were expecting that some other European company would win the contest . But , at the end of the day it was ARBED .
So , this proves that there has been normal competition for participation in CSI .
The concentration cannot be completed until it has been authorized under the two regulations I just mentioned .
So , in any case , we will have to wait for the investigation and the final findings .
Having said this , as you know there is a lot of movement in the steel sector and we will probably end up with four or five big European steel companies .
By the way , by the time the European Coal and Steel Community Treaty expires in 2002 we are likely to have a kind of European common market for steel .
Up to now we have had an addition of national markets , usually with publicly-owned steel companies .
So , finally we are close to a European steel market .
This is enhanced by the fact that more and more alliances are being concluded , our concentrations are happening , our acquisitions are taking place across borders .
This is in line with Community policy but it has to be looked into properly from the point of view of competition rules and state rules .
This was done a few years ago when we discussed difficult cases in Spain , Italy , Germany and so on .
Mr Commissioner , what is being presented to the public and the European Commission as a strategic alliance between ARBED and CSI is really a strange privatization operation , or absorption . We Spanish socialists think it is a present from the Spanish Government to a company , strangely enough , with public participation .
As you know , following the major restructuring authorized by the European Union , CSI is a completely reorganized company with no debts , with 10 , 000 million in the bank . It was restructured socially ( at Spanish taxpayers ' expense , by the way ) and at the moment it is in a privileged position compared with other large companies such as USINOR , ARBED , Thyssen or British Steel .
It is a beauty , Commissioner .
According to the share-transfer formula , the implied holdings of CSI in ARBED are greater than the estimated cash outlay by ARBED for the acquisition , and ARBED 's holding is valued at a level way above the market price . This is based on a report by Salomon Brothers , who were previously advising against buying ARBED shares .
You are right . It is not that there was no competition from other companies .
But the problem lies in the offer , in the gift which the Spanish Government was making right from the start . This may have been for dogmatic reasons , to get rid of a company which has cost much human sacrifice , and economic effort from Spanish taxpayers too .
I think , Commissioner , that you really ought to study this right from first principles and perhaps see , with the advice of independent companies , what the true valuation of this Spanish company is , and whether or not it has been bought at below market price .
It was not the Commission which took the decision to privatise the company .
That was a decision made by the government .
We did not impose it .
Secondly , since there was a transparent procedure under which a lot of other companies were asked to bid for CSI , we must assume that the winner offered the best terms .
It was up to the government of Spain to make up its mind and that is apparently what it did .
As far as I know , we certainly did not receive a complaint that the procedure was not transparent or was not a fair one .
Question No 28 by Niels Sindal ( H-0617 / 97 )
Subject : Government aid
It is deplorable that , while opposed in principle to national government aid , the Commission and the Council continue to give the go-ahead for packages of massive national aid , particularly to ailing shipyards , most recently in Germany , Spain and Greece .
This double entry book-keeping obviously goes some way towards undermining confidence in a consistent and credible effort to reduce government aid which distorts competition .
More resources must be set aside to monitor government aid .
This issue is currently relevant to the shipbuilding industry but also to other sectors .
What steps will the Commission take to set aside more resources to monitor government aid in order to obtain an up-to-date and comprehensive picture of the scope and nature of such aid ?
Mr President , I shall also be brief , as these decisions were taken some time ago already , and as the honourable member knows , these are cases that have been with us for years .
In the case of Greece , the delay in the payment of subsidies which had been authorized some years earlier , prompted the Council to accept the Commission 's proposal , under which interest relating to late payments could be added , but nothing more .
In the case of Spain , things were a little more complicated .
I remind you that Spain had , as part of the OECD negotiations , obtained a number of concessions relating to investment grants and for social and labour difficulties associated with restructuring , in the shipyard sector .
Here too , there was late payment , and hence extra interest , for which compensation had to be made .
Then , as a result of late payment , a certain extra amount was granted for investment .
The Council considered that this was a matter of settling a case from the past , and that consequently , there was in reality nothing new .
It was a matter of closing the dossier .
I draw your attention to fact that at the same time , the Spanish authorities made the following commitment : if at the end of next year the shipyards in question were still loss-making , were not viable , they would draw the necessary conclusions , and would not come knocking on the door of the Commission for still further requests for assistance .
Firm commitments of this kind have been made both to the Commission and to the Council of Ministers .
This was what made it possible for a large majority of the Council of Ministers to accept these commitments .
Finally , capacity must be reduced . As you know , we entered into a commitment to inspect this four times a year .
The Spanish authorities produce reports on the state of the progress in the commitments , four times annually , and we send teams on site to check , in the shipyards , that commitments have effectively been met .
The last case involves Germany .
Here too , this was the consequence of a drama that had involved Bremen Vulkan .
It was finally agreed to allow the two East German shipyards to continue to work under the conditions which had been previously determined .
But as the money had been taken out by Bremen Vulkan , compensation had to be made .
Here too , a commitment was entered into for the last time .
If the shipyards are privatized in the future , there will be no question of anyone coming back to knock on the door and ask for more public money .
Furthermore , as you know , a very considerable reduction in capacity will take place in Bremen , in Germany .
This is the context in which things are done , and done in a manner which can be defended .
Now I come to my conclusion , and to two points .
We are still not certain that the United States will ratify the OECD agreement .
The solution and way out is there , but the United States is not budging .
We have , however , ratified the agreement .
As soon as they ratify it , it will immediately come into force .
If that is not the case , we must prepare for the future .
The Commission , Before the end of this month , the Commission will put a proposal on the Council table , given that the seventh directive will come to an end at the end of next year , a proposal relating to the future of the shipyards in this sector .
I can tell you already , that the Commission will take a fairly strict attitude with regard to assistance in this sector .
Of course , I am sure we shall have the opportunity to come back on this , once I have presented this proposal to my colleagues , and the college has accepted it .
I am naturally perfectly ready to stand before you and discuss this in Parliament .
First I would like to thank the Commissioner for a very satisfactory answer and generally to say thank you for the Commissioner 's work in connection with state aid .
My question was equally concerned with what will happen in future generally , that is , in other areas as well , with regard to state aid .
Since I put this question , fate has decreed that a Kellogg 's breakfast cereal plant , which stands beside a shipyard which has been closed in my hometown , is now going to close to as it is being moved to Spain and Manchester .
They are objective areas - objective 1 and objective 2 - where subsidies are also provided in a different way .
My question therefore equally concerns what the Commission is going to do to ensure that there is capacity in the Commission to monitor how aid is provided from both Community and state funds in future .
We have had the case of Boston Scientific in Denmark , we have had Renault , and now we have Kellogg 's : businesses which move around in Europe , all depending on where conditions are most favourable with regard to capital .
I wish to suggest to the honourable Member that we continue this discussion later because in the coming weeks and months there will be several initiatives by the Commission , including some by Monika WulfMathies in the field of the structural funds .
As far as national regional aid is concerned , I will be trying to reduce the eligible regions - at least to some proportion - and also to reduce the levels of aid intensity linked to a whole series of other initiatives to tighten the rules and try to develop a stricter public aid policy .
So there will be plenty of opportunities to come back to that issue , and I will be readily available to Parliament to discuss it in depth .
Mr Commissioner , I should like to inform my colleague that I don 't know what he means by ' ailing shipyards ' .
I think he should visit some of those ' ailing shipyards ' , and he will realize that they are competing with shipyards in other countries such as Korea .
The Commissioner has mentioned the OECD agreement and the renewal of the next directive on state aid . If the United States does not ratify what has been agreed , and if other countries such as Korea continue with discussions about shipyard aid , then we will commit suicide by not compensating for a control of subsidies which we cannot exercise in other countries .
I should also like to remind my colleague that it is companies in the richest countries which receive most government aid . The Commissioner will correct me if I am wrong .
I would just suggest to the honourable Members that they wait a few weeks and then there will be a proposal from us on the future of shipbuilding in Europe and what we think might be envisaged from the point of view of state aid .
So there will be many opportunities to discuss it further , and I reiterate our willingness to discuss it fully with Parliament .
Since the time allocated to questions to Mr van Miert has now run out , Question No 29 will be dealt with in writing .
The protocol to the Amsterdam Treaty establishes a general principle .
It means that all Member States in the European Union shall be considered to be safe countries of origin .
The protocol 's single article is formulated so as to limit the ability of EU citizens to seek asylum in another Member State to four specific situations .
These are found in four separate paragraphs of exceptions .
Mr Sjöstedt 's question concerns the protocol 's fourth paragraph in particular .
This stipulates that a Member State , regardless of the protocol 's basic principle , always has the right ultimately to decide for itself whether or not an asylum application shall be examined .
If a Member State chooses to examine such an application for asylum , the Council of Ministers must be informed , and the application shall always be assumed to be manifestly unfounded .
However , the protocol expressly states that this in no way affects the Member State 's right of self-determination .
It could therefore be said that what is new is that the Member States are put under an obligation to inform the Council of Ministers if and when an application for asylum from an EU citizen is being examined .
Although I personally regret that this protocol has been included in the new treaty , I welcome the fact that in the preamble to the protocol it is expressly established that the spirit and letter of the Geneva Convention shall be respected with regard to the granting of refugee status .
Member States have the right to take the administrative measures considered necessary to fulfil the requirements of the Geneva Convention .
A special declaration which was attached to the protocol also expresses clearly and unambiguously that agreements in no way have a prejudicial effect in this regard .
A further declaration is directly linked to the fourth exception paragraph .
It premises an examination of how one can best speed up the procedures for examining manifestly unfounded asylum applications from EU citizens .
Let me summarize my answer in three points .
My understanding is that the Amsterdam Treaty 's Asylum Protocol means the following : Firstly , that the obligations Member States have under the Geneva Convention remain unchanged .
Secondly , that an application for asylum made by an EU citizen shall not normally be seen as valid , since the Member States are to be regarded as safe countries of origin .
Thirdly , that all Member States retain their right to make decisions and can therefore always examine applications for asylum from EU citizens on condition that the Council of Ministers is informed and the examination is done on the basis that the application is manifestly unfounded .
I would like to thank the Commissioner warmly for her answer , in particular for her personal observation on her view of this protocol , which I fully share , and her opinion that what has happened in the Amsterdam Treaty is unfortunate .
I also think it is important to establish that each Member State has a perfect right to examine each asylum application itself .
At the same time , it is impossible to get away from the fact that an attempt is being made here to put pressure on the Member States to apply a partly different practice .
Strong criticism has also been directed by , for example , the UN High Commission for Refugees , against these formulations and also by organizations which work with refugee cases .
It would be best if this could be reconsidered , since it is in fact a dangerous example ; if , for example , it is followed by other areas of the world , which could use it as justification for them to restrict in various ways the right to seek asylum and to have one 's asylum application heard .
Remember that this proposal was not put forward by the Commission .
This is what the Member States have agreed .
Therefore the question should perhaps have been put to the Council of Ministers .
I feel that I must speak now that the whole debate is in the beautiful Swedish language .
I would just like to put the following question to Commissioner Gradin .
When you say that an application for asylum in a Member State shall not normally be seen as valid and that the examination shall be done on the basis that the application is unfounded , exactly how do people think this will be implemented as far as the law is concerned ?
We have a legally independent judiciary .
Shall it in some way start saying that the score is 1-0 against asylum being granted ?
I do not know whether the Council has considered this , but to me it appears to be a totally impossible juridical problem .
I do not think people will turn this into legal red tape .
What is important is that under these provisions each country has the right to examine an application in accordance with the Geneva Convention .
Secondly , I would like to say that I cannot answer for the Council of Ministers .
It is the Council of Ministers which is responsible for this .
It was in the Council of Ministers that this was adopted , and it was not at the Commission 's request .
Firstly , I should like to thank Mrs Gradin for her very full and thorough explanation of the Commission 's interpretation of the protocol to the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Mrs Gradin , you have confirmed firstly the independence of the courts ; secondly , the sovereignty of Member States to examine any application for asylum ; and thirdly , that these applications will be considered unfounded from the outset if they originate from citizens of a State which guarantees all the basic rights and is therefore considered a safe place to live .
These are the normal conditions .
Is it not also true , Mrs Gradin , that the extent of political integration currently enjoyed by the Member States of the European Union does not exist in any other part of the world at the moment ?
Let me once again sum up the Amsterdam Treaty 's Asylum Protocol .
It means , firstly , that the obligations Member States have under the Geneva Convention remain unchanged .
Secondly , an application for asylum made by an EU citizen shall not normally be seen as valid since the Member States shall be regarded , as the protocol states , as ' safe countries of origin ' .
Thirdly , all Member States retain their right to make decisions and can therefore always examine applications for asylum from EU citizens on condition that the Council of Ministers is informed and that the examination is done on the basis that the application should be manifestly unfounded .
Question No 31 by Jan Andersson ( H-0616 / 97 )
Subject : Measures to combat trafficking in synthetic drugs
Trafficking in synthetic drugs is on the increase in Europe .
Much of the production and distribution is based in countries applying for membership of the European Union .
How will the Commission , in membership negotiations , attempt to persuade those countries in which production and distribution takes place to tackle the problem of synthetic drugs ?
The Commission shares Mr Andersson 's concern over the spread of the new synthetic drugs in Europe .
Until a few years ago amphetamines and ecstasy were produced mainly in the Netherlands and Belgium .
Today production is increasingly taking place in some of the central and eastern European or Baltic countries .
I understand , for example , that around half of the amphetamines which are seized in Stockholm now come from Poland .
In May this year the Commission issued at my suggestion a communication with a thorough analysis of this development .
We also proposed a number of measures , including increased co-operation with central and eastern European and Baltic countries on this issue .
The battle against narcotics was also a major issue in the structural dialogue during the Irish Presidency in spring 1996 .
At that time I took up in particular the question of the spread of synthetic drugs .
None of the Ministers from the applicant countries who were present can have any doubt that this is a high priority question in the European Union .
This is something I have also taken up during all my visits to the applicant countries .
The Commission has explained very clearly that this is an area which will attract a great deal of attention during membership negotiations .
The applicant countries are expected to adopt our acquis communautaire .
This also includes the battle against narcotics in general and chemical drugs in particular .
It is important therefore to be able to live up to the rules we have with regard to the control of precursors , money laundering and the like .
On 16 June the Council of Ministers passed a resolution to set up what we call an early warning system .
This means that in future the Member States will get information much faster than today when a new type of chemical drug appears on the market . This will be very useful .
For the applicant countries all this is , of course , a delicate problem .
From the Commission 's point of view we shall therefore provide as much help as we can .
Moreover , since 1993 we have provided technical assistance through Phare , not least for the control of chemical precursors .
A lot remains to be done , of course , and I am working intensively to ensure that this issue will continue to be prioritized in future in our cooperation with the new democracies in the east .
I thank the Commissioner for her answer , which was quite excellent .
In connection with the eastern enlargement , we often discuss questions which concern economics , and on the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , on which I sit , we also about social rights , etcetera .
That is extremely important , but the cross-border trade in drugs is also a major issue .
I am very pleased with the answer and with the work which the Commissioner presented , but I have two questions in connection with this .
Firstly , I wonder what reaction the Commissioner received from Poland and the Baltic States when all these measures were presented .
Did the countries take it seriously , were they positive and do they intend to do anything about it ?
Secondly , in spite of everything there is also production in our own countries .
I therefore wonder whether you have ever been asked this question : ' Shouldn 't you put your own house in order ? '
The applicant countries covered by structured dialogue and with which we have had talks on visits have understood very clearly that we consider it very important that they make sure they get to work on issues such as synthetic drugs .
There is no doubt that the majority of these countries do not currently have an adequate legal basis to do this . They still need to get laws and regulations which provide them with better tools - that is one thing .
The other is that they get to grips with corruption , not least on borders , etcetera , in order to further intensify their activities .
On the question of our own countries : when we proposed the communication in the spring the idea was that we should put our own European house in order , that is , we in the fifteen Member States should also recognize that we are producers too and make sure that we find solutions .
That is why this early warning system has been put on the agenda .
Question No 32 by Richard Howitt ( H-0647 / 97 )
Subject : Harmonization of immigration policy - discrimination against a constituent
An immigration case involving the Russian spouse of Mr Clark of Leigh-on-Sea , one of my constituents , whereby a settlement visa has been awarded by German immigration authorities but not by UK immigration authorities , highlights the fact that harmonization of EU immigration law , as provided for in the European Treaty , does not yet exist in the European Union .
What action can the Commission take to help Mr Clark return his wife to the United Kingdom and what further action to ensure that greater harmony of immigration policy exists throughout the EU so that cases such as this do not recur in the future ?
The question from Mr Howitt concerns the fact that immigration rules are part of Community law in certain cases and are governed by national legislation in others .
This sometimes creates a certain amount of confusion .
The situation is currently as follows : It is only when an EU citizen exercises his or her right to freedom of movement and takes up residence in another Member State that the members of his or her family are covered by Community law .
In such cases a family member can assert his or her right to family reunion .
For citizens of third countries who need visas , Community law requires that a visa shall be issued at no cost and without burdensome procedures .
However , if it is a citizen who lives in the country where he or she is a citizen , the family members are covered by the national rules and laws applicable in that country .
According to rulings by the European Court of Justice , a person can assert his or her right to freedom of movement and right of residence against their own Member State .
This applies when he or she returns to their homeland after having resided in another Member State .
It is quite clear that the decisive factor with regard to the rights of family members to immigration and residence under Community law is that the EU citizen is exercising or has exercised the right to freedom of movement .
It is therefore difficult for the Commission to judge in what category Mr Clark or his wife belong .
The Commission would obviously prefer to see common immigration rules for the whole Union .
On 30 June the Commission adopted a draft convention on rules for immigration throughout the European Union .
The proposal is an important first step in the work of creating a more homogenous immigration policy in our Member States .
One paragraph in the proposal covers precisely the problems raised by the honourable Member .
It means that the same rules on family reunion would apply everywhere within the European Union .
I hope , of course , that the European Parliament will give the Commission all possible support to the proposal which will begin to be discussed in the Council of Ministers in the autumn .
Thank you , Commissioner for taking this question .
I accept , as you said , that the role of Member States in this matter is crucial .
Indeed I welcome the abolition of the primary purpose rule by the UK 's new Labour Government , which will very much assist in cases such as this .
However , what I would like to press the Commissioner on is the fact that Community law is being discredited .
We cannot continue with a situation whereby citizens of a Member State enjoy rights under their own national law which are less favourable than those they enjoy as EU citizens in other European countries .
Mr Clark , a British national , found that he could bring his Russian wife into Germany but not Britain - unless he lived for six months in Germany first .
If he found that he had a Greek grandfather he could claim Greek citizenship and again have no problem .
If he was Italian there would be no dispute at all .
Such anomalies generate a sense of grievance amongst Europe 's citizens , not least my own constituents .
I call on the Commissioner to argue with some force in favour of the proposals to which she has referred to support the right of genuine family reunion in all European countries .
I agree with the honourable Member that it is very confusing that we have these contradictory rules and regulations in the Union .
The reason behind the Convention that I have now presented to the Commission and that has been accepted , and that will be discussed by Parliament and the Council of Ministers , is that we will get common rules for all our citizens concerning migration and admittance to our countries .
Nobody can understand what is going on sometimes .
This is very confusing .
I am very concerned that Commissioner Fischler should have been here at 6.40 p.m. to take the questions .
I think , out of all courtesy to this House , he should be here promptly and I would like an explanation as to why he is not here .
Mrs McIntosh , I share your concern entirely . I am very surprised , because I insisted that the parliamentary services should call upon the Commissioner to be here .
In fact , Mrs Gradin has been kind enough to overrun by 6 minutes the length of time she had promised to spend with us .
I do not know why the Commissioner is still not here , but I imagine there must be a good reason .
But , with Mrs Gradin 's help , we will continue our work .
Question No 33 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0649 / 97 )
Subject : Sharing the burden of refugees and asylum applicants
What is the current situation as regards burden-sharing among the Member States where asylum applicants and sudden movements of refugees are concerned , and when will the Commission submit to the European Parliament an overview of the rights and material benefits that these two groups of people enjoy in the various Member States ?
Against the background of the Bosnian refugee crisis , the Council of Ministers initiated a debate on how the division of responsibility for asylum seekers shall take place in mass refugee situations , that is , burden-sharing .
This initial debate resulted in the Council Resolution of 25 September 1995 on the division of responsibility with regard to a temporary solution for the admission and residence of people in need of asylum .
This was followed by the Council of Ministers ' Decision of 4 March 1996 on an early warning and contingency system .
The Commission has tried to take the question one step further with its proposal in April this year for joint action on temporary asylum for refugees .
The proposal requires a joint decision-making mechanism for the introduction , review and phasing out of temporary asylum .
It also establishes certain minimum rights and conditions for the reception of refugees .
The idea is that this joint decision-making process will form the framework for a real division of the burden of responsibility with regard to the mass immigration of people who are refugees and in need of asylum .
The European Parliament has also contributed to stimulating concrete efforts for a division of the burden of responsibility by introducing two new budgetary lines .
Line B5-803 is intended to cover the costs of carrying out pilot projects with regard to the reception of refugees .
It is based on the idea of shared responsibility between the Member States .
The other line , B7-6008 , covers the Community 's financing of pilot projects which aim to facilitate the voluntary return of people who have received temporary asylum in the Member States .
The Commission has already successfully got the necessary legal instrument through the Council of Ministers , based on Article K 3 ( 2 b ) , for the implementation of these two budgetary lines .
The Council decision was taken on 22 July .
It has made it possible for the Commission to start pilot projects in these areas in accordance with the budget notes .
The Commission will evaluate the results of the pilot projects financed during the year and intends to return with a proposal for a programme lasting several years in 1998 .
As far as the other part of the question is concerned , I would like to refer the honourable Member to the document which the Commission produced in connection with the joint action on temporary asylum .
It is a summary of the central points of the Member States ' policies in this area , in particular the rights and obligations which each Member State gives people who are granted temporary asylum .
According to the proposed joint action , the Commission should report annually to the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers on how the rules on temporary asylum are being implemented in the Member States as well as the financial effects .

Thank you , Mrs Gradin , and may I say how grateful we are to you for having patiently remained here way beyond the call of duty . You have covered for an absence that would certainly have hindered the work of this House .
Questions Nos 34 and 35 will be dealt with in writing .
.
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as stated in the question , Directive 93 / 119 on the protection of animals at the time of slaughter or killing provides that this directive is not applicable in the case of the killing of animals at cultural or sporting events .
The Commission is of the opinion that in these cases national authorities are responsible for the welfare of the animals in question .
This approach is in accordance with the Protocol on Animal Protection to the Amsterdam Treaty agreed in June 1997 .
As animal protection is not an express part of the Treaty of Rome or other agreements , the Commission can only repeat its earlier advice to the governments of Member States to do all in their power to bring to an end all unacceptable practices where animals are killed during cultural and sporting events .
It is always a pleasure to see the Commissioner albeit , on this occasion , quite late .
How would the Commissioner satisfy my constituents , and I am very happy to copy every single letter I have had from them on this point - particularly in relation to killings in cultural and sports events ?
Is it not the Commissioner 's duty , under the Protocol to the original Maastricht Treaty , to ensure that every piece of legislation and every act does comply with the animal welfare provisions which were agreed on in that Protocol ?
While I have already stated in my question the fact that I realise that Directive 93 / 119 applies , constituents still have substantial misgivings about the unnecessary and needless suffering of those animals which are killed in cultural and sporting events .
They are not satisfied - not in my own country but in other Member States - that the Protocol is being adhered to or that the directive is being complied with .
If the directive is being breached , do they have an action which can be taken before the Court of Justice ?
Mr President , Mrs McIntosh , as I said earlier , one must first bear in mind that the question of animal protection is not solely the task of , or not solely regulated by , Community law , but that merely specific aspects of animal protection are regulated at Community level .
Anything more than that comes within the authority of Member States and their legislation .
Member States must also be responsible to this authority .
Where regulations under Community law are concerned , in this case Guideline 119 / 93 , Member States are also charged with the execution and application of these Guidelines .
Where it is discovered during an inspection that a Member State is paying insufficient attention to the regulations , or has undertaken unsatisfactory measures for the execution of the guidelines , it has to be decided if a charge of contravention should be initiated against such a member state .
I should be pleased to send my colleague , Mrs Bonino , information on this , as the subject of inspection of animal protection measures , according to the new distribution of responsibilities within the Commission that was mainly demanded by Parliament , now falls within her province .
Mr Commissioner , you have said that even though this may not be within the jurisdiction of Community law , you hope that Member States will soon cease these practices , which you consider cruel .
Is it not rather the case , Mr Fischler , that this is one of the basic legal precepts of Article 128 , that is , subsidiarity applies fully because it is a cultural matter . Is it not also true that there is still no unifying view of what constitutes animal welfare when cultural interests are involved ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think I have made it quite clear that there are separate responsibilities here , if you want to call them that , in accordance with subsidiarity .
We as a Commission have to obey the requirements of the treaty , but I should like to stress that we also have to ensure that the treaty is complied with .
If there are any transgressions to these guidelines , then we are obliged to correct those transgressions .
Question No 37 by John Iversen ( H-0550 / 97 )
Subject : Pesticides
One of the results of the new Treaty of Amsterdam will be that a number of directives now based on Article 43 such as the Pesticides Directive , 91 / 414 will instead be based on Article 129 .
This will give the European Parliament greater influence over the criteria used in the approval of pesticides in the EU as the matter will fall under codecision .
Will the Commission therefore temporarily refrain from approving active substances on the positive list of pesticides , as it is now said to have begun doing ?
Is the Commission prepared instead to review the directive now so that any requirements the European Parliament may put forward may be taken into account before the new substances are approved ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Guideline 91 / 414 concerning the dissemination of plant pesticides has been in effect since 1993 .
The first testing stage for previous active agents and the testing of certain new agents has just started .
The Commission does not , therefore , yet have sufficient evidence at the present stage of guideline implementation to make it imperative for the basic criteria concerning approval of chemical synthetic agents to be modified , or for the testing programme to be stopped .
Any future Commission proposals concerning modification to the criteria that were made subsequent to ratification would , of course , be binding on the corresponding new regulations .
Thank you for your answer Mr Commissioner .
I understand the answer to mean that there could be a situation where there is a period of overlap because there is insufficient information .
That is at least how I understood your answer .
As such , I think it is quite excellent and I would just like to urge you , if the new treaty is very close to coming into force , not to hurry some things through on the basis of the old standards if new information is needed .
As such , it is a kind of suggestion or request to you , Mr Commissioner , to delay looking at these new chemicals until the treaty has entered into force , even if it appears , as I understood you , that there will be a certain period of overlap .
Question No 38 by Raul Rosado Fernandes ( H-0554 / 97 )
Subject : Vine growing - Directive 193 / 68 / EEC
In order to survive , the EU 's vine growing sector needs to be constantly renewed with selected vegetative material which will enable it to achieve optimum productivity or quality based on market requirements .
Vine growing is still governed by Directive 193 / 68 / EEC , which was an excellent piece of legislation for its time , but now growers in Greece , Spain and Portugal are in practice unable meet the health standards , which are interpreted differently nowadays .
Since vine cultivation in these three countries has not been subject to selection over a period of decades as in the ' founding ' vine growing countries , it is important that the above directive be interpreted in a way which meets their needs , so that strains which can never be imported from the more advanced Member States can be preserved .
Why does DG VI not explain objectively the criteria to be met when applying the directive in accordance with the historical situation of each country ?
Why does the Standing Committee referred to in Article 17 of Directive 193 / 68 / EEC not include representatives of the private sector ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this question concerns the bringing into circulation of so-called vegetative propagation material from grapes .
Unified quality standards were introduced for this , which the Member States have to meet on circulating such material .
The aim has been to increase productivity in the wine industry .
Relevant offices of the Commission are currently preparing a revision of these guidelines , not only in order to simplify them in view of relevant legal and technical developments and to update them , but also to remove existing trade barriers and ensure conformity with the internal market .
The Commission will probably lay the proposal before Council , and hence Parliament , towards the end of this year .
The various plant health regulations referred to by the honourable Member in his question have their origin in the requirements of the guideline itself .
For in this guideline Member States are expressly given the freedom , under certain circumstances , to apply additional requirements for their own products . They are also permitted to apply certain other requirements according to various circumstances in individual wine-growing regions .
Legal developments and likely problems in applying the regulations were mentioned by experts from Member States in the Standing Committee on Seed and Plant Material .
During this the situation in each individual country was carefully investigated .
As for the participation of representatives of the private sector in meetings of the Standing Committee , the relevant Council decision establishing the Committee only permits representatives of Member States .
Representatives of the private sector may , however , present their points to those consultative meetings of the Commission in which important new developments in legal regulations may be mentioned .
The relevant offices of the Commission have held direct consultations for this revision work with professional associations having relevant knowledge on the subject of propagation material for vines , and specialize in it .
Mr Commissioner , there is a degree of tolerance for the commercialization of Portuguese grape varieties that are grown from unclassified cultivated rice material .
That can only be explained by the fact that the Portuguese authorities are fairly strict - it is an old tradition since our Inquisition , if not a very wise one !
For this reason some are grown in France , then loaded and sold again to Portugal .
There have already been complaints about it .
For instance , Mr Legras received a complaint on 1 September this year , which can be easily established .
That is just for your information .
I would just like to respond quickly to that .
I have , of course , little influence on the wisdom of the Portuguese authorities .
But I can assure you of one thing : if there are definite complaints , then we shall investigate them .
I f complaints stem from the private sector , that is , from businesses or plant propagation cooperatives , then these may be made in addition within the framework of consultative committees and discussed at specialist level .
Question No 39 by Arlindo Cunha ( H-0595 / 97 )
Subject : The Commission 's strategy for CAP reform
The next CAP reform must provide the EU 's farmers with the resources and conditions they need to adapt to the increasing external competition caused by eastward enlargement and GATT .
This means that the reform cannot be carried out on a purely sectoral basis , since , over and above alterations to certain common organizations of the market , the emphasis of the policy needs to be shifted towards boosting rural development and establishing a minimum level of income support for all farmers .
Only in this way can unacceptable social and political discrimination be avoided .
How does the Commission plan to reconcile all these aspects of the problem ?
Does it intend , as in 1991 , to submit a general discussion and strategy paper to facilitate debate with technical , professional and political circles ?
As everyone in this House knows , the President of the Commission presented Agenda 2000 on 16 July this year . In this the Commission gave a wide overview of the development of the European Union and its policies from the millennium into the middle of the following decade .
The effects of expansion and the budget framework after the year 2000 were discussed .
For agriculture , the Commission proposed a further expansion of the reform introduced in 1992 - which was established under Mr Cunha when he was a minister and President-in-Office of the Council - and the development of a coherent policy for rural areas in support of this process .
By changing from price subsidy to direct payment the European Union can greatly improve its competitiveness through lowering the price of grain , beef and milk . This will also help producers in the European Union to have access in full measure to positive developments on the international market .
At the same time , food hygiene and food quality , as well as food safety , will be improved .
The proposals for development of a coherent policy supporting rural areas have as their objective , on the one hand , to secure a suitable income for the rural population . They should also play a part in creating stability of agricultural incomes and new sources of employment and income for farmers and their families .
The Commission intends to present to the Council , after consultation with the European Parliament , a first report on the Agenda 2000 package of measures , and then to suggest relevant legal texts and distribute concrete proposals for individual areas following the Luxembourg Summit .
Mr President , I am grateful for the Commissioner 's reply , but the fact is that the Agenda 2000 proposal will continue to exclude the producers of certain Mediterranean products , like wine , fruit and even rice , from direct aid .
This will lead to more than half of agricultural production in certain countries of southern Europe being excluded from the premiums of direct aid to income , creating discrimination difficult to sustain at the political level .
The Commissioner knows that .
We cannot explain to Portuguese , Spanish or Italian farmers why half of their agricultural production is not entitled to premiums , when in other countries , which have other production , almost all of agricultural production gets premiums .
I would like to ask the Commissioner what the Commission intends to do to prevent this discrimination between countries , as this is a difficult political issue which we , the politicians , must try to resolve .
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make a very clear distinction here .
First , as far as Mediterranean or southern products are concerned , Agenda 2000 says that the Commission intends to make firm proposals for the tobacco and olive oil sectors .
I should like to remind you that here in Parliament it has been repeatedly urged that the Commission should only make such proposals when reports on these two sectors are being discussed in the European Parliament , and when a view has been expressed on them .
We are complying with that .
Concerning the wine sector , there is a proposal here for reform which we believe , however , should not be processed in its existing state .
I see here the necessity of presenting to the Commission a new proposal .
You may rest assured that these concrete proposals will be made available just as punctually - at the end of the year , or the beginning of next year - as the firm proposals for the areas grain , milk and beef , so that these southern products can be discussed within the framework of more general discussion .
A situation like that of Reform 92 should not arise , therefore , whereby it is really only possible to deliver a Council declaration at that time , work on reforming southern products having to be dealt with afterwards .
I should also like to draw attention to the fact that there is naturally a fundamental difference between grain , milk and beef products - although I must add in parenthesis that these products are also of the greatest importance in southern countries - and that is , that we are recommending here a marked reduction in price guarantees which will result in prices falling in these areas .
In the other sectors we are making no recommendations that would result in a fall in market prices for olive oil or tobacco grown by tobacco farmers within the European Union .
This aspect , that of the target income for agriculture , we must regard in future along with many others as one of the primary objectives .
Mr Commissioner , can we deduce from what you have said that there will be guarantees and prospects for the future of Mediterranean agriculture ?
Please be more specific , because the last Council of Ministers caused a lot of anxiety .
In what you have said so far I have not heard any details .
Mediterranean farmers need you to give them these guarantees of future prospects , as you do for other parts of Europe .
Please be more specific .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , I agree with you that farmers throughout the European Union need a plan for the future .
That is precisely the purpose of Agenda 2000 : to offer the farmers of Europe a vision for the future .
We want to make no differentiation between farmers from the south and those from the north .
The future of agriculture must be secured throughout Europe , and the reform proposals should , amongst other things , help to clarify what we can secure this future with .
Mr President , what I really want to ask the Commissioner is that , since it is quite clear that we are not going to reach the large number of questions on BSE , could he please ensure that the written answers which Members will receive go to everyone who has tabled those questions , because all of us would be interested in the answers to the other questions .
Thank you very much , Mrs Hardstaff .
Honourable Members , this is a question for the Presidency , and my answer to Mrs Hardstaff is that this Presidency will see to it that Questions Nos 40 to 85 , which have not been answered directly , will receive written answers as soon as possible .
Since the allotted time for questions to the Commission is now up , Questions Nos 40 to 85 will be dealt with in writing .
That concludes Question Time .
Since it is now significantly later than the timetable envisaged , I should like to thank the parliamentary services for their patient assistance . May I remind you all that the work of the part-session will resume tonight at 9.00 p.m.

The sitting is suspended .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.15 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Chernobyl , Khmelnitsky and Rovno 4 nuclear reactors ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the oral question by Mr Scapagnini ( B4-0519 / 97 - O-0087 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , to the Commission , on the closure of the Chernobyl nuclear reactor by 2000 and the completion of the Khmelnitsky 2 and Rovno 4 nuclear reactors in Ukraine .
Mr President , the sarcophagus at Chernobyl is in a worsening condition and new risks are emerging , including the plutonium dust cloud release , so that securing it and closing the remaining unit are more urgent than ever .
The completion of K2 and R4 nuclear reactors is part of an agreement between the G7 and Ukraine on the closure of Chernobyl .
The agreement stipulates that the nuclear option must , however , be least-cost and the independent least-cost study commissioned by the EBRD makes clear that the nuclear option is far from least-cost .
Other least-cost studies were unofficially undertaken later , but these were not done by an independent panel of experts .
Any other report is unofficial and suspect under the EBRD 's own operating principles for investment .
I must labour this point .
The official economic due diligence , I must emphasize , was done by an independent panel of experts and it follows that in the absence of a weighty published critique of the panel 's work , any work , such as that being done by Stone and Webster , is unofficial and its basis must therefore be suspect under the EBRD operating principles for investment in the energy sector .
Indeed the Stone and Webster study has changed the assumptions to try to make K2 and R4 economic , and the model produced a long list of other projects which became economic before K2 and R4 .
If they tried to make K2 or R4 economic , the investment bill for the bank would be astronomic .
A computer model cannot , without human intervention , make one reactor least-cost and the other uneconomic , so I was actually quite shocked at your own reaction today , Mr Commissioner .
ECU 30m nuclear-safety funds have already been committed to the K2 and R4 reactors through taxes .
Despite EP budget responsibility , decisions are being taken in a secretive manner without any consultation or proper information being given to Parliament or any clarity on the decision-making procedure .
Parliament is , along with the Council , the budgetary authority .
The budget for 1997 includes a stipulation that requires that Parliament be consulted in advance about individual Community loans .
To date this has not happened .
This lack of consultation is inconsistent with current proposals from the Commission to increase the level of the Guarantee Fund .
I am also alarmed at the Court of Auditors ' report .
If we want to close Chernobyl we need to look carefully at what is actually being done in that particular area .
Mr Commissioner , you did not and cannot answer the question on consistent safety standards tonight .
The truth is that these reactors cannot be completed to Western safety standards .
You are planning to spend upwards of ECU 800m on unsafe reactors .
We will not be forgiven if we fail to close Chernobyl and create another accident zone .
Mr President , the more we hear about this whole project the more alarmed I have become .
I have the feeling that this Parliament could become embroiled in a cause célèbre with the Commission .
If it is the case that the EBRD is evading its own requirements to go for the lowest cost option , this is a serious matter which could have serious repercussions .
The European public also will fail to understand why Ukraine is being encouraged to rely on the nuclear option instead of going for what would appear to be a very fruitful alternative , i.e. energy saving , energy efficiency , and renewables .
A big push in that direction would be signalled by not replacing the Chernobyl-era plants .
That is the direction in which the European Union 's policy should be pointing .
It would be very strange indeed if Chernobyl , which to the West stands as a terrible warning of the dangers of nuclear power , and should therefore lead to the phasing out of nuclear power , was instead to become the symbol of its replacement by a new generation of nuclear power .
This is - or could be - a historic turning-point .
Instead of propping up the Western European desire to renew the nuclear energy of Ukraine , we should be looking to alternatives .
This would be in the best interests of the European Union and of the people of Ukraine who have suffered long enough from nuclear contamination .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the closure of the nuclear power station at Chernobyl is an extremely sensitive subject , in the light of the dramatic accident which occurred , and which we naturally all remember .
In the light of the dangers of this type of power station , it is in the interests of all that the closure of Chernobyl should occur as soon as possible .
However , the Ukrainian government has put a prior condition on the closure of the unit still operating at Chernobyl , namely finance for the completion of the replacement nuclear power stations at Khmelnitzky 2 and Rovno 4 .
This position is understandable , if Ukraine 's requirements in energy are taken into account . However , it appears that loans from the EBRD intended to finance the replacement power stations may be rejected , under the criterion of least cost .
It appears to us completely unacceptable that the achieving of a goal as essential as that of the closure of a supremely hazardous power station should be deferred for purely technocratic and budgetary reasons .
If the EBRD is to be managed as a private bank under common law , one cannot really see why there is any need for its existence .
It is clear that , if the logic of the least cost were to carry the day , the closure of Chernobyl would be indefinitely postponed .
After all , it was also for reasons of cost reduction that power stations such as Chernobyl were built in the past .
The adoption of stricter safety standards would have increased costs and led to the construction of more technologically sophisticated power stations .
Here it is quite apparent that the European Commission 's logic is a budgetary logic .
Of course , that has its merits for day-to-day administration , but in our opinion , this should not win out over the need to insure oneself against major nuclear risks .
Furthermore , it appears to us regrettable that the European authorities which , in general , and fairly systematically , it must be said , push for the integration of European states , even when this goes against the wish of the population , as can be seen in Bosnia , does not recommend Ukraine at any time to intensify its energy cooperation with the Russian Federation .
However , the interests of the two countries are indissociable one from the other , by reason of a long common history , and it is absurd not to take into consideration such a historical heritage .
If ever Ukraine were to be short of nuclear-powered electricity following the closure of Chernobyl , why not envisage supplying energy from Russia and Central Asia - which is already being done - but on a much greater scale , as the oil and gas resources of these regions are considerable .
Here of course this is really a question of politics , and not a matter of mere experts .
We believe , indeed , that this possibility has only been excluded in order to marginalize the Russian Federation and deliver up Ukraine to the economic appetites of the west .
Such an attitude does not appear to us to be reasonable in the long term , and it is essential in our opinion to breach the law of silence which benefits western policy , and founded on the determined pursuit of limitless profit .
The wish increasingly to dissociate members of the CIS one from another , and so make them into Western economic colonies , in a manner of speaking , may well be profitable in the very short term , but probably not in the longer term .
To isolate Ukraine , to impose upon it ever more rigorous financial standards , appears not to be the best way to render it service .
This logic is tantamount to doing nothing about the hazards of Chernobyl , which is perfectly scandalous in human terms .
It is therefore , we believe , necessary to grant the priority loans which Ukraine needs , or alternatively - and this is not incompatible - to prompt Ukraine to draw closer to Russia , and finalize a common energy policy with Russia .
Why would any form of rapprochement between the Russian Federation and Ukraine be taboo , whereas everywhere else , there is a push to closer links between states ?
In our view , only such a political line of rapprochement could provide some safe outcome , first for the urgent needs of short term nuclear safety , and secondly , for the need to create a climate of peaceful cooperation in Europe , reminding ourselves of this obvious truth , which is apparently too often forgotten : the Russian Federation is also in Europe , and no-one has the power to expel it .
Thank you Mr President , and thank you too , Mr Commissioner , for your attendance and for your answers this afternoon .
Perhaps they were not all quite as detailed as we had hoped but perhaps you will get another chance to comment .
We would be particularly interested in any fall-back plans you might have should things not go according to our expectations .
Clearly we need a solution to Chernobyl .
I am sure there is complete unanimity on that .
Also , it is quite obvious that you , Mr Commissioner , will be safeguarding the European Union by not simply accepting the wishes of Ukraine without imposing certain conditions .
We are indebted to our colleague , Gordon Adam , for his extremely thorough report - quite characteristic of that very diligent person - on the situation in Ukraine , which is clearly terrifying .
This is not the time for a debate on whether or not nuclear power is a good idea and I urge colleagues not to misuse this debate for that reason .
We are looking at a specific case .
We are asked , and indeed President Larosière of the EBRD did raise the four safeguards that we would all want , whether , as a result of the EBRD loan we will have the highest possible existing standard of safety .
Are we doing something which is sound in financial terms ?
What is the bankability of Ukraine ?
Are we putting money at risk ?
Are we doing what is the least costly solution ?
Other aspects also arise .
Clearly , in western Europe , constructing nuclear power stations in our market and in our conditions is not always the least-cost at the moment .
This worries me a lot : will the long term operational management be satisfactory ?
If we have any doubts can we ensure through specific help , through a long term programme , that there will be backing for these people who are living through very traumatic times , so that whatever solution is chosen they will not be abandoned in a period of difficulties ?
We know that it would not be acceptable to you , and certainly not to us , to have lower standards , money at risk , public money wasted , and we want the assurance from you that this is not contemplated .
The energy situation in Ukraine raises much wider questions than those we have posed this evening and we have alluded to some other aspects and , indeed , other possibilities .
They include the geo-political situation of Ukraine and its relationship with its neighbours and former masters , which we have to take into account .
We have to look at the need to use the available western expertise in nuclear power .
What we want more than anything else , though , is to know that no rules are being broken , that they are being kept and that what we are doing is sensible and can be justified in the eyes of the public .
Mr President , safety aspects also militate against completion of the two nuclear power stations .
Neither project accords with the allocation guidelines of the EBRD , and I have the results of studies which come out most clearly against the construction of these nuclear power stations .
The modernization and completion programme planned by the operators will never satisfy Western safety principles .
The planned modernization programme will not even comply , Mr Commissioner , with the new Russian safety standards , as the construction of the reactor type used in K2 and R4 still fulfills the old Russian standards .
Furthermore , the modernization programme does not even meet all post-Three Mile Island requirements .
If the project were so to be modified that it met all the above requirements , then the financial means needed for it and the time frame required for a corresponding re-equipment programme would alter so radically , that it would greatly exceed all the assumptions so far made .
With regard to the fourth condition - environmental friendliness and citizen participation - I leave it to your assessment just what citizen participation might look like in Ukraine today .
There must be no retreat on the closure of Chernobyl .
On the contrary , everything possible must be done to close this damaged reactor for all time as quickly as we can .
I think it is irresponsible to allow Chernobyl to run for even one more day , or perhaps to use it as an excuse for the construction of two more , equally problematic , nuclear power stations .
A few days ago the President of the EBRD , Jacques Larosière , was in Austria , where he held talks with members of the Austrian Government .
Austria came out quite clearly against any financing of these two nuclear power stations .
As an alternative , Austria supported , amongst other measures , the modernization of existing calorific power stations .
When one considers the heat loss of everything being built in Ukraine - up to 60 % - that is so huge that one can easily imagine that one could help the people there with far fewer resources and in a much less dangerous manner .
Austria will obviously help to finance the sheathing of the ruined reactor at Chernobyl , and it will also pay into the corresponding funds .
Chernobyl was one catastrophe .
In God 's name let us not create potential new catastrophes through the completion of these two doubtful nuclear power stations !
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I shall address myself directly to you , because this debate seems to me to be utterly absurd .
It is suggested that about ECU 1 billion be collected to buy the closure of Chernobyl from the Ukrainians - let us be blunt about it - and then we should finance with this money two new nuclear power stations , which will be - as Mrs Flemming has just said - an ongoing risk . A risk not only for Ukraine , but for Europe as well .
And at the same time they will produce energy which Ukraine does not even need !
I think that is an absurd development .
By all means assist the eastern and central European countries to move away from nuclear power , but not one single ECU for the construction of more nuclear power stations !
Mr Commissioner , I exhort you to represent this line in the Commission , because it is the only energy policy line which can sustain the future . Anything else would be a continuation of , and a support for , a policy that is recognized as wrong .
I exhort you to allow this line of development in energy policy generally , and particularly in this special case . Above all , to allow the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to withstand pressure from the nuclear lobby , and not to permit the very opposite .
Mr President , the results of the disaster at Chernobyl have hung like a sword of Damocles over Ukraine and the whole of Europe for more than ten years .
It was only possible two years ago to negotiate serious closure programmes and put them into action .
Just how difficult this is can be seen from the question that we have put to the Commission today .
This is a matter of more than just the completion of two nuclear power stations which - as has previously been said - are very complex and expensive , and above all do not meet Western safety requirements .
The International Atomic Energy Agency has undertaken a safety assessment and was unable to discover this degree of safety in all points .
In fact some important points were omitted .
A main argument that Ukraine always raises , when alternative forms of energy are discussed , is the supply of fuel .
If Ukraine does not want to be dependent on Russia , which would have to supply the gas for a gas power station , then I ask myself where the big uranium mines are in Ukraine , from which it could obtain its own uranium .
This is exactly the same sort of dependence .
I believe we have to look at energy policy in its entirety .
We should start with least cost planning - which the bank also prescribes - and invest no money in projects that do not meet our concepts of safety and electricity output .
It is interesting , by the way , that there has been a reduction in power production in Ukraine , where mainly calorific power stations have been closed down .
Mr Commissioner , I very much regret that we find ourselves in a situation where we must apparently choose the lesser of two evils . I urge you to produce an energy policy with the eastern European countries which is orientated towards the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , occasionally we end up standing on our heads .
Everybody knows today that Chernobyl must be definitively closed .
This summer , a report from the nuclear operators throughout the world was unanimous in saying that unit 3 was now exposed to a major risk along the lines of the 1986 accident .
Everyone agrees that Chernobyl must be closed .
Now other nations are saying to us : we want the Ukrainians to agree with out point of view .
The Ukrainians are independent people , they have decided to undertake an energy policy which is suitable to them , and they have asked us to help them .
If we do not help them , what will happen ?
We had experience of this in 1996 .
They built a nuclear power station at Zapörozhe , which is an exact replica of Chernobyl , without containment , and without the safety facilities that we employ in the west .
If that is what we want , that is what we shall get , and you will always be able to say in Austria , or elsewhere , or in Portugal , that you don 't like it , but the power station will still be there .
Alternatively , some say , we need only recommend the building of coal , gas or oil-fired power stations .
Well , I say that this will cost you more , and I hope that the Commission will confirm what I am saying : $ 100 million a year for a coal-fired power station which emits more CO2 into the atmosphere than is acceptable .
And hence , curiously , the ecologists will come up to demonstrate that the nuclear power station is hazardous , while accepting coal combustion pollution .
You need to be clear on what you want .
What is the problem we face today ?
It is simple : two nuclear power stations are 80 % to 85 % completed .
In no way , ladies and gentlemen , are we to accept a new Chernobyl .
Already western companies from France or Germany are working to install in Ukraine the facilities employed in their own western nuclear power stations .
I would like to say to those who are exposing us today to a twin danger , that their calculation is all wrong .
On the one hand , we shall have a nuclear accident if we do not close Chernobyl . On the other hand , we shall have pollution , if we accept power generation by archaic resources .
This is why , today , the Ukrainians wish to be independent , and do not wish to be in the hands of the Russians , either for gas , or for uranium , or for coal , and are therefore asking us to provide them with assistance . Shall we in response to their expectations simply keep our mouths shut ?
Or shall we implement the policy that suits the circumstances ?
Mr President , I should be pleased to go into the matter more deeply on another occasion perhaps .
I would say to those who have the feeling that they are not well informed , that the European Commission , I believe , has shown the necessary transparency on this point and spoken on this matter many times with the members of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
I agree with the comments that have been made that we cannot hold a debate this evening for or against nuclear energy .
We have here a debate about closing down Chernobyl and how it can be made as safe as possible . When two weeks ago , during a summit with Ukraine , we again asked President Kuchma whether he was able to confirm that his earlier political commitment to close Chernobyl in the year 2000 was still applicable , he said that it was , inasfar as the international community is also prepared to honour the commitment that it made in the Memorandum of Understanding in 1994 and 1995 .
That not only involves assistance in implementing a large energy saving programme , also in the MOU , which is also jointly financed .
But it also involves , among other things , supporting completion of the two nuclear power plants under construction .
If the international community does not come up with the financing - let us also be realistic about this - then we know that Ukraine has already reserved funds in its own budget at the moment in order to achieve the dismantling of the two reactors in another way , but that of course does not give the West the opportunity to lay down the safety conditions that now form part of the loans that we wish to provide for the dismantling of the reactors .
Also , in order to avoid any misunderstanding , I understand very well that there is a dilemma at the EBRD .
I also understand very well that scientists have argued with each other about whether this is a matter of a least cost solution or not .
We can discuss this with each other for a long time , but in the meantime the closure of Chernobyl would be jeopardized .
Therefore the Commission said at a given moment : we will in any case comply with what was agreed within the G7 at that time , inasfar as it is within the power of the Union .
That implies that we are offering joint finance via Euratom loans for everything on condition a ) that Chernobyl complies with the safety requirements and b ) that the EBRD is prepared to jointly financed it .
In addition , it will also be financed by Ukraine itself and third party donors will also part-finance it .
We are awaiting the statement by the EBRD .
The Union is spending an enormous amount of money , hundreds of millions per annum , in contributions to eastern Europe , former countries of the Soviet Union in order to ensure that unsafe nuclear reactors are either closed down or made safe again .
I would refer you to the many discussions that we have had with each other about Kosloduy , Mochovse and so on .
These things concern all of us .
We do not take it lightly and we are not trail-blazers who purely and simply wish to promote nuclear energy .
But we are facing an enormous dilemma here , in which , as has just been said , the Chernobyl plant and particularly unit 3 has now been declared unsafe again by international experts .
We therefore do not have very much time left for discussion .
We must act .
The Commission will shoulder its responsibilities in this regard .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Van den Broek .
I have received six motions for resolutions under Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12.00 noon .
The debate is closed .
Innovation action plan
The next item is the report ( A4-0269 / 97 ) by Mr Rovsing , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the Commission communication ' The first action plan for innovation in Europe - Innovation for growth and employment ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0589 - C4-0624 / 96 )
Mr President , at the summit in Florence in March 1996 the European Council mentioned that the efforts for employment would continue to have top priority in the Union and Member States .
As part of a strategy aimed at achieving this goal , the European Council has asked the Commission to draw up an action plan for measures which can be implemented in the area of innovation .
Parliament agrees with the Commission that this area is important .
It concerns employment and earnings in the European Union .
The post-industrial , information-based society has fulfilled a substantial part of the basic needs of citizens .
The great challenge now for business and public institutions is to create quality and not just quantity .
The task will be completely different from the task of building a mass production society .
Often technological developments and changes in the social and institutional framework have quickly deprived a business of the basis of its business concept .
Information about the socio-economic aspects of the fifth framework programme , which the Commission 's DG XII presented in January 1997 , reveals disturbing traits in the European Union .
Average unemployment in the EU stands at 10 % .
The figures for the USA and Japan are 6 % and 3 % .
The latest estimates suggest that the businesses in which the number of jobs in Europe will rise substantially , will be those which require high qualifications , and that the jobs are more likely to come in the service sector than in manufacturing .
Statistics show that the technology gulf between the developed and less developed regions in the European Union is twice as large as the cohesion gulf , and there is much to suggest that the gulf is widening .
In the report we note that small and medium-sized businesses are in need of special attention .
General instruments , tax incentives , joint industrial research projects and the exploitation of the results are more suitable than quantified set targets in the specific programmes .
However , these measures are outside the Commission 's mandate .
Innovation indicators and finance should both be developed .
Experience shows that a lack of access to finance is seldom the most important obstacle to innovation , even though it is often used as an excuse .
The right financing after the introductory development phase can , however , be decisive as to whether new business are a success or a fiasco .
There is plenty of risk capital available in the European Union , but innovations do not always meet the market 's requirements .
Risk capital and innovations will catch each other 's attention if the risk capital side is convinced that prospective customers and other interested parties believe in a new business and if the entrepreneur or inventor understands that the risk capital investor wants a reasonable return on his investment .
The education of risk capital investors and risk capital providers is necessary to enable them to spot the new business opportunities .
It is wrong to believe that the European Union can solve the problems of unemployment .
That is chiefly a task for the individual Member States .
We should not give our citizens the idea that the Amsterdam Treaty can solve the problem of unemployment in Europe .
It can only make a modest contribution to that end .
In our report we stress that innovation policy in the Member States is a substantial part of the education system , and we point out , among other things , that in the short term neither legislation nor measures will contribute to a genuine culture of innovation .
We are also of the opinion that high environmental standards will give rise to innovation in the area of new technologies to the great benefit of mankind .
We call on the Commission , among others , to prioritize its proposals and to make EU research more innovation-orientated .
Finally we call on the Member States to review courses and teaching methods to stimulate creativity and enterprise at as early a stage as possible and to consider what essential changes must be made in the training of teachers .
We urge them to create greater mobility of people between universities and industry and to consider favourable tax conditions for investment in innovative projects or businesses .
Finally our proposal emphasizes a desire to give the Commission greater powers to guide research and development projects under the framework programmes , so that the Commission can change projects and start new projects when developments in basic research and new technologies make this appropriate .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur Mr Rovsing for an excellent report .
It is one that has been very helpful to our debates .
It is appropriate that the first action plan for innovation in Europe should come from Florence which was the centre of so much early European civilization .
We are aware that the correlation between research , technological development and innovation on the one hand and productivity growth and job creation on the other is very strong .
We are aware too that the European Union is less efficient than its competitors at exploiting the ideas we have .
Indeed , we currently have a deficit of ECU 24 billion per annum in hi-tech trade with Japan and the USA .
Clearly we need education and skills development .
Clearly we need , and are seeing , benchmarking by our companies .
Clearly we need better provision of finance for small businesses .
Essentially this will be at the individual , local and national level but it is important that the Union sets the operational environment . That it can do in areas such as competition , intellectual property and the functioning of the single market .
And not least too in assisting with finance for small businesses .
This action plan is good and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy of this Parliament welcomes it .
But we need to prioritize to a greater extent , which is not easy for the Commission but which is essential , to create more opportunity to provide equity finance and to work on the European company statute .
There is much to be gained .
The great giant , IBM , recently looked to a small Belgian company when it was looking for voice recognition technology .
Clearly there is a lot that can be done in Europe .
Far more will be achieved through programmes such as this than ever will be achieved through the jobs package which is being dressed up by the European Council to convince our citizens that we are doing something about employment .
I welcome this report and believe that Parliament should spend a lot of time looking at what the Commission is doing and ensuring that our innovation policies , which will really foster jobs , will take us forward into the next century .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have been appointed rapporteur on the current and future situation regarding European industrial competitiveness , and I am therefore working urgently on this important dossier .
I can also tell you that I am a militant Web-surfer , and therefore extremely conscious , not only of the great importance of the Net , but also of our considerable backwardness in this field .
I therefore read Mr Rovsing 's report with great interest , and I can say that I accept , that the Socialist group accepts , many of the observations , reflections and proposals contained in that report .
I can also say that I shall include a number of those observations , reflections and propositions in my own report , which is due in a few months .
In the few minutes available to me , I wish to go to the essential , in the three briefest of points .
First point , in the European Union - you have said so and everyone has said so - we are short of innovation , which is the consequence of the relative trimming back in our research effort . This has occurred in spite of the initiatives of the European Commission .
The shortfall in research is , without any doubt , one of the causes of the rise in unemployment in the European Union in the last few years , and the situation has been aggravated by very substantial delays in the field of new technologies - a dossier with which I am also well acquainted - and in particular , the take-up of new technology among the population , and especially among the youth , through our national educational systems .
Additionally , as has been said or can be read here and there , in the fields of information technology and communications , we are still in the Middle Ages , in a manner of speaking . And as some countries will move from the Middle Ages into the third millennium in the next ten or twenty years to come , we should take stock of the urgency and importance of the efforts required in Europe to improve research , develop new technologies and promote innovation , and in particular in communication .
For this , we need larger budgets , as everyone will agree , but also priorities in our actions , a proposal with which I also agree .
Can I say that it will be necessary perhaps , everywhere in Europe , to put everyone on Internet , and in particular political and economic managers and senior decision makers , who often spend their time talking about things they know little about .
This is either because they have no personal experience , or because they ensure that that experience is confined to their secretaries . This for me would be a real , a new , a great service to be developed , one which would indeed be universal , and in the general public interest .
Madam Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today much is being said about employment .
However employment presupposes economic growth , which itself requires research , technological development and innovation .
Hence , ladies and gentlemen , members of the Commission and ministers - who are not represented here this evening - maybe we need to combat all temptations or attempts at bringing cost cutting of the Malthus style into our budgets .
Mr President , we in Europe are experts in consumption , but not very good at investing .
We are experts in taking money from businesses , after which we set up aid programmes which give part of the money back .
We are experts at taxing initiative and poor at rewarding it .
We are far behind the USA and Japan with regard to technological innovation .
We have only 2 business scientists per 1 , 000 employees , while the USA and Japan have 6 .
That is why we in Europe also have twice the unemployment of the USA and three times the unemployment of Japan .
We have , in other words , ' difficulties with innovation ' .
We have problems with flexibility , which is noticeably worse , perhaps because we in Europe cultivate rights instead of incentives , and rules instead of opportunities .
When we paralyze innovation or restrict it , we also restrict job creation .
But those who cling to the jobs of the past restrict the jobs of the future .
The way to more jobs , better workplaces and a better environment and working environment is through innovation .
Christian Rovsing 's outstanding report rightly stresses that innovation is not created by laws and rules , but what you can do is remove burdens and hindrances and promote a competitive and rewarding business sector , and you can reward innovation .
So we can do something for education and research .
We can foster a culture of independence , and the European institutions should also practise what they preach to others .
That applies to this Parliament where I myself have the honour of being responsible for technological innovation in connection with the new buildings , but it also applies , for example , to European schools , which should be an example , but which from a technological point of view are definitely not an example , perhaps because they are subject to a centralized form of management .
Mr President , our group values Mr Rovsing 's report highly and considers it to be very good overall .
We also think that the Commission 's communication is a positive step .
We agree with Mr Rovsing 's appraisal of communication failings and about the need to establish priorities and clarify the European Union 's obligations .
However , there are various contradictions and ambiguities , which mean that in the end our opinion is not entirely positive .
Firstly , it is said that innovation will result in more jobs , but the innovation and employment statistics from the last 25 years indicate precisely the opposite .
The increased productivity yield per hour worked means there is a decrease in the number of jobs .
Secondly , there are calls for European policy to improve the structure of research - which we think is correct - and also its relationship with small businesses .
But the way the framework-programmes have developed in recent years means that there is a growing concentration of resources in a few outstanding regions , and a privileged link with large industries .
Thirdly , we think that although the investments supported by the Commission are important and result in improved funding , the Maastricht criteria are nevertheless imposing budgetary restrictions on research as well , both overall and in each country .
Fourthly , it is said that there is a need for a favourable climate , but students ' training causes an increase in competitiveness and individualism , and this can hinder that favourable climate .
Finally , we believe that we need to rely much more on the workers and the unions , both within companies and outside them , to be able to create this climate of technological innovation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union has a special place within the industrial world .
Alas , that position is one of particularly low growth , and particularly high unemployment levels .
Under such circumstances , innovation is effectively a necessity , not only for the present , but also for the future .
Mr Rovsing 's report rightly emphasizes the comparative weakness of the research and development drive in Europe as compared to the United States and Japan .
While this is easily said , the solutions have yet to be found .
In this respect , I wish to remind you that innovation is above all a matter of business , and those who work in businesses .
As has so rightly been said by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , the public authorities , be they regional , national or European , are not the best place to decide on the skills and qualifications required by businesses .
The role of the authorities in this field , as in many others incidentally , is to create an environment favourable to corporate innovation .
Indeed , it is only if society as a whole is borne up by a spirit of enterprise , with the risks and innovations that this involves , that enterprises will effectively be able to develop a dynamics of research and development .
The key factor is therefore to ensure that national legislation applies to the patents and know-how which promote innovation . But we must also ensure that the burden of taxation should not be intolerable and discouraging for companies that might no longer have the resources to invest in research and development .
We therefore need to congratulate the rapporteur , who has emphasized the need to avoid excessive regulation .
The report 's recommendations lay great emphasis on the role of small and medium-sized companies .
Their role is clear , but you will allow me to give equal emphasis to the major role of the larger companies in this field .
We should also , possibly , have raised the question of technology transfers and cooperation between large and small companies , particularly large companies and sub-contracting companies .
In regard to small and medium-sized companies , it should be noted that they already consider that they are all too often at some considerable distance from the national authorities .
Hence , the Community authorities will appear to them to be even more remote .
In this field , as in others , the principle of subsidiarity must not only be raised , but also respected .
Finally and in conclusion , I would like to insist on the fact that innovation can only develop in an economic and social climate which is favourable to enterprise , and that it is vain to promote special campaigns in this field and to devise assistance and incentives , if economic policy is locked up in narrow monetarism , and does not favour growth .
Innovation , and here I repeat myself , is above all the business of the enterprise sector itself , and of the men and women who give that sector life .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate concerns an extremely interesting subject .
I wish to bring forward a few points in this debate that I personally feel are of great importance .
I have also found them in the Commission document and in the excellent report by the rapporteur .
The financing of innovative companies and especially young people starting up and pace-setting companies by means of investment and risk capital is one of the keys to innovation .
From research we know that innovation is especially to be found among these young , new companies .
We have spoken here about getting the discussion going .
If we debate this subject with each other , then I should very much like to mention the phenomenon of the role of the bankers and the large pension funds .
There are enormous amounts of money there .
I think they could be made better use of and in order to get the banks in on this , I think this debate could be an excellent way of doing this .
I also want to ask again for attention be paid to the European company statute .
It has been dropped again .
It was often discussed in Parliament in the past .
Also very important is the role of education , the role of the combination of universities and business and last but not least I believe that the SMEs in particular can play a large part in this innovation which is something that we all want .
As my very last point , I therefore wish to refer to the letter from the chairman of the Committee on Culture who is afraid that we just keep on talking to each other and invites us to do something .
I think that is a message we should take to heart .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Parliament for the interest it has shown in the first action plan for innovation .
This has benefited from extensive scrutiny , as three Committees - the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs - have given their opinions to the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
My thanks go first to Mr Rovsing for the quality of his report .
It is stimulating in its criticism and motivating for the Commission , because the report invites the Commission to do more , particularly in the fields of finance for innovation and management of Community programmes for research and development .
The Commission is sensitive to the rapporteur 's recommendation , which invites the Commission to set up priorities on four points .
The Commission shares the opinion of the rapporteur with regard to the priority to be granted to the question of finance and innovation .
This , as you have rightly emphasized , is a vast question , which covers company start-ups , venture capital , transeuropean capital markets for high-growth companies , stock options , equity finance , etc .
The Commission on 1 July 1997 launched a pilot project - Hightech , Innovation and Technology Equity Capital - in collaboration with the European Investment Fund , to encourage private venture capital operators to invest in the start-up phases of technologically innovative projects .
The project was very warmly welcomed , and in two months , many funds were committed to playing a more active role .
The European Investment Bank and the European Investment Fund should also in the future , and in accordance with the resolution of the European summit for growth and employment held at Amsterdam , contribute to the improvement of the potential for innovation among companies in the European Union .
The second point is that of intellectual property , and this is one of the priorities of the Commission .
On 25 June 1997 the Commission adopted the Green Paper on the Community patent and on patent systems in Europe .
The Green Paper was to be an incentive to extensive debate and was intended to result in measures for substantial improvement of the current system of patent protection .
And you know that in this field there is much that needs to be done .
I rely on the support of Parliament in the approach adopted , which will be absolutely decisive .
The Commission also intends to introduce an assistance and information service on questions of intellectual property for the fifth framework programme .
It is vital that results financed out of public money should be better exploited , and this service should contribute to that .
The third point is that the framework programme should mark a change in Community policy towards research for innovation .
Innovation should become a concern to be included in the operation of theme-based programmes .
The innovation and participation programme for small and medium-sized companies should be attentive to this as part of its co-ordinating and supporting role , while carrying out its own activities .
The rapprochement between the themes of innovation and small and medium-sized companies within a single programme should make it possible to open up this framework programme more widely to small and medium-sized companies , and to ensure they benefit more broadly from its results , by making a better evaluation of their requirements .
The improvement in methods of management of the framework programme should facilitate the re-orientation of programmes or projects currently in their execution phase , in the light of technological and social requirements .
Finally , and this is the fourth point , the Commission is convinced of the importance of the educational and cultural dimension .
This is one of the three themes retained by the action plan .
Competitiveness and employment in Europe depend upon mastery of information , of knowledge and of adaptability .
The implementation of the proposals of the White Paper on education and training , in particular Erasmus and apprenticeship , and the pilot projects such as ' Learning in the information society ' , should contribute to promoting innovation and ensuring its image is democratized .
In conclusion , the debate around the Green Paper and the publication of the action plan have raised awareness of the importance of innovation for company competitiveness , for growth and for employment .
Mr Rovsing 's report provides a critical and enriching back-up to the approach of the Commission .
This report encourages the Commission to pursue its efforts and even to go further on some points .
Parliament 's recommendations and suggestions will be taken into account by the Commission in the implementation of its action plan and in the preparation of the Luxembourg summit on employment .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Cresson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Imports of CFC products from China and Russia
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B4-0522 / 97 - O-0106 / 97 by Mr Teverson and Mr Eisma , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party to the Commission , on the illegal network importing CFC products from China and Russia into the European Union ; -B4-0523 / 97 - O-0107 / 97 by Mr Dupuis and Mr Macartney , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Commission , on illegal imports of CFCs .
Mr President , one of the things that impressed the world most in terms of global environmental action was the Montreal Protocol - the agreement , that was unique at that time , between 24 nations to work towards a ban on CFCs .
That has now grown to 163 countries and indeed production is now banned in the European Union , in OECD countries and will be in developing countries from the year 2010 .
That protocol was a unique combination of determination between NGOs , government and business to solve a vital environmental problem .
But that good work , as we have seen from a number of reports recently , has been undermined by smuggling , estimated at up to some 20 , 000 tonnes a year , a third of world trade , undermining quite substantially the legitimate industry that is trying to provide substitutes .
Europe has been described as being awash with illegal CFCs .
These have come primarily from Russia , often relabelled as being recycled products - Russia appears to be contravening the Montreal Convention - and from China where output is actually growing .
The solution must be a ban on sales ; not just of virgin CFCs which is important and taken on board quite substantially by the European Commission and a number of European nations , but a total ban because of the problem of relabelling and lack of control .
While those sales go on there must also be a licensing system world-wide that is fully accountable and fully traceable .
I , personally , have always been a great subscriber to the principle of subsidiarity in European decision-making , but this is one area in a global environmental issue where there is no room for subsidiarity .
Europe , the Council of Ministers , the Commission and Parliament together should be working for the highest standards to make sure that the principles of the Montreal Protocol are not undermined but are indeed strengthened .
Industry is behind it .
The health of future generations , certainly in the northern hemisphere , is very much threatened by this smuggling and continued use of CFCs .
I ask the Commission , which has been a strong advocate of reform , what step it is now going to take to stop this smuggling of CFCs into the European Union ?
Mr President , we generally keep an extremely close watch on the action of the Commission services , and we often recommend they show more vigour .
However , in the matter about which we have just received information from our colleague , the Parliament should be invited to congratulate the Commission services , which are frequently put in a difficult position because , in the field of combatting fraud , they bring to light fraud which very often is more or less covered by the administrations of the Member States .
Our group therefore wishes that the action of the Commission services should be supported by the whole of the Parliament .
It should be remembered that production of CFCs has been banned since 1995 in the European Union , and is also in general banned in all the developed countries , and will be so in all the developing countries from 2010 .
For the present , we accept the import of these products into the European Union , on a quota system .
However these quotas must be respected !
Nevertheless , we see that the lack of international customs cooperation and the poor quality of cooperation between the customs departments of the Member States , in matters affecting the environment , creates breaches in the protection to which our countries should be entitled .
The intervention of UCLAF is therefore a major victory , in so far as coordination at European Union level seems to have borne fruit .
The Group of the European Radical Alliance wishes to invite Parliament to make progress towards total prohibition of CFC imports into the European Union .
It invites the Commissioner and the Commission to work in close cooperation with the parties to the Montreal Convention , in order to set up a very strict regime of sanctions against those operating illegally .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European Commission was warned , some time back , of illicit transactions in substances which deplete the ozone layer , and has therefore taken and continues to take measures at various levels .
The European Commission unit for combatting fraud has intervened , as you emphasized , to institute and coordinate inquiries with the customs departments of the Member States .
These inquiries have recently resulted in discoveries of illegal imports into a number of Member States ( Germany , Netherlands , Belgium ) of some 1 , 000 tonnes of CFC and halon of Chinese origin .
The merchandise was seized and the persons suspected of the fraud arrested .
Other inquiries relating to situations and products of different types and provenance are underway .
Simultaneously , several initiatives have been taken to reinforce the control system and seek out possible sources of illegal imports .
In these past few days in particular , parties to the Montreal protocol on substances depleting the ozone layer have been studying the problem as part of a tenth anniversary meeting , and are discussing a proposal whose aim is to oblige all parties to set up a regime of licences for the import and export of substances of this type .
The European Community is already managing a system of quotas and licences for the import of these substances . However , it goes without saying that the efforts of all parties should be coordinated to prevent illegal trading .
The Commission intends , at the time of the revision of Council Regulation 3093 / 94 relating to such substances , to propose the prohibition of the sale and use of CFCs , whose production has already been banned since 1995 .
The prohibition of sale would eliminate demand , and hence the temptation of illegal trade .
In parallel , the European Union has , under the Montreal protocol , submitted a proposal to all the industrialized countries , and this is also under discussion .
The regulation lays the obligation on all Member States to set out persuasive sanctions in the event of non-compliance with provisions , but it is their responsibility , clearly , to apply these sanctions effectively .
Mr President , I am pleased to hear what Mrs Cresson says .
It is certainly different from what the Commission said last year when Mrs Bjerregaard spoke on the subject .
First of all , I must welcome the report by the Environmental Investigation Agency which has exposed this trade and provided the undeniable evidence which means that the Commission must act against this illegal trade .
Despite the report and questions from the Institute of International Affairs and questions by myself and other Members in the past , the Commission has been slow to act on this .
Indeed , in May last year Mrs Bjerregaard said : ' we obviously are interested to study reports from the UK , but we will have to see if there is enough information to take the matter forward ' .
Well , I am pleased to hear that the Commission is taking the matter forward at last - at last - but not far enough !
Anybody who has studied this trade knows quite clearly that it is a classic example of the operations of illegal crime and illegal trade in general .
The Commission must not just take action against the demand , it must take action against the supply .
There are clearly alternatives to all existing uses and the Commission has been slow to ban the use and the sale of CFCs within the Community .
But the matter does not stop there , Mrs Cresson .
You have got to take action against the supply as well .
A World Bank plan exists to buy out almost half the world 's production in Russia , costing only $ 27 million , yet the response by Member States so far has been poor .
Britain has offered $ 3 million , Denmark has offered $ 2 million , Norway - it is not in the Union , but at least it is a responsible country - has offered $ 2 million .
The Americans have also offered money .
I would call upon the Commission to get its full strength and full weight behind this proposal to buy that production out , to isolate the remaining production in China and to ensure that this illegal trade is stopped .
You can buy it out - it costs peanuts .
Why has the Commission not done it ?
Why has it not acted in the interests of the people of Europe in response to calls from their representatives like myself and others who have asked questions in the past ?
It has been slow to act and the consequences are severe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , two old proverbs to start with .
Whenever money is to be earned by circumventing the law , crime cannot be far away .
The other : the fact that UCLAF , the European Commission 's fraud squad , has got onto the trail of these nefarious dealings shows that the controls are working .
At the forefront of the oral question are illegal imports from China , and possibly also from Russia .
In Germany they have just uncovered the illegal import of 1 , 000 tonnes of CFCs from Great Britain .
There is also evidence that some other countries in eastern and central Europe are not obeying the current agreement on ending the production and use of CFCs , which have been identified as an ozone killer .
Ten years ago 24 states and the European Union signed the Montreal Agreement , the aim of which was , and is , the phased cessation of CFC production and a phased renunciation of other agents which are most damaging to the ozone layer .
CFCs have been forbidden in industrial countries since 1996 .
Despite this , some 240 , 000 tonnes are still produced worldwide every year .
Consumption still rises worldwide by about 4 % , mainly in the developing countries .
Even here in Europe CFCs have not been entirely abandoned in existing installations , for instance , condenser plant . This is not merely on grounds of cost - the replacement of all these installations would swallow enormous sums - but also for environmental reasons .
There are insufficient plants across the world to remove these CFCs without causing environmental damage .
To satisfy the need for an alternative there is the so-called quota system , and in the resolution motion which we are voting on tomorrow we shall be unable to pass point 6 , because here the question is raised about what is to happen to the quantities that cannot be removed .
We in the European Union must not only see that the existing laws and treaties are obeyed , and that offenses are strictly penalized , but we must take every step to ensure that developing countries and those in the former Eastern Block are persuaded to forgo the use of CFCs earlier than hitherto foreseen - by the year 2010 , in fact .
For this they need our financial and technical support .
We must likewise do all in our power to reduce the use of other ozoneharmful agents .
Methyl bromide , which has two thirds of the damaging potential of CFC , and is used mainly in developing countries in agriculture , is principal amongst these .
The same applies , though , to the partially-halogenated hydro-chloro-fluorocarbons , the HCFCs , which are being increasingly introduced throughout the world as replacements for CFCs , and whose damaging effect is only 20 % of the CFCs ' potential .
For this reason we cannot vote under point 7 for inclusion of the HCFCs .
We should like it removed , because it is simply impossible .
Throughout the world there is resistance to an earlier end to the use of these materials .
The European Union should , as already agreed , lead with a good example here .
Mr President , in this one minute I can merely say that I am very worried about the illegal trade .
Another 96 , 000 tonnes of CFCs , and in July of this year it was discovered that 150 tonnes of these dangerous substances were being dealt in illegally and that they come particularly from China and Russia .
But I have not completely understood from the Commission what specific action and sanctions they now wish to impose on the dealers in these illegal substances .
Perhaps the Commission could just have a better look at this matter .
If I have understood the Commission properly , during the Montreal conference that ends tomorrow , it will also put forward proposals to prohibit the sale and use of all CFCs worldwide .
But I should also like to know , and I ask the Commission once again , whether in the one remaining day of the conference it also wishes to ban the substitutes for CFCs and methyl bromide .
I hope we will receive a report on this Montreal Conference and the effort that the Commission has made and we would ask the Commission to let us have the report as quickly as possible so that we will know what the Commission has done .
Mr President , as many speakers have already mentioned , part , in fact a very large part , of the illegal imports of freons comes from China .
Some also comes from Russia . A while ago German newspapers reported on how a seller of fire-fighting equipment had been arrested for illegally importing freons from China .
The profits which can be made from this are thought to be up to around 300 per cent , and around 10 , 000 tonnes of illegal freons are said to be imported into the European Union each year .
This is therefore a very serious problem as everyone has stressed in this debate .
The question is how we are to overcome it .
The World Bank is now trying , as some speakers also mentioned , to buy out the people who produce these substances . For example , by providing DM 140 million to Russia so that they will refrain from producing what they have committed themselves by agreement not to produce .
This is perhaps a doubtful method , but you must still ask yourself whether it is not a necessary method .
Since developing countries now have the right to produce freons until the year 2010 , there is perhaps no alternative but to buy them out in one way or another .
It would be interesting to know whether the Commission has thought about this ; in other words , what is its view on the World Bank 's project and is it prepared to support it ?
Is the Commission further prepared in the case of China to open special discussions with the Chinese government to see whether the Chinese authorities can be of assistance in stopping this at source ?
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , smuggling occurs when it brings in a lot of money .
The contraband CFCs that have been discovered are surely a mere fraction of what is being smuggled into the Union .
My colleague , Mr Bowe , has drawn attention to that fact .
I , too , have put a series of questions to the Commission in this context , because rumours of smuggling have repeatedly arisen .
They are not being smuggled because they are themselves so valuable , but because their manufacture is prohibited , and yet much equipment and many installations that cannot function without CFCs are still in existence .
This is , I believe , one of the main points we have to bear in mind .
It is not enough to prohibit manufacture .
It is not enough to prohibit sales .
It is not enough to prohibit imports .
One must also work towards the phased removal , modification or replacement with new models of all those installations that still operate with CFCs today .
That is most certainly also an area which must be researched , not just into replacement materials , but also replacement equipment and installations .
If someone owns a car cooled with CFCs , replacement for the air conditioning costs over $ 200 , and that money can buy a car in the USA .
So this means that if we are serious about the matter , we must start with the total removal from use of this material , which causes long term damage to the ozone layer .
Many of us will not live to see the day when the ozone layer has so far recovered as to equate once more with pre-1970 levels .
I believe it will also be necessary to reinforce control measures in Member States , to examine quotas carefully , and perhaps to buy more equipment like that used in the USA to detect smuggled CFCs .
This also would be an important step , but all that can only be one measure to bring about a faster end to use .
As far as I am aware , Directorate General XI is preparing a document that will also enable the Union to introduce an earlier end to the use of HCFCs .
We should all work together on this , as far as both investment and replacement compounds are concerned .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall try to reply to the questions which have been raised , and this will enable me to give details of the Commission 's position .
Some of you have raised questions as to the exact scope of this traffic .
For some time already , complaints have been made about illegal imports of CFCs , and the industry believes that such traffic could involve volumes of between 10 , 000 and 15 , 000 tonnes annually .
Furthermore , an NGO , the Environmental Investigation Agency , which is principally in charge of such problems , in a recent publication made reference to imports ranging from 6 , 000 to 20 , 000 tonnes .
Others have raised questions as to the resources available to the Commission for undertaking legal action against customers involved in traffic of this kind .
The follow-up on violations of European legislation - that is , the obligation to set up a system of licences , prohibition of imports , and the relevant sanctions - falls within the responsibility of the Member States .
As I said earlier , the European Commission anti-fraud unit has opened and coordinated inquiries with the customs departments of the Member States .
Sanctions differ from one state to another , and are not homogeneous .
Yet others again have raised questions about the current situation on the application of Community legislation in the various Member States .
The Community stipulations relating to the inspection of substances depleting the ozone layer are applied thanks to regulations which directly involve economic operators .
Another question raised relates to the continuation of CFC imports .
Basically , are there no replacement products ?
If we look at the various sectors in which the CFCs were originally used , it can be seen that in aerosols , with the exception of inhalers for asthma treatment - where their use is essential - solvents have been suppressed , and foams are now totally CFC-free .
Replacement products used in this sector are hydrocarbons , HCFCs , and to a lesser extent , HFCs .
In the refrigeration equipment field , the industry believes that a volume of between 50 , 000 and 100 , 000 tonnes of CFC is still contained in existing equipment .
Increasingly , HCFCs are used as a substitute for CFCs .
Ammonia and hydrocarbons are also increasingly used in the new equipment .
The question may arise as to whether the Commission believes that total prohibition of the sale and use of CFCs - which is equivalent to drying up the supply of CFCs - would also be the most appropriate means to eliminate demand and facilitate inspections .
Effectively , a provision which would make it unlawful to maintain CFCs on the market , for example , prohibition of sale , would certainly contribute greatly to ease of control .
What strategy does the Commission intend to adopt now , particularly within the framework of the Montreal conference ?
At the Montreal conference , the Community is working for the introduction by all parties of a regime of licences for the import and export of substances which deplete the ozone layer .
The position of the Commission is therefore very firm .
Furthermore , the European Community has put forward a proposal whose aim is to forbid the sale of CFCs in all industrialized countries .
Mr President , the Commissioner was about to tell us whether or not the Commission believed that a total ban was going to be Commission policy or not and then , certainly as far as the interpreting was concerned , I never heard the answer to that question .
I seek clarification .
Does the Commission believe that this strong policy of stopping sales altogether is a Commission policy or not ?
Yes , Mr Teverson , you are quite right .
The European Community has presented a proposal whose aim is to forbid sales of CFCs in all industrialized countries .
I also said that , clearly , the prohibition of CFC sales would facilitate the combat against fraud .
These two proposals therefore overlap .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Cresson .
I have received four motions for resolutions under Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12.00 noon .
The joint debate is closed .
Helms-Burton Act
The next item is the oral question ( B4-0521 / 97 - O-0102 / 97 ) by Mrs Castellina , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , to the Commission , on the negotiations between the Commission and the US administration on the Helms-Burton Act .
Mr President , this is an oral question put by the Committee on External Economic Relations .
I am grateful to Commissioner Brittan for being here .
Next Thursday the second bilateral meeting between the United States and the European Union will begin in Paris on setting common criteria for the definition of rules to guarantee the safety of investments . These rules are to be included in the multilateral agreement on MIA investments currently under negotiation .
We do not know what was discussed and what guidelines were adopted at the previous meeting .
But we do know that they will be decisive , given the weight of the two players in the CSCE .
That is also why the Committee on External Economic Relations is raising the need to be better informed during the actual course of the discussions , before being faced with a take-it-or-leave-it agreement .
We are all convinced that guarantee rules for all should be established at the international level , but we are still concerned , all the more so as the decision on this closer consultation between the European Union and the United States was part of an agreement which led to the suspension of the WTO panel when the United States was in the dock over its Helms-Burton Act .
This suspension has already caused concern in this Parliament which had , moreover , like the Council , taken a firm position against the American embargo .
So we would like to understand better how and whether the rules intended to guarantee investments will safeguard the sovereignty of our countries , so as to continue to guarantee their legislative autonomy .
Your colleague , Commissioner Fischler , himself raised the same question the other day on the BSE issue , asking whether and to what extent , within the context of this general liberalization , it would still be possible to take the necessary steps to protect the health of European citizens .
In short , we do not want obligations introduced through this agreement to distort our legislation and , I think , many European constitutions as well .
But , more particularly , we would like clarification on any proposed retroactive effect of the rules in question .
What is intended ?
Is it really intended to reopen the nationalization chapter ?
And if it is , starting from when ?
I hear that a Polish citizen , who at one time had his Warsaw mansion expropriated , is now reclaiming the building which is now the property of the American embassy , which has naturally refused to hand it over .
That is only one example of what could happen if this chapter is reopened .

Finally , and this is a basic clarification , if there is a wish to apply a retroactive criterion to Cuba and support the approach of the United States on nationalization issues , given that in that country a large part of the property belonging to foreigners or Cubans who have emigrated to the United States was nationalized 36 years ago , and considering that , while virtually every other state has for years sought compromise solutions on its citizens ' nationalized property , the United States has refused to do so , the new rules under discussion could be extended to any commercial operation , any investment in that island , in contradiction , I repeat , to the decisions which have been taken by the European Union .
Mr Commissioner , these are the clarifications the Committee on External Economic Relations would like to have .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I say first of all that looking at the question generally , the existence of the World Trade Organization and the ability to take a case to the World Trade Organization has been the best and perhaps the only effective weapon the European Union has against the completely unacceptable attempt of the United States to export its policies and impose them upon us .
Without such a dispute settlement mechanism , without those rules , we would have very little ammunition indeed in this contest .
I say that because it illustrates very well the importance of the European Union staying loyal to the principles of the World Trade Organization because they enable us to defend our interests .
But we have to use them in the right way .
In answer to some of the other points , I will reiterate the facts of the matter .
The understanding of 11 April 1997 reached between the European Union and the United States calls for the development of disciplines which ' should inhibit and deter the future acquisition of investments from any state which has expropriated or nationalized such investments in contravention of international law and subsequent dealings in covert investments ' .
It is clear from that language that the understanding does not necessarily provide for the negotiation of disciplines which would prohibit future investments in expropriative property because it talks about inhibiting and deterring and also refers to investments in contravention of international law and not otherwise .
Of course not all such investments will be in contravention of international law .
In addition and in parallel , the understanding also calls for the European Union and the United States to work together to address and resolve through agreed principles the issues of conflicting jurisdictions and secondary boycotts .
It is very important to note that the negotiations on this point have to be parallel with the negotiations on investment disciplines .
There is one thing that is of interest to the United States ; there is the other which is of interest to us .
Therefore it is a balanced agreement .
Another element of the understanding is the D 'Amato legislation .
The full implementation of the understanding would call for the United States to grant the European Union a multilateral regime waiver under this legislation , which is not the subject of the case in the WTO but nonetheless is part of our agreement with the United States .
The understanding presupposes the continued waiver of Title 3 of the Helms-Burton Act and also that Congress will amend Helms-Burton to permit a presidential waiver of Title 4 .
With regard to the observation that the European Union has committed itself to join the efforts of the United States to promote democracy in Cuba , which is referred to in the text of the oral question , I would remind the honourable Member that the language of the understanding is quite clear .
It does not contain a commitment on the part of the European Union and the United States to take action jointly .
Each side remains free to judge how , where and when it wishes to raise these issues in Cuba .
Therefore , on the question of whether the Commission considers that such disciplines would make it impossible to invest in Cuba , taking account of the historical factors mentioned by the honourable Member , I would say clearly once again that the coverage of past expropriations is not excluded by the wording of the understanding but that it presupposes that a clear violation of international law has taken place and , as I have indicated , the understanding only commits the European Union to disciplines which would inhibit and deter investments , and not to disciplines which would prohibit investments .
The latter would in any case be difficult for the Community owing to our almost complete freedom from capital movement restrictions as set forth by Article 73 ( b ) of the EC Treaty .
The next question relates to the fact that international law provides rules on investment protection , including rules on the legality of expropriations .
One of the criteria for determining the legality of an expropriation is whether prompt , adequate and effective compensation has been paid by the expropriating state .
The Commission and the Member States have consistently in our negotiations insisted on the fact that under the understanding , disciplines could only apply to expropriations which have taken place in contravention of international law .
The precise conditions for determining when that has happened are still a matter for discussion .
It will be clear from what I have said that the negotiations are currently at a complex and delicate stage .
The Commission 's objective remains to achieve a balanced solution covering both the disciplines for investment in expropriated property in the sense that I have described them , and the principles on conflicting requirements and secondary boycotts .
Any deal would have to lead to Congress adopting the legislative amendments to permit a waiver of Title 4 of the Helms-Burton Act ; and the United States ' Administration would also have to grant a multilateral regime waiver under the D 'Amato Act .
The negotiators are in Paris this week for the sixth round of negotiations and further discussions are scheduled for the month of October .
For the moment we do not have an agreement but those are the principles and procedures which we are applying .
Mr President , I am glad the Commissioner has reminded us of the terms of the agreement which was reached between the European Commission and the Clinton Administration ( and subsequently modified in part by the Council of Ministers of the European Union ) because , as the Commissioner has well demonstrated , this is not just any agreement , but is conditional .
Sir Leon has reminded us of the conditions , but I would like to stress the two basic ones .
On the one hand the European Union suspended the World Trade Organization complaint proceedings , and the United States promised to postpone the application of Title 3 . President Clinton renewed this promise on July 18 , incidentally provoking a further six months ' worth of sarcasm from the Cuban authorities , who jokingly said that the United States were postponing the sovereignty of the rest of the world for another six months .
As I understand it , the second basic condition accepted by the United States authorities was the amendment of Title 4 .
But , Mr President , I have heard nothing to say that this amendment to Title 4 , which requires the intervention of the United States Congress , has yet happened .
And as the Commissioner knows perfectly well , the Clinton Administration is one thing , and the United States Congress is quite another .
All these agreements were forged , Mr President , on the understanding that if any person physically , legally or morally belonging to the European Union was affected , or if the conceded annulments did not happen or were altered , the European Union reserved the automatic right to re-initiate the normal WTO complaint procedure .
And we have never accepted the extra-territorial principle of the act , which interferes with the trade relations of the European Union and its Member States with third countries such as Cuba .
I should like to say , Mr President , that our political group has always rejected the Helms-Burton Act . This is mainly for three basic reasons .
Firstly , it increases the already great suffering of the Cuban people . Secondly , it introduces an extra-territorial aspect which deeply offends any sovereign state , as I have previously stated to this House .
And thirdly , Mr President , it calls into question the authority of the WTO as a body devoted to settling and resolving these conflicts .
Sir Leon has told us that it is the best guarantee of defending the basic concepts of the European Union .
Going by the results of the recent banana and hormone panels , I am not sure about that .
Anyway , as regards this Helms-Burton Act proposal , it is absolutely clear that the European Union has right on its side , but it has nevertheless sought an amicable solution for the time being .
Bearing in mind that when the European Commission signed this agreement with the Clinton Administration the time limit was 15 October , it would perhaps be a good idea if the Commission could tell us the position of the United States Congress as regards the amendment of Title 4 .
I was recently in the United States , with the delegation which I head , and judging from what we heard on the subject of the amendment to Title 4 from congressmen and senators , their position is not at all clear .
I end , Mr President , by saying that we reject the terms of this act because , although the aims include the promotion of a peaceful transition towards freedom in Cuba , as regards human rights and democratic liberties , we do not agree with the method . These boycott policies which have been going on now for 40 years have not led to the slightest advance in these matters , as mentioned by the European Union in its statement of 2 December .
Mr President , we have debated the Helms-Burton Act here many times and passed resolutions on it , and the position of my group with regard to the extra-territorial provisions in this Act is unchanged .
The American Congress simply cannot lay down the law for our companies and if there are disputes then arbitration is in the hands of the WTO .
The WTO exclusively .
Mr President , I have two questions for Commissioner Brittan .
Why did the Commissioner go it alone in the negotiations with the Americans on the Helms-Burton Act ?
Only 20 % of this act deals with trade policy in the context of the WTO and that is the prime concern of the Commission and Parliament .
But 80 % of it involves investments in Cuba by third countries and then in former American ownership .
The latter , if we are dealing with investments , is the prime concern of the Council .
It is therefore not surprising that the Commissioner going it alone causes irritation in this Parliament but also and especially in the Council .
And the result was no new powers within the framework of Article 13 for the Parliament and the Commission in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
My second question concerns the multilateral agreement on investment that is currently being prepared by the OECD .
The agreement will be signed in May , if it is good , by 29 countries and the Union .
It will provide for a ban on investments in illegally expropriated property .
The question is whether the American property expropriated in Cuba 36 years ago was illegally expropriated .
Because there was no international law in that field and at that time the Americans categorically refused an offer for compensation .
Can we reasonably speak of illegal expropriation ?
I should like to know the opinion of the Commissioner on these two questions .
Mr President , the last time Sir Leon was here it was also to speak about the Helms-Burton Act , and as my compatriot , Mr Salafranca , recalls , he said that if the United States did not keep their side of the agreement , by continuing to postpone Title 3 and by revoking Title 4 , the Commission reserved the right to go back to the WTO panel .
Although Title 3 may have been postponed for a further six months , it seems to us that not only has Title 4 not been revoked , but the United States Congress has made the Helms-Burton Act worse with eight amendments demanding strict compliance with it .
In other words , the wishes of the United States Congress lead in completely the opposite direction to what Sir Leon told us .
Furthermore , Sir Leon says that investments are not going to be prohibited , but inhibited .
I wonder what the formula for this inhibition is .
This is a concept which I have never heard mentioned in international law and I would like to know what it consists of , especially in view of the fact that until not long ago the European Union had been holding talks with the Cuban Government in order to reach an agreement on trade and cooperation since , as I should like to remind you , Cuba is the only country with which we do not have such an agreement .
We think this is unfair .
It seems to us that the discussions at the WTO are resulting in greater acceptance of the premises put forward by the United States , and do not safeguard the interests of the European Union - the sovereignty of the countries of the European Union .
When they talk about regulating investments , they are of course thinking about Cuba - as you know as well as I do , Sir Leon - about Cuba and the investments which certain countries in the European Union are putting into Cuba .
It seems to us that we are going down a dangerous path , and the European Commission should re-register its objection with the WTO .
Mr President . Our debate today would be completely unnecessary in a fully-functioning democracy .
The will of this Parliament would have been respected and the intention of the WTO panel on Helms-Burton would have been implemented .
But in May this year , Mr Commissioner , you proceeded independently and we reprimanded you .
We learned that you had had a private audience with Big Brother to calm things down .
You made completely unacceptable concessions .
That had nothing , absolutely nothing whatever , in common with staying loyal to principles .
Two months later we were proved quite right .
On 11 June the US Congress further increased the internationally much-criticized US embargo .
We had voted for the exact opposite and for that very reason had demanded the panel you circumvented .
Mr Commissioner , the citizens of Europe as a whole have become more than sceptical about the WTO .
The World Trade Organization has run into a real crisis of legitimacy .
What do we need such an organization for , if it only acts as a referee when the matter concerns opposition to social achievements , or opposition to conservation of the environment ?
What do we need a WTO for , if those with power continue to machinate independently , as soon as they themselves come up for public scrutiny ?
What do we need a WTO for , if it gets round its own rules in secret negotiations , and then even proposes to use the results of these as the basis for a multilateral investment agreement affecting us all ?
We demand detailed information and the participation of everyone at the negotiations for an MIA , which has so far been at OECD level and will certainly later continue at WTO level .
At least a significant number of developing nations must vote for it , in order for such an agreement to be made at all .
I think the point made by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel is very relevant .
To return to the matter of Cuba . The EU must not continue to knuckle under , but must sensibly fund the existing budget items , instead of deleting them .
It must at long last introduce a treaty of cooperation with Cuba .
The investment protection that the USA has set at such a high level is no current problem at all for Europe .
I would point only to Cuba 's investment protection agreements with such countries as France or Germany .
Miami vice is really not our business !
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , relationships between the United States and Europe are studded with misunderstanding and divergences in approach , even in fields where the objectives sought are in reality identical .
The case of the Helms-Burton legislation is a supreme example of this type of transatlantic misunderstanding .
The Member States of the European Union and the United States of America wholly share the aim of democratization in Cuba , even if , within this Parliament , romanticism of Castro still seems - and this is strangely out of tune with the times - to be quite popular .
But the European Union is seeking to promote democratic change in Cuba by a proliferation of human , economic and political exchanges and trade .
The Americans , who are more sensitive to the pressure of those who have had to flee the Castro dictatorship , and are very close to the country concerned , believe that the only effective line of conduct is that of firmness and sanctions .
The goal sought is the same , but the orientations are radically different . There are two approaches , each of which is as legitimate as the other .
It nevertheless remains true that the use of legislation which has such extra-territorial repercussions is totally unacceptable .
Now , the Commission 's compromise is closer to an exercise in pure pragmatism , since the Commission has given up on getting results by sticking to principle .
This is a poor figleaf for the total absence of concessions on the American side .
We have hardly anything to be proud of , in my view , as regards the exemption which will be made in respect of companies belonging to the European Union , when we leave our partners in the third countries to face the power of America alone .
Since there has been no success over the principle of the unacceptability of extra-territorial provisions , nothing now stands in the way of the perverse proliferation of such legislation at all political and administrative levels from the United States .
This defeat on principle is , on the contrary , an encouragement to such proliferation and sends out a bad signal .
It is already deplorable that towns or cities have made enactments whose consequences are extra-territorial , without Mr Clinton 's government having the resources to oppose them .
Proliferation is of all the more concern in that it very often advances the politically correct concern to fight for human rights or the protection of the environment , in order , in reality , to winkle out foreign firms and prevent their competition in tenders for American government contracts .
This compromise , in the eyes of our group , is a poor one .
It will not , I fear , prevent there being further discomfiture .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , It must feel strange to you , as a convinced supporter of free trade who has always demonstrated that fact , to find yourselves receiving criticism of the sort just expressed by Mr Wolf .
I want to leap immediately to your defence , because it was not merely rhetorical overstatement , but above all did no service to the subject .
The situation is as follows . Cuba is a democratic country , but the USA is trying , contrary to human rights , to penalize democratic countries such as those united in the European Union , because they are on the wrong road .
We all considered it right to call in the WTO , not in order to make an example in the interests of the WTO 's negotiating freedom and free international trade , but in order to enforce our legal rights .
It was difficult to understand how the Commission could attempt - not in secret negotiation , as Mr Wolf supposes - to find a compromise or take a path whose success is more dubious .
If it should not be successful , it will be difficult to start again on the path left for the compromise , that is , to complete a successful WTO panel procedure .
The Americans negotiated differently in the banana dispute .
They followed the matter through to the end , and it is still being discussed today .
I mention that because here we have , something I quite understand , due respect for the internal policies of the USA .
Anyone following the way in which Mr Helms is behaving in the matter of the nomination of ambassadors - bearing in mind that he is himself the one who drove through the Helms-Burton Act - will know how difficult it is for the President of the United States to force what he promised through Congress .
Be that as it may , that is an internal matter for the USA .
When we see that it was mainly the USA and Europe that established the WTO , and that the beneficiaries are those who replaced the GATT , and when we see the concern with which the third world reacts , lest it should suffer whenever the major powers frame agreements , then we should not really be surprised when , as in Singapore , Asian and other countries grow to suspect that the WTO is really only there to serve the rich , who could settle their disagreements in any case .
For this reason I put this request to you on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party : If it appears that your efforts to reach a compromise are unsuccessful , return speedily to the path of virtue and pursue a legal case wherever one may be required .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I think Europe can be proud of its policy .
We have been very successful .
Our expansion into the east was successful and marked by mutual agreements and negotiations .
The Americans have only sought confrontation with Cuba and have lagged far behind Europe .
I think it is simply essential when talking to Helms and Burton , who have after all adopted a clear position and are not ready to negotiate , to make a case for our modern strategy . This involves the offer of alternatives , the practical search for a system that supports the democrats in Cuba , that supports the market economy in Cuba .
If we employ a policy that offers alternatives , in order to support those forces in Cuba that also pursue our aims , and do not look for blind confrontation , then we Europeans shall be successful in Cuba as well .
I have received six motions for resolutions under Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12.00 noon .
I would like to reply briefly to some of the points that have been made and put the matter in perspective .
If I may say so , the views put forward by Mr Rübig and Mr Kittelmann are closer to reality than some that we have heard .
Let us start from first principles .
We share with the United States an objection to the non-democratic government in Cuba .
We differ as to the way in which we should handle that and we object to the United States trying to impose on us its policy .
We object so strongly that , uniquely , we have taken legislative action through this Parliament and through the Council of Ministers in order to impose blocking legislation .
We object so strongly that we went to the WTO to assert our rights. not only with regard to Helms-Burton but also , although not in the WTO , with regard to the D 'Amato legislation affecting Iran and Libya which is equally objectionable .
We are and remain quite prepared to proceed with the WTO case .
But a strong wish was expressed repeatedly in the Council of Ministers that we should try to find a negotiated settlement .
And we have achieved a settlement of an interim kind which enables us to go back to the WTO if that settlement is not observed and if our objectives are not achieved .
What are our objectives ?
By definition a settlement means that you will not get a ringing declaration saying that we are right and the Americans are wrong in an international tribunal .
But we and the Member States have rightly taken the view that what is important is to protect the interests of the European economy above all else and to ensure that no action taken by the United States could damage us .
The consequence has been that the President of the United States has suspended Title 3 , the most damaging title of this legislation , and that since the understanding there has been no action under Title 4 .
We then entered into a negotiation which , if successful would have the effect of permanently suspending Title 3 , so that European industry and individuals were never threatened in that way , and of giving the President of the right to do the same with regard to Title 4 .
In addition , as a result of this negotiation we were given the prospect and the possibility of obtaining a waiver from the operation of the other objectionable legislation , namely the D 'Amato legislation .
And what has happened is that we are engaged in negotiations .
There is nothing mysterious about it .
The MIA negotiation is another matter which is broader than this and which we are also engaged in .
It does not affect the developing countries .
We hope to negotiate with them later in the WTO on a broader agreement .
The 15 October target date is a serious one and we have told the Americans that .
We are free participants in the negotiation .
There is no obligation on us to agree to anything which is not in the interests of Europe and we will not do so .
The negotiation is not concluded .
The Americans also have their task to do what is needed to satisfy us in the negotiation .
I believe that if we are successful in the negotiation , we will have protected the interests of the European Union in a very effective way and we will actually have used the WTO procedure , which is valuable .
For only by bringing the case will we have led the United States to suspend Title 3 , not to take further action under Title 4 and to do something with regard to the D 'Amato legislation as well .
If we do not succeed in our objectives we will have the full right to return to the WTO , to resume the case and to seek its resolution through the WTO .
Therefore we have lost nothing , we have gained a lot , we have every possibility of gaining more .
If we are unsuccessful we can resort once again to the international forum which we have helped to create and which we must defend in order to achieve our rights .
That is the true position as it stands .
The negotiations are complicated and incomplete but I can assure you that we will not come to a conclusion or agree to an agreement which does not protect fully and adequately the interests of the European Union as I have defined them .
Commissioner , if I am here at 11.00 p.m. and ask you questions , I hope you will answer my questions and not only answer people who have the same view as you on this .
I had two questions .
You did not answer them .
I thought I made it absolutely clear that we have not gone it alone , as you put it , with the Helms-Burton problem .
We have repeatedly reported to the Council .
I have explained the matter to committees of this House repeatedly .
The interim understanding has received the support of the Member States .
That is the answer to your first question .
Nor is there the slightest reason to think that the reluctance of the Member States to change Article 113 has anything whatsoever to do with this issue .
As to the question of what is illegal expropriation , that is an issue which has not been determined in the negotiations and therefore it is impossible to give an answer to it .
But in my opening remarks I indicated the principles of international law which determined whether expropriation was illegal or otherwise , in relation to the question of compensation .
Mr Commissioner , the question of who will decide what is an illegal expropriation is a very interesting one if it opens the possibility that a big country , by its legal system , decides effectively what is constitutional in other countries .
For instance , in the Federal Republic of Germany , we have Clause 15 which allows for expropriation on a legal basis .
But if the American Congress judges that this is inappropriate , would this then be illegal ?
I can assure the honourable gentleman that we will not allow this matter to be determined by the United States Congress .
To the extent that it is covered in the negotiations , we will have to be satisfied that there is an adequate definition which satisfies us , not the United States Congress .
Obviously , in the negotiations , the United States administration will also have to be satisfied , but it is not something that is going to be unilaterally imposed on us .
Mr President , this is not an attempt to reopen the debate but rather , as my colleague has said , to ask the Commissioner to be more precise , as far as he is able .
He has told us that the negotiations are in a complex and delicate phase , and the question is as follows . The interim agreement was signed in April .
April has now passed , as have May , June , July and August . It is now 15 September , and on 15 October the time limit set by the Clinton Administration and the Commission for reaching an agreement , expires .
Does the Commissioner think that the problems currently under consideration will be resolved before October 15 ?
Secondly , does the Commissioner think that the mood in the United States Congress will allow the President to amend Title 4 , in accordance with the Clinton Administration 's promise , although it has not yet come into effect ?
15 October is indeed the target date for the conclusion of the negotiation .
In my experience of all negotiations it is very , very rare for there to be any conclusion except , at least , on the date which has been specified .
At this stage , therefore , it is impossible to say whether we are going to have a successful conclusion .
We are quite a long way from it but we have made some progress .
To say any more would be to give a greater precision than the facts warrant .
As to whether the mood in the Congress permits a solution which would enable the requisite amendment to the legislation to amend Title 4 , I cannot answer that either .
All I can say is that unless that amendment is passed , there is no deal with the European Union .
I have great admiration for the diplomatic ability of Sir Leon and I am certainly not going to comment on what he said because I have to study carefully the significance of ' eventually ' , ' inhibiting ' and " not preventing ' and all these nuances .
These really have to be studied carefully before I can judge what he said and what it means .
I understand that while one is negotiating it is difficult to talk about it .
Nevertheless , my question is : are we going to be informed of what is going on before there is an agreement ?
We are worried about Helms-Burton and its effects on Cuba .
This is one point on which concern has been expressed by my colleagues .
We are also worried by the more general implications of the Multilateral Investment Agreement .
How is the sovereignty of our countries going to be affected by an agreement which may give the right of property an interpretation which is very different from the one which is in the European tradition .
This is a point I would love to understand .
The answer to the question is very simple .
Sovereignty does not arise .
Every European country , quite apart from the European Union , is constantly entering into treaties .
The entry into a treaty is not an abdication of a sovereignty but the exercise of sovereignty because no country that enters into a treaty is compelled to do so unless it thinks it is in its interest .
In negotiating the multilateral investment agreement in the OECD , of which of course the members of the European Union are members , the Member States will not agree to an agreement unless they think it is in their interests and compatible with their approach to these matters .
As everybody knows , but just to clarify it , the MIA negotiation is something that existed long before the Helms-Burton issue arose .
It is seeking an agreement which covers many things and it would be in our interest to encourage investment .
That is why we are doing it and why all the Member States of the European Union are very enthusiastic that such a thing should be completed .
This issue rose at a late stage in negotiations and we are talking about a particular provision which will have to be agreed in the same way as any other provision .
Of course , that is only part of the settlement of the Helms-Burton agreement as a whole and as far as that is concerned , I will follow all the normal constitutional and parliamentary practices in keeping the House informed .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Brittan .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.10 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( The Minutes were approved )
Madam President , on a point of order .
I just wish to draw the attention of this House to the agenda for this week , particular the agenda for Friday , when the only item on the agenda is the Hallam report ...
which is on the agri-monetary system for the single market , 1 July 1995 to 30 June 1996 .
Between you and me , Madam President , this is hardly earth-shattering news .
I am wondering whether it might be wise for Parliament , rather than to have a half-hour debate on a Friday - I am very flattered we are having this debate - to bring it forward and have it with the Hardstaff report on Thursday , delay the vote until the following Wednesday in Brussels , and thereby save the taxpayers of Europe thousands of pounds by not opening this building on Friday .
( Applause )
Mr Hallam , you have raised a delicate point which has in fact been considered by the Conference of Presidents .
You will be aware that , because of an exceptional chain of events , yours is in actual fact the only item on the agenda for Friday .
Nevertheless , colleagues have made arrangements , changed their flights and so on .
It seems to me - and this is my personal opinion , the Conference of Presidents may , of course , look at the question again - but I think it would be extremely strange to alter our agenda so abruptly by missing a morning 's plenary session .
I do not doubt for an instant that after the powerful plea you have just made , Mr Hallam , all our colleagues here will be intent on attending the presentation of your report , to which I strongly invite them .
Madam President , on a point of order .
It concerns the Rules of this House . As chairman of Parliament 's Delegation for relations with the United States , I had arranged a meeting this morning with President Santer in advance of our visit next week to Washington to discuss those issues that are pressing in relation to European-US affairs .
We were told that because of the Rules of this House we could not meet on a Wednesday morning with the President of the Commission , we could only meet on Wednesday afternoon .
I now find that the Conference of Presidents has called an extraordinary meeting this morning to meet President Santer to discuss the Commission 's work programme .
Madam President , you might find it an amusing issue , but let me tell you that there seems to be one set of rules for the chairmen of groups in this House and a different set of rules for the rest of this House .
I would like the President to write to me , so that I can explain to the Delegation for relations with the United States why we were refused a meeting with Jacques Santer but you later this morning will be having a meeting with the President of the Commission .
Mr Donnelly , your comments have not made this member of the Bureau either laugh nor smile .
You are aware that I do not participate in the Conference of Presidents , but I see some group leaders here , and I will allow them to reply .
Mrs Green has asked for the opportunity to reply to Mr Donnelly , I believe .
Madam President , I do not wish to reply to Mr Donnelly : I want to confirm what he has said .
In fact I spoke with the President at the Conference of Presidents last week and asked him to make a room available for the Delegation for relations with the United States , given the nature of the issues that we have to discuss between Europe and the United States .
I was assured that that would happen , so I am somewhat dismayed if what Mr Donnelly has said is correct .
We will clarify that point .
We will see .
In any case , Mr Donnelly , I will make sure that this sort of incident does not happen again , as far as it is within my capacity to do so , of course .
I now hand over to Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , for a procedural motion . I repeat , a procedural motion .
Madam President , I asked the Presidency in this House three months ago , how it was possible for the Dutch President-in-Office of the Council , when asked at the CITES Conference in Zimbabwe what the view of Parliament was , to reply that Parliament does not have a view , even though Parliament in an emergency debate three days earlier had expressed its views perfectly clearly .
I was told by one of your colleagues - I do not now know just which President that was - that I would receive an answer .
Up to now I have received no answer , and I am beginning to think , to be convinced , almost , that we go to a lot of trouble to pass resolutions here , but do not know if they ever reach the recipients .
It appears that they have not .
If that is so , we might as well scrap the whole of Thursday evening 's debate and go home !
I would like an answer now !
Ladies and gentlemen , if I am to understand it correctly , you have been promised a reply which you have not received .
We will look into this and make sure that an answer to your question is obtained as quickly as possible .
Situation in Algeria
The next item is the statements by the Council and Commission on the situation in Algeria .
Mr Wohlfart , President-in-Office of the Council , has the floor .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , by way of introduction I would like to thank the European Parliament for offering me this occasion to explain the Council 's position with regard to the situation in Algeria .
From the outset , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I can assure you that the Council fully shares your apprehension about the situation in Algeria , which we are following closely .
As we pointed out in a press release published last Friday , the European Union is deeply shocked by the wave of assassinations and other atrocities which are now bringing bloodshed to Algeria .
The estimated figure of more than 60 , 000 victims over the course of the last few years is an eloquent and tragic testimony to this .
We are all deeply moved by the upsurge of violence in Algeria , culminating in these last few weeks .
It is hardly necessary to remind you that hundreds of people have been brutally assassinated with axes and sabres , had their throats cut and worse .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , young girls have been kidnapped and raped , only to be murdered shortly afterwards .
Newspapers , radio and the television report murder after murder , affecting not only isolated rural areas but also the capital .
Only a few days ago , Algiers was the site of a mass murder .
More than sixty people were killed at Sidi Yessef under particularly atrocious conditions .
I can assure you , ladies and gentlemen , that like yourselves the Council clearly and firmly condemns these acts of terrorism and blind violence .
As far as the political position of the Council is concerned , it is scarcely necessary to remind you , Madam President , that on many occasions the Council has re-affirmed its unconditional support for the process of political and economic reform being undertaken by the Algerian authorities .
We have therefore expressed our satisfaction concerning the legislative elections held on 5 June , whilst noting the statement by joint international mission of observers regarding certain significant shortcomings .
I already had occasion to refer to this last July , during Question Time .
Nevertheless , we consider that these elections , which took place under what can be termed generally satisfactory conditions , marked a step forward in this process and enabled the Algerian people to participate directly in the building of a democratic and non-violent society in which human rights must be fully respected .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to human rights issues , international human rights organizations , and Parliament itself , have expressed criticism of the way in which Algeria is fighting the armed Islamic groups .
The Council is well aware of this , and does not hesitate to insist that the Algerian government adopt a moderate attitude in the face of crisis and respect human rights .
The Council emphasizes that , with a new association agreement in preparation , it is entitled to expect that a country going through such a crisis should settle its problems as far as possible with wisdom and moderation .
As far as the association agreement is concerned , I am convinced that this new agreement will be able to contribute significantly to the process of democracy and economic reform in Algeria .
Consequently , the Council hopes that the Commission will be able to bring the negotiations with the Algerian government to a rapid and satisfactory conclusion .
With regard to the local elections , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to highlight the fact that the Council is encouraging Algeria to follow the path of democratization and to respect the next date for the elections - as you know these are local elections - which is expected to be 23 October , following the presidential elections of 1995 , the revision of the constitution in 1996 and the general elections in June of this year .
In conclusion , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council is following the internal situation in Algeria with concern .
It is hardly necessary to emphasize that Algeria is an important partner of the European Union in the Barcelona process .
Our vision of Algeria is necessarily part of a long term perspective .
Algerians themselves must find a solution to this serious and deep crisis which their country is enduring , through the completion of the reform process , both on a political and on an economic level .
It is in this spirit that the Union is determined to continue negotiations to conclude a new association agreement .
Madam President , the Commission agrees and shares the opinion of the Presidency of the Council about what has happened in Algeria . Naturally , we believe the Council 's statement on the Algerian situation of 12 September reflects fairly well what is happening in that country .
As Mr Wohlfart said , the Union could not remain silent in the face of these acts of blind violence .
There is no doubt that the Algerian people are suffering one of the most ferocious outbreaks of terrorism the world has ever known .
We have discussed Algeria before , in July , in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy and the Committee on Political Affairs , and nobody can deny that Algeria is experiencing a serious political crisis .
It is true that institutional normalization exercises have been carried out , subject to the imperfections and limits imposed by the situation , of course .
The organization and development of the presidential and parliamentary elections are an example . They were perhaps not perfect , as we had the opportunity to discuss in July , but given the internal situation there can surely be no doubt that they are steps in the right direction , which the European Union must recognize .
What we would like is for the internal situation to allow the municipal elections to take place as well , on 23 October , as planned .
What can the Commission do ?
We are in a very early phase of the association agreement .
We have had a few sessions of negotiations , but it seems unlikely that these can be divorced from the current Algerian political situation .
I still think , as I said in the July debate , that it would be a good thing if these negotiations allowed us to bring Algeria further into the Barcelona process , to enable us to form more bonds with that country through agreement with the European Union . I am not going to hide the fact that I still think this is a difficult thing to do , and that these negotiations are not going to be easy .
However , I think it should be done because , regardless of current events , Algeria also needs an international response . If that response comes from the European Union , then so much the better !
Furthermore , human rights , democracy and freedom form part of the central axis of the type of political dialogue we are developing with the Mediterranean countries . Therefore , association agreement negotiations will allow us to open up another line of political dialogue with the Algerian authorities and tackle a situation which is frightening , of course , and extremely complicated as regards both internal and international politics .
Initially , the Commission is working at the technical level and we are expecting the Algerian Government - the new Algerian Government - to tell us what type of negotiations they want to pursue .
And , as I have already said , when Algeria gives us details , the European Commission will try to work in the normal way . We shall try to work normally , but in the knowledge that the situation is very difficult .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , what you have presented today is certainly a position we can very broadly support and accept from the outset , and which represents the situation in Algeria .
I feel , however , that we as a Parliament must be even franker , to try to change the immensely difficult situation in Algeria today .
Each attempted assassination and each terrorist attack is a blow , not only for Algeria , but also for Europe .
For this reason we must make it clear to the Algerian Government that this is not a case of outside influence , or intervention , but of our concern for an area and matters of mutual interest .
I think our proposals from Parliament should be understood in this sense .
We in Parliament condemn the use of force just as unreservedly as do you in the Council and Commission .
Force destroys not only people , but the soul of a people .
Force must not be successful , not even , and most particularly not , in Algeria !
For that reason we emphatically support all measures aimed at limiting or preventing the use of force .
At the same time , however , human rights must be maintained .
We sometimes get the impression that human rights are being regarded as secondary .
To some extent that is understandable in a difficult situation , but here limits are sometimes crossed , and we can in no way accept that .
There are also doubts , let us be quite frank about it , in many media about whether force is being combatted everywhere with the utmost rigour .
The government is accused of not proceeding with the required degree of decisiveness .
We do not mean to cast any aspersions here , and that is why we have included nothing on that in the resolution .
I must make a most heartfelt request to the Council and Commission , however , to find out if these rumours and accusations are indeed relevant , and how force can be more effectively withstood .
People must not be tortured for hours , murdered in their villages , without intervention by the police , army or other security forces .
I should like to draw particular attention to that point .
In the context of what the Commissioner said about the association agreement and the Barcelona process , we emphatically demand that the dialogue in Algeria be continued .
There have been repeated set-backs .
People who declare themselves ready for dialogue , and who renounce the use of force , are still not met with the support and the positive reaction which both they and the situation deserve .
It should also be noted that the dialogue should be carried out with those who renounce force .
Just as in all crisis regions , however , like Ireland or other parts of the world , one must naturally take many steps to convince those who currently support the use of force that it is better to renounce it .
A really effective dialogue can clearly be held only with those who say no to force .
But we must persuade as many political , social and religious movements as possible to renounce the use of force .
For that it is necessary to make contacts within , to give advice to , and above all to encourage the Algerian Government .
I consider it unacceptable that the Algerian Government is being relatively hesitant and reserved .
We want to go ahead with this dialogue , and that is why we seek this dialogue between the European Parliament and the newly-elected Algerian Government .
That cannot be a unilateral offer , but must be a real dialogue that keeps the peace process and the maintenance of human rights in the forefront of the priorities .
To return again to what Commissioner Marín said about negotiations .
We , too , hope that negotiations on the association agreement include Algeria more closely into the whole Barcelona process .
This is how I understand what you have said and should like to offer you my full support on behalf of my group .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office , Mr Commissioner , everyone present realises the gravity of this debate and is happy that Parliament has finally decided to participate in a debate which should lead to the re-establishment of peace in Algeria .
Firstly , you are right , Mr President , to place our actions within the framework of a much larger perspective .
Algeria must know that we have not lost hope and that , at a time when alliances are being formed throughout the world , Europe cannot remain indifferent to the situation in the Maghreb and , in particular , in the youngest and most powerful country in that region .
We therefore need to envisage , not bilateral relations between Algeria and any particular country - I am French so you all know to what I am referring - but between Europe and Algeria , a country endowed with such resources that it lacks nothing to whet the appetite , and I am referring to no-one in particular , not even a great ally .
It is firstly necessary to re-establish civil peace . We must avoid two pitfalls .
Firstly , to give way to despair in the face of the extreme violence used by the radicals on all sides and perhaps also by armed gangs during critical periods .
We must also avoid - our colleague from the Party of European Socialists may question our strange passivity but this is still not the most important thing - making Algeria think we are going to interfere in her affairs .
We must therefore express a hope and find a way of discussing the issue .
The hope is clear .
Algeria is gaining , little by little , democratic institutions .
There is no such thing as perfection . And we cannot in any case launch into a frenzied attack on what has been done and what continues to be done .
The political forces who believe in democracy , or who want to express that belief , must take their place within these institutions .
Secondly , through the measures that have been taken concerning Mr Madan , we must encourage all gestures of the Algerian government which enable dialogue to be re-opened , and we must also encourage the political , moral and religious authorities of the country , those which still have the strength and power to express themselves , to call for a rejection of violence .
Without this , Algeria will continue its journey towards the abyss .
So , within this framework , what are the powers of Parliament ?
Firstly , it is good to be able to say that we - Council , Commission and Parliament - all express the same views .
We need to participate in the re-establishment of dialogue , firstly by expressing the hope that dialogue inside the country continues .
Secondly by drawing to the attention of the Algerian authorities the fact that the association agreement will not be signed unless a clear indication is given to European , western , indeed world , public opinion , of a return to peace .
And there , perhaps , we have a very narrow gate to get through .
Our Parliament must enter into dialogue with the Algerian Parliament .
We must say that we are open to discussion with any political force which renounces violence .
Of course , the assassin , the radical , the extremist , who reject all prospect of - I was going to say peaceful - discussion , must be excluded from the debate , even if that offends them .
But our Parliament , faced with a parliament in Algeria which was newly elected at the beginning of last year , must make contact .
It is necessary - and I am addressing myself not only to the Bureau of Parliament , Madam President , but also to the presidents of the various groups - that Parliament works out , decides on the setting up of an extraordinary ad-hoc delegation which will go to Algiers prior to the Algerians visiting Strasbourg - I mean this Parliament and not the actual territory of a given state within the Union - in order to commence a dialogue with the political forces .
The individual states will not be involved , the Council will not be involved , the Commission will not be involved .
Parliament to parliament , there where democratic debate is born , there where public opinion is expressed through universal suffrage , there we can start , perhaps weakly , perhaps hesitantly , but at least certainly , to tread the path that will lead to peace .
This is what Parliament 's contribution could be .
And if the Council and the Commission considered that our Parliament had accomplished something useful , all the better .
Madam President , I am speaking on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party which has , on many occasions over recent months , requested a discussion on the serious crisis which is raging in Algeria .
This has been refused until today .
I thank the Council and the Commission for finally having answered this request .
I am , however , very disappointed by the inconsistency of their statements in the face of such a tragedy .
Their lack of responsibility leaves us flabbergasted .
Respect for human rights is a prior condition for the maintenance of our agreements .
What will the Commission and the Council do from now on when they are not respected ?
The absence of a common foreign policy has once again resulted in the failure of our international policy and has highlighted the need for reform of our institutions in this area .
More than six years after the vote which gave victory to the Islamic Salvation Front was ruled invalid , Algeria lives in fear of tomorrow .
Barbarity has reached an unbearable level : 60 , 000 people have been massacred and the Algerian Government confines itself to eradicating terrorism by answering violence with violence .
The recent legislative elections and the constitution of a new government have not led to the long awaited dialogue between different sectors of Algerian society .
On the contrary , the few signs of democratic goodwill on the part of the Algerian authorities have been wiped out by blind terrorism .
What is worse , information has shown the powerlessness of the forces of law and order to foresee and prevent even massacres perpetrated near barracks .
We think that only an initiative on the part of the Algerian authorities , aimed at bringing together all the life blood within civil society , including the Islamic movements , will enable an agreement on the rejection of violence to be reached , based on a respect for human rights and cultural minorities .
The European Union must support the setting up of a true national dialogue likely , let us hope , to put an end to the terrorism which is hitting the Algerian people ever harder .
It is not a question of interference , but of helping a people in danger .
We cannot stand by and do nothing whilst assassinations are committed on a daily basis in a country with which we have deep historic , cultural and friendship links .
It is our duty to act .
Our joint resolution calls for the establishment of an ad-hoc parliamentary delegation which will be able to engage in a dialogue , both here and in Algiers , to help restore peace and strengthen cooperation between Algeria and the Union .
We must not let this opportunity pass us by .
We cannot allow ourselves to fail .
Moreover , we will be able to help the Commission , which will have a predominant role to play in the democratization process to be established during the negotiations for a new Euromediterranean agreement with Algeria , with respect to human rights .
I would not want to end without paying tribute to the courage and tenacity of Algerian journalists who , at the risk of their lives , continue to keep us informed and I would like to commiserate , in their terrible grief , with the families touched by a barbarity which has gone beyond all bounds .
It is to be hoped that this friendly country will very quickly return to the path of peace and stability .
Madam President , the Algerian people are suffering a new escalation of terror that is without precedent since 1992 .
Armed Islamic groups excel themselves in a horror which intimidates the population in order to create a situation of chaos in the country , destabilize the Algerian government and force it to capitulate .
My group would similarly like to express its indignation at and vigorous condemnation of these barbarous acts .
But it is necessary to go further and denounce without ambiguity the fanatical fundamentalists and their leaders who are the true authors of and inspiration behind this wave of terror .
The recent remarks of Abassi Madani , the lately liberated former leader of the ISF , shine an alarming light on his responsibilities .
The blackmail he tried to exert by agreeing to do his best to stop the massacres if the authorities submitted to his conditions proves his full and complete complicity with the terrorists .
That is why our group , which refuses to give lessons to others , will not take part in any manoeuvre , wherever it may come from , which aims at including within the negotiations the fundamentalist forces responsible for , and complicit in , the massacres , for example by means of an international conference .
We reject any interference in the affairs of the Algerian people .
The Algerian people have within them , their history proves it , the necessary strength to overcome terrorism and to contribute to their social , democratic and cultural emancipation .
Algerian women have a considerable role to play in this fight , with a courage which demands admiration and which should be praised .
In our opinion , it is not in the search for compromise with the fundamentalist forces that Algeria will find its salvation and the path to democracy and social and economic progress .
Europe can contribute by reaffirming its solidarity with the Algerian people , by encouraging a strengthening of cooperation between the European Union and Algeria in close contact with the lifeblood of the country , notably through debt reduction , assistance with modernization of infrastructure and building local authority housing .
In order to express our support to all who fight , risking their lives against terrorism , my group similarly proposes that our Parliament send a delegation to Algeria to meet the members of parliament as well as all the forces who are courageously struggling in that country .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Algerian people are a martyred people in history .
Angelism in the face of fundamentalism is synonymous with cowardice and abdication .
Angelism in the face of eradication is synonymous with intellectual perversity .
The situation is both complicated and very simple .
When a country goes through such a crisis , it is very difficult for a government to follow good policies .
But when the crisis reaches such a degree of violence , government reaction determines whether there is a possibility of finding a solution or not .
If secret detention centres exist , if massacres are also perpetrated by government forces , it does not mean the government is no better than the terrorists , but it means that the government is accentuating the spiral of violence set off by the terrorists .
Thus when we say ' no ' to eradication , it is not the same as saying ' yes ' to fundamentalism , but it is saying that a different solution to Algeria 's problems must be found .
That is my first point .
Secondly , let us not deceive ourselves !
It is obvious that if we want dialogue , then this dialogue must go as far as possible . This dialogue must reach those who , at one point , thought they could gain their liberty through the gun .
It is precisely those guns that need to be disarmed .
It is therefore necessary to try to hold a dialogue with the worst of them .
If you only dialogue with the good , you will always be good , but you will not accomplish anything .
Talking to the bad guys does not mean you support them , or accept them , it means you want to persuade them that they have no future .
So we will go to Algiers together , we will hold discussions with the human rights committee of the Algerian Parliament , with all the political forces of the Algerian Parliament , we will discuss with the lifeblood of Algeria , even with the perverse in Algeria so that the perverse stop being perverse .
I am sure that hope will be reborn in Algeria when the Algerian population feels that there are people who do not want to interfere in Algeria to give them lessons .
Since when have communists not wanted to give others lessons ?
It is an intellectual abdication .
As for me , I maintain that a lesson in dialogue must be given to those who do not want to dialogue , whether it be in Algeria , Afghanistan , Cambodia or anywhere else .
And to do that the European Parliament must use every means to tell the Algerians : you are a part of our world , a world in which dialogue is the only solution to massacres and any other problems .
Madam President , this morning the Council confirmed its support to the Algerian Government for the economic and political reforms it has undertaken .
I consider the elections which took place on 5 June to be a step forward , and I regard the association agreement as a factor for progress .
It may be so . But the Council , like the Commission , has not put forward any concrete proposal , any initiative to stem the horror , the slaughter and the violence , and it concludes by stating that the Algerians must find the solution to their problems on their own .
Well , that is not the view of the Alleanza Nazionale , because we think their problem is also our problem , Europe 's problem .
The progressive and increasingly rapid descent into barbarism in Algeria has now made horror a daily event in that martyred country .
Senseless violence , carried forward by the spiral of blind terrorism and subsequent repression , is feeding on the blood of an innocent population .
If the responsibility for this state of affairs lies , in part , with the past dictatorship of the National Liberation Front , born of the tremendous anti-colonial struggle which preceded its rightful independence , it cannot be denied that today it is also our responsibility and our countries ' responsibility to put an end to this martyrdom .
For a young population like the Algerian population , which has known nothing but the poverty of five year plans , then to slide into the horror of a civil war sparked off by the fight for religious freedom , is a time bomb which threatens not only the Maghreb and the whole vast Arab world but constitutes a very serious threat to Europe which should not be undervalued .
Restoring hope to Algeria must be a priority objective for the Union , which confirms the validity of a cultural and civil model based on a tolerant , democratic and lay state , open to freedom of association , thought and religion .
So it is not facile rhetoric to affirm that the struggle of the Algerian population , hostage to violence , is our struggle .
To isolate the extremism and establish a dialogue between the parties is certainly possible , and we Europeans have the means to get it accepted . But it requires a political will which already proved lacking , unfortunately , when it came to the war in former Yugoslavia .
Failure to restore peace in Algeria would confirm the image of a faint-hearted Europe , turned in on itself , incapable of acting and hence of reacting , making it dangerously vulnerable to separatist ideologies , the symptoms of which are already being felt and could grow in strength .
The Alleanza Nazionale is conscious of the external , but also internal , dangers of this situation , should it persist , and hopes the European Parliament will take the initiative to call a conference to bring the parties involved - the Union , the Maghreb countries , the CSCE - together .
We ask that the European Parliament pledge the governments of the 15 countries to a determined battle against fundamentalism of any kind , and we ask that no concessions be made to those who have brutally exterminated women , old people and children .
We maintain that the west also has a responsibility for letting violence take hold .
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Madam President , if we are absolutely honest with ourselves , we do not actually know what to do about Algeria .
All that we have heard so far confirms that .
In fact this was clearly illustrated last February , in Parliament , when we failed miserably to agree on a resolution about Algeria .
What we do know is that the violence is barbaric and unacceptable and should be condemned absolutely and without any conditions attached to that condemnation .
We also know that the situation is not as simple as some speakers this morning seem to think it is .
We have to ask ourselves questions such as why it is that some of these murders have taken place close to security positions ; why it is that the military have not been able to protect their population .
Not all these murders have taken place in obscure rural villages , some were in built-up areas .
Why have these murders happened ?
We also know that we increasingly seem to be seeing the development of death squads along the lines we are familiar with in South America .
We know from the South American experience that once that happens you begin to completely lose control of a political situation .
Because Algeria is so close to the European Union , we know that this dangerous instability could ultimately undermine the European Union .
Therefore , we have to develop a strategy .
It is essential that the common foreign and security policy starts to have some teeth and starts to take effective action .
Clearly we have to start on political dialogue ; clearly we have to develop inter-parliamentary dialogue .
We have to try and use the association agreement , as Commissioner Marin has indicated , in order to develop that dialogue and allow access to Algeria by non-governmental organizations that can begin to assess the reality of the situation there .
We should be encouraging that dialogue , in order to establish greater freedom of the press in Algeria so that we can all become aware of what is happening .
Also , as Mr Dupuis has said , we need to encourage further economic reform .
Ultimately it is only through improvements in the economic situation that we will begin to ensure a more peaceful development in future in Algeria .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in response to this tragic crisis , I utterly and firmly condemn the terrorist acts ravaging a country a few sea miles from the European Union , a country which aspires to associate itself with our Community and set up a free trade area with us . I would also like to express a few thoughts .
First of all , I think there should be more emphasis on the possibility that the events in Algeria may cross the country 's frontiers and spread to nearby Tunisia and Libya .
Indeed , this is a factor of great concern which prompts me to ask for the European Union to pay the greatest possible attention to all three of these countries .
My fear fundamentally arises from the fact that I consider the terrorism in Algeria to be the direct consequence of a socio-economic crisis rather than a cultural and religious one , which is why , given the similar economic situation in the other Maghreb countries , terrorism could also emerge dangerously elsewhere .
Assessing the Algerian crisis as socio-economic in nature , I believe that the Euromediterranean policy undertaken in Barcelona is fundamental and that , therefore , the European Union must respond to the terrorist attacks with instruments of structural development and financial engineering rather than diplomatic ones .
It is therefore necessary to implement the association agreement , as a first step . In fact encouragement is needed which runs the gamut of economic and social aid and not the isolation which Europe and the western world are now , in substance , decreeing .
I also support the fact that at least the European Parliament is doing all it can to promote dialogue and respect for human rights , sometimes forgotten in all the drama and repression .
I welcome with great satisfaction the idea that a delegation from this Parliament is going to make an urgent visit to Algeria to begin as constructive a dialogue as possible with the new Algerian Parliament .
But I would mention that there is already a delegation on relations with the Maghreb countries , which carries out its duties with a sense of responsibility and which , if required , can be broadened for the occasion , so as to represent the whole of the European Parliament better .
I hope this delegation can make contact with both majority and minority members of parliament and the social movements , and that it can lay the foundations for a new Euromediterranean dialogue in the spirit of that Europarliamentary forum repeatedly called for as necessary to the development of a dialogue which , in cases like these , can undoubtedly provide support and a clarion call to all the European democracies .
Finally , it has to be said that the paralysis and , perhaps , the fear the European Union has for too long been victim to in the face of the spread of Islamic fundamentalism and terrorism , and this carries the risk of discrediting , if not swamping , every Euromediterranean initiative .
But having said that , I believe we need to avoid too simplistic a comparison , which some people are making , between the procrastination and failure of the European Union - and it certainly occurred - in the tragic Yugoslav civil war and the response to the Algerian crisis .
While equally tragic , they are obviously different situations .
I have deliberately talked about civil war in the Yugoslav case and crisis in the Algerian case , just to emphasize that it is quite impossible to regard the Algerian events as a clash of ethnic groups or opposite sides in society .
In short , we should not make the mistake of seeing the Algerian terrorists as combatants in a civil war , thus giving them international recognition and legitimacy .
In saying that , I am not trying to justify the European Union , I simply believe it is essential to identify the appropriate means of correcting the serious delay that does exist as soon as possible .
Madam President , as regards the escalation of raging barbarity which we are seeing in Algeria , it must be remembered that this is also a question of a struggle for political and economic power .
Today we have raised the matter in this House , with wide agreement it would seem .
I believe it is important for Europe - the European Union - to take up its responsibilities for the sake of its interests and obligations , and because of its solidarity with certain countries - particularly France .
And the question we have to address is what we can do .
The Council has told us that it is in favour of the association agreement - within the joint political viewpoint which we share .
The Commission tells us that it is waiting for the Algerian Government to want to negotiate , if I have understood correctly .
The problem is , what should we do in the meantime , besides showing our disapproval by voting , as we are going to do ?
I think that as regards our negotiating partner ( which basically is the Algerian Government ) there are some things we can and should do .
Firstly , as regards that reaction to interference , we should remind them that the Euro-Mediterranean Agreements do not involve the European Union alone .
They involve many countries which also share the values of respect for human rights and democracy , and some of these countries are Islamic .
Secondly , we should remind them of another important thing , which is that one of the responsibilities of a legitimately formed government is the maintenance of public order , starting with the protection of the right to live .
This is something which is the responsibility of the Algerian Government .
Furthermore , we are prepared to help to achieve this in a democratic fashion .
Thirdly , Madam President , there is the question of dialogue .
I believe that we need to talk and to support dialogue .
First , with those democratic Algerian political forces , of which there is no shortage , which can also join in this process .
Next , there is a pre-condition for dialogue with the terrorists - because people are still calling them men of violence - who are murdering the population on a massive scale .
The pre-condition is that they should be isolated and made to disarm .
It is not just a question of working miracles , but we have to know what our responsibilities are .
Madam President , we have to ask ourselves the reason for this terrible violence which is staining Algeria with blood and killing civilians , soldiers , town- and country-dwellers and , above all , women and children , cruelly and with incomprehensible barbarity .
No doubt Algerian history has something to do with it .
During the last century that territory never experienced a state structure like those which were headed , for example , by the sultans of Morocco or the beys of Tunisia . Perhaps that made it easier for the French influence to take root .
It became so great that France really and sincerely believed that it was another part of its own territory . Certainly , that was the reason why the struggle for Algerian liberation was subsequently so violent .
That struggle was enormously hard .
It was led , as was natural , by an armed movement , which took power . It was a totalitarian power - not just total - which was military rather than civil and which , by the way , mistakenly operated economic policies similar to the Soviet five-year plans .
This created huge structures of low productivity , squandered resources , probably destroyed the traditional sources of wealth to a large extent , bred corruption and , finally , deprived the Algerians of hope , especially the young . This in turn led many of them to turn to solutions which are supposedly based on religion but which are far removed from the true Islamic faith - solutions which border on magic and even false miracles .
And let us admit that when electoral victory for the IFS seemed likely , we were too ready to accept the cancellation of the subsequent general elections , once again because of the French Government 's attitude .
We should recognize that now .
The truth is that elections have taken place , despite these excesses of blood and suffering . Of course , we know that they were not perfect , but they were valid enough to allow us to enter into dialogue and , in fact , speaking from Parliament we have to talk about parliamentary dialogue .
I do not believe that an ad hoc delegation is needed , and on this small point I differ from what was said by my friend , the chairman of the Committee on Human Rights , Mr Soulier .
As Mr Viola has just mentioned , we have a delegation for relations with the Maghreb , which by the way has visited Morocco and Tunisia on several occasions , but not Algeria .
Well , there is now an Algerian Parliament whose president , as I have been informed , wishes to receive such a visit , and I believe that our Parliament must send that delegation .
Perhaps the ad hoc response will be to arrange for it to be sent now , rather than make Algeria wait its turn . Perhaps another ad hoc response could be to somehow increase the number of members in the delegation , in order to cover as much ground as possible .
Also , of course , to talk with all the political forces represented in that parliament , and perhaps also to make contact with other political forces able to switch soon enough from an attitude of violence to one of moderation and peace - for that violent attitude not to be thought of as irreversible .
Madam President , we Europeans have a long and violent history which has often been stained with blood .
Well , we have now arrived at an era when we can give a modest example of dialogue to others who are currently in a violent phase .
Of course , we should encourage the Council and the Commission in their decisions on the cooperation agreements , as we are indeed doing , but above all we should set an example with an initiative of our own - we ourselves should initiate that dialogue .
Mr President , over the last few weeks I personally have been particularly shocked by the resignation with which the international community has reacted to the horror in Algeria and I am therefore pleased with the tone that has been set for the most part in this debate and also with the proposal to send a delegation from this Parliament .
I am nevertheless convinced , ladies and gentlemen , that any steps taken by this Parliament will only be meaningful if we remain objective and if we are not selectively outraged .
It is of course clear to everyone that this is fundamentalist terror at work which wants to force its ideology on people by violent means , and I actually believe that we must not only show respect for the women who are organizing but also support them from here .
But there is also something else and fortunately it has already been mentioned a few times in the debate today .
More and more journalists and human rights organizations attest to the fact that violence also occurs by armed gangs associated with the army .
And may we not ask any questions about the impunity with which murders are carried out ?
May we not ask any questions about the army 's impotence to protect the civilian population ?
May we not ask any questions about the fact that the Algerian authorities react by restricting press freedom , human rights and the rule of law ?
It is important that the parliamentary delegation also discusses these problems with their colleagues in the Algerian Parliament .
Finally , colleagues , I should like to point out our own responsibility in this debate .
Algerian refugees are still being sent back to their country without guarantees for their safety .
The UN Commissioner for Refugees has already made several dramatic appeals to a number of Member States still applying these practices .
He asks that for the time being these states suspend the sending back of these refugees until the situation in Algeria changes .
I am convinced that this can only succeed if all Member States together take this decision and I invite the Council to come up with a proposal in this regard .
I hope Parliament will also be able to support this .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Algerian people have had enough of violence and as Mrs André Léonard has already said : neutrality in these circumstances would amount to refusing assistance to a people in need .
Madam President , in the face of the tragic events taking place in Algeria , the temptation is great for friends of Algeria to remain silent .
To remain silent because words cannot express our feelings of sadness , horror and indignation at the escalation of barbarity which people are suffering in that unhappy country .
To remain silent , too , since it is evident that the fanatics will not hesitate to massacre the populations of entire villages and are completely insensitive to all calls to reason .
To remain silent because the Algerian leaders seem to consider any word spoken about Algeria , any interest taken , the slightest interest regarding the Algerian population , as a scandalous attack on national sovereignty , as an unacceptable interference in the domestic affairs of the country .
And yet now , more than ever , is the time to cry out , and especially we Members of European Parliament .
Cry out because in the eyes of many throughout the world , this House is considered the voice and conscience of the European people .
If we remain silent in the face of such events , when else will we have the right to make our voices heard ?
Cry out so that those in Algeria who risk their lives daily , fighting and suffering for democracy and human dignity can hear us express our solidarity with them in their fight , their ordeal and also their hope .
Cry out , too , to awaken the international conscience which , apart from occasional bursts , often seems scandalously quiet with regard to Algeria .
Cry out to show that we are neither impressed nor intimidated by the Algerian Government 's shameless blackmail about interference .
One sometimes has the feeling that the savage brutality of the Islamists serves as an excuse for the government to restrict the liberty and rights of the people .
Let us never forget that the legitimacy of the president , a legitimacy which comes from the elections , does not authorize any behaviour he chooses .
Let us never forget that the legitimacy of power wears out very quickly when you permanently betray the principles on which that power is based .
In any case , when a government shows itself incapable of defending its citizens , or preventing massacres from being committed , day after day , like those to which the Algerian people are victim , it is the duty of the international community to exercise the right of assistance to a people in mortal danger .
But since the European Union has entered into economic negotiations with Algeria , let us not hesitate - of course at the same time condemning vigorously the dreadful crimes committed by the fundamentalists - to put pressure on the Algerian Government so that , whilst fighting terrorism , it does not support or organize criminal behaviour or serious attacks on human rights ; so that they allow NGOs , in particular Amnesty International , to carry out their specialist investigations , as they do in many countries around the world , with particular emphasis on the prisons ; so that the international media may freely accomplish its mission , and finally so that the Algerian government may search constantly and with courage for dialogue with all the forces in the country who are ready to renounce violence , including the perverse and the wicked , in order that this country may return to peace and Algeria may once again take her rightful place in the Euromediterranean group , where we await her impatiently .
Madam President , over and above other considerations it is good for Algeria and the Algerian people to be able to see that there is an enormous feeling of support and a wish for mutual progress here in the European Parliament .
The most important challenge is one which we both have in common , and we can do a great deal towards meeting this common challenge .
It is the challenge of working towards a decisive link between Algeria and the European Union .
We propose stepping up political and parliamentary dialogue , opening a dialogue between the European Parliament and the Algerian National Assembly within the framework of the partenariat .
We support the determination to set Algeria on the road to progress , to consolidate it as a democratic state and to promote human rights .
We condemn unreservedly the brutal scourge of terrorism which the Algerian people are suffering , and support the people and the country of Algeria .
Madam President , as this debate comes to a close I do not want to end by repeating what has already been said , so eloquently , by previous speakers on the subject of the horror we feel at the Algerian tragedy , and our admiration for those fighting for peace and liberty .
I am thinking particularly of the women , doubly targeted and doubly courageous !
On the other hand I would like to counteract the idea , which is all too widespread , that there is nothing immediate or concrete that we can do to relieve the Algerians ' ordeal .
In fact , there is a concrete gesture that the European Union can immediately make since it depends only on her , and it consists of offering protection worthy of the name to Algerians , male and female , who have chosen to flee the hell in their country .
You will say that it falls to the Geneva Convention to play this role .
Paradoxically , it seems that Algerians cannot benefit from this Convention - Mrs van Lancker alluded to this just now .
The law of the Member States notes that protection under the Convention can only be offered to those persecuted by state authorities .
This understanding of the law was confirmed as recently as 1996 , by the common position of the Council on this matter .
It is a paradox because the Islamists , rightly considering that they are persecuted by their government , can claim protection in the European Union whilst their victims , those fighting for liberty whom I have just mentioned , cannot .
Nevertheless , this interpretation , which is contrary to that of the UNHCR and contrary to the spirit and the letter of the Convention , is now established in Europe .
That is why I am arguing for the establishment of a form of subsidiary protection which would be half way between the convention 's status and temporary protection , currently under study .
It is not a far-fetched idea since it has figured for many years in the Council 's programme and I am delighted that France - my country - is currently considering it , but I think that such an arrangement will not make complete sense or be completely effective unless it takes place at European Union level .
Whilst waiting for this , Madam President , I hope that the European Union will have a more open attitude towards the position of Algerians seeking protection in France , protection which today 's debate has demonstrated is completely legitimate .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank all those who have spoken in this debate , an animated and passionate but dignified debate , which has well reflected the horror , the challenges and the dangers of the current situation in Algeria .
I would also like to thank the speakers for the quality of their contributions , even if some have been disappointed by the Council 's statement on the role the European Union should play in Algeria .
I believe the unanimous watchword in this House has been that we cannot be indifferent to Algeria , that Algeria - and I would go further and say the whole of the Maghreb - needs the European Union .
But , on the other hand , the European Union needs an Algeria and a Maghreb that is peaceful and politically stable .
I pay tribute to the initiative taken by Parliament , to face up to its responsibilities .
The Council has its role to play , the Commission has its role to play - in particular concerning the future association agreement within the framework of the Barcelona process - and the European Parliament ( this is a purely personal opinion ) also has its role to play .
We have talked about constructive dialogue . I would add ' watchful dialogue ' on everything involved in this sensitive area of protection of human rights .
Certainly , nearly everyone is in agreement that the circle of participants in the dialogue in Algeria must be as large as possible , but this is a long drawn process and it has to be said that , unfortunately , in Algeria as in other crises , there are people who do not want to talk .
Our common effort will therefore take a long time .
Algeria is worth supporting because , by and large , the people want peace . This has been stated by one of the speakers and was proved by the people themselves at the last elections and the ones before that .
Before handing over to Vice-President Marín to present his conclusions in his capacity as representative of the Commission , I would like to conclude by saying that our role is to accompany and encourage the different institutions to assume their proper role in this long process of peace , but that all the lifeblood of Algeria and all willing Algerians are called on to resolve this problem .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I support what Mr Wohlfart has said on behalf of the Council , and I should simply like to add that if the European Parliament would like to set in motion a mechanism for political dialogue at the parliamentary level , the Commission would put itself at your disposal , because just at the moment , anything which can help to open new channels of dialogue with the representatives of the Algerian people is interesting .
When it comes down to it , the association agreement negotiations have a precise mandate , and their methodology and language are also precise . Regardless of whether the discussions are of politics or not , the overall framework and the negotiating brief do not allow political dialogue with the Algerian authorities to be entered into .
In other words , circumstances dictate that the Commission 's discussions are limited in an objective manner by the nature of the negotiating brief .
In contrast , I think that the European Parliament could perhaps represent a far more open route for opinions to be expressed - much more open , and also wider , more global in a certain sense , and much less restricted than diplomatic language .
If this Parliament decides to act in this way , then I support what Mr Wohlfart has said ; we would set up all the mechanisms to encourage progress in this political operation .
Thank you , Commissioner Marín .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12.00 noon .
Situation in the Middle East
The next item on the agenda is the statements by the Council and Commission on the situation in the Middle East .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am glad we are also able to tackle the issue of peace in the Middle East this morning , which is a very important issue .
Ladies and gentlemen , let me remind you that the Council 's position regarding the current situation is based on two elements .
Firstly , co-operation on the issue of security and secondly , negotiations , all under the umbrella of ' land for peace ' .
The Palestinian authorities must do all they can to prevent acts of terrorism .
The Council speaks regularly , notably through its special envoy , to the Palestinian authorities to encourage total cooperation with Israel on the issue of security .
We have suggested to both parties that a permanent security committee should be set up which we consider could prevent the extremists from taking the peace process hostage .
We must at all costs avoid the stalling of negotiations after every incident , however tragic , however abject and reprehensible it may be .
Negotiations leading to acceptable results for both sides and to a real improvement in the economic position of the Palestinians is the only way possible to create , little by little , the climate of confidence that is essential for the re-establishment of a situation where a maximum of security can be guaranteed .
Mr President , on the subject of honouring the Oslo agreements , the President-in-Office of the Council seized the occasion of the recent visit of the American Secretary of State , Mrs Madeleine Albright , to the region , to reiterate the position of the Council regarding the honouring of agreements reached and to ask Israel to honour her obligations and commitments .
Real and credible confidence building measures , such as the unblocking of projects essential for the viability of the Palestinian economy , are more than ever necessary .
Both sides must adopt a code of conduct .
Any revival in the negotiations regarding the final statute must be accompanied by the parallel and complex drafting of an interim agreement .
We particularly want to see the next phase of redeployment taking place as agreed .
Both parties must avoid unilateral acts , which could prejudice the final statute , which implies that Israel must suspend all new expansion of colonies .
Regarding the Palestinian economy , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , its situation is , to say the least , precarious and since the recent attacks in Jerusalem , the Israeli government has continued to enforce strict measures over the population of the Palestinian territories .
In addition to the cordoning off of the territories , Israel continues , in particular , to freeze the tax receipts due to the Palestinian authorities , even though as recently as Monday they announced they were going to free up half the amount due to the Palestinian authorities , that is 50 % of the amount , which equals some 50 million shekels .
The Council has , on many occasions , repeated that it respects the legitimacy of the Israeli government to defend its population .
However , the measures taken by the Israelis are , to our mind , excessive and do not affect those who are truly responsible for the attacks .
We have insistently requested that Israel respect her obligations by handing over the full sum of tax revenue to the Palestinian authorities .
In order to help the latter face up to its immediate needs , we are going to send , as a matter of urgency , ECU 4 million and , in the same context , we are going to look into the possibility of creating a medium term revolving fund for the Palestinian authorities .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to say a word about corruption within the Palestinian authority itself .
The Council is particularly worried by the apparently quite widespread unhealthy practices within the Palestinian authority and with regard to this we have urged President Arafat on many occasions to make a serious effort to put this situation right .
Having said this , the fact that critical reports have been published by the Palestinian authorities themselves shows a willingness on their part to be transparent and I can assure you that the Council will follow this very closely , along with the other main donors .
I would also like to add a word on relations between the European Union and Jordan , a country which plays a major role in the process I have just mentioned , a country with whom it was possible to announce , during the General Affairs Council last Monday , that the negotiations led by the Commission had finally ended in a Euromediterranean association agreement , the final two obstacles being removed at the last minute .
It is a result with which I am extremely pleased .
I will finish by mentioning Syria .
I think everyone is aware that Syria has an important role to play in the peace process and the meetings our special envoy has had with President Assad have confirmed previous impressions .
In fact , Syria would be seriously interested in re-opening negotiations with Israel .
Of course , Mr President , the most difficult part is yet to come , that is , defining a basis on which discussions can be re-opened .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it would be difficult for the Commission not to go along with what Mr Wohlfart has said on behalf of the Council .
His description is correct and the Commission agrees completely .
There is no doubt , especially since the Israeli Government 's decision to build a new settlement in East Jerusalem , that we have entered a vicious circle which has placed the Middle-East peace process in a frankly delicate situation .
You are all familiar with the United States ' initiative and Mrs Madeleine Albright 's visit .
It seems that a meeting between Palestinians and Israelis , not involving the United Nations , is planned for next week .
We shall see whether a United-States package can finally achieve significant progress in a situation which has deteriorated at internal , regional and international levels .
Lastly , I am not going to try to hide from you the Commission 's primary cause for concern , which is that it will be our responsibility to manage the financial package which was approved by the Council and supported by the European Parliament .
I am afraid that , as a budgetary authority , we will have to take that responsibility in the future , because of the Council 's decision .
The Palestinian economy has been placed in an absolutely impossible position because of numerous factors . These include border closures , restriction of movement , cases of corruption and lack of transparency in the management of the Palestinian budget , and financial sanctions - such as not handing over taxes , and so on .
What has been created by the European Union and particularly the Commission - which has had responsibility in the Palestinian case - has been a system of social security , financed by the international community , rather than a model of economic development .
The events of last year mean that this economic model is not now viable , unless a peace plan can be resurrected quickly . This also needs to allow the Palestinians the opportunity for economic development in the medium and long term .
The peace process will not be able to rely for ever on large-scale financial efforts by the international community , and particularly the European Union , as it has done for the last four years . As you know , the European Union contributes the most financially - much more than the United States , the so-called moderate Arab states , the World Bank or the International Monetary Fund .
And because of our extensive experience the Council , at the Commission 's suggestion , has again decided to grant urgent financial aid in an attempt to salvage the political momentum . Once again we are going to salvage the political momentum so that the Palestinian Presidency can pay for the government , the police , the hospitals and the local authorities .
It has become traditional for the European Union to perform this operation .
Finally , the Council authorized the Commission to make a rapid transfer of approximately ECU 4 million and to present a new financial engineering system by means of a cash fund .
We want to consolidate this , to help the Palestinian Government in their struggle against the problems of border closure or the failure to receive their share of the taxes collected by the Israelis , which stem from the Oslo agreements . I am telling you this because the European Parliament will have a great deal to contribute .
The only way of achieving these aims will be by what is known as the Notenboom procedure . When the time comes to calculate the new distribution , we will have to find an adjustment to set this new political decision in motion .
This will allow us to grant a special aid programme for the peace process in Palestine from November , depending on how well the money problems of the Palestinian Government may have been resolved . As Mr Wohlfart said , the causes of these problems are very diverse , but they all matter .
We should think about this , because the current aid programme expires next year .
This is not the moment of the Oslo agreements , or the elation in Washington or Casablanca - this is not a moment for elation .
But the Community and its Member States have agreed to a financial effort , which by the end of the process will probably amount to about ECU 2 , 000 million .
We have rescued some very difficult situations by injecting financial resources , but we are stretched to the limit .
The reason is that up to two million Palestinians living in the territories are in a desperate situation because the Palestinian economy is based essentially on international donations and because of regular border closures , restricted circulation in the territories , and being unable to export to the European common market as a result of infrastructural problems and systematic obstruction by the Israeli authorities .
So one of the things the Commission must do is regularly approach the Council and the European Parliament with a whole series of important questions .
As Mr Wohlfart has said , this is a long-term matter , and next year we will have to define what we are going to do . The special budget runs out next year .
I mention this because last week we were very distressed because the Council asked us to provide finance to help Palestine and the Arafat Government , and we could not do so because we have no money left .
So we will have to find a solution in November , using the Notenboom procedure . And from 1999 , we will have to think very carefully how to spend the same amount of money as we have spent in the last five years , or more .
We certainly do not want to perpetuate political difficulties or obstacles . Instead , we want to provide a regional solution for the Middle East and , most importantly , a viable and sustained economy for the Palestinian people .
Otherwise , I doubt whether the international community can sustain this enormous financial effort which , despite all attempts , has not been able to prevent the Palestinians becoming even poorer this year , and having fewer investments than four years ago .
A population living in a desperate situation , where there is not only no peace but also increasing poverty , where the level of private investment has plummeted , especially in the last year , and there are no investors from Europe , the United States , or the " moderate ' Arab states , is , as you will appreciate , a situation which does not favour restraint .
And I want to assure you that we will come to Parliament again , and I hope we will have your sympathy and support in finding a solution in November , when we discuss the problem of the reassignment of resources .
On behalf of my parliamentary group I should like to thank the representatives of the Council and the Commission most sincerely for their clear , frank words . We shall certainly support you , Commissioner Marín , in your efforts to find money , which will be , and will have to be , used efficiently .
We are confronted here once more with a spiralling use of force which is difficult to break .
Thus we regret all the more emphatically that the Israeli Government has undertaken measures that increase yet again the conditions for force .
As Mr Marín has just said , the reply to the use of force that the Israeli Government has just given will naturally lead via more misery and greater problems for the Palestinian population to further escalation in the use of force .
This is not to say that such escalation can in any way be justified , supported or condoned , but it must be quite clear what responsibility the Israeli Government also bears for the overall development of the situation .
It is of course the settlements policy , above all , that was the starting point for the new spiral in the use of force .
We reject a settlements policy , which seeks to create a fait accompli before talks have even started and negotiations begin .
The present Israeli Government finds itself in a situation where it can no longer control the forces it has conjured up , because there now exist new activities that involve too great an intrusion , even for this Government , into the Palestinian area .
In this context , however , the question of land will have to be negotiated .
It is totally unacceptable that people who sell land , from Palestinians to Israelis , should be " punished ' by death in a legal or illegal manner .
Yet it is obviously the right of any community and any country , particularly in such a difficult phase , to take steps to ensure that the peace process is not impeded again by arbitrary land sales . I believe that here , too , one must find a solution by dialogue with the Israelis and the Palestinians .
As has already been said , the Israeli Government ' s reaction to the use of a force that they had to resist was appropriate , but it was inappropriately intensive and it has created new conditions for force .
The financial restrictions , the restrictions on freedom of movement , lead a people to the point where even those who previously rejected the use of force now support it as the only way out of this situation .
I consider that to be catastrophic , and I hope that the measures announced by the Council and Commission , and also those presented today by Commissioner Marín , which I hope Parliament will approve , will at least cover the financial aspects .
The fact remains , though , that freedom of movement is being massively restricted here , and also that the only peace partner there is , Arafat and the PLO , is being divorced from the support of its own population .
I believe that this last point is very important , and I am delighted at the statement by the President of the Council .
We want an independent Palestinian State .
I think that is the only chance , and more and more groups in Israel are saying that themselves .
It has to be , however , a democratic state and one free from corruption .
I emphatically request that efforts be made so that we , as friends of the Palestinian people , may be assured that the new state to be established is a democratic one , and one that respects human rights .
I also request the Council and the Commission to ensure that the measure announced against corruption is also enforced , as no one in the European population will be prepared to spend a lot of money if there is the slightest suspicion that it will not arrive where it belongs , namely , with the people of Palestine .
Mr President , first of all I would also like to warmly congratulate both the Presidentin-Office of the Council for his very important words and also the honourable Member of the Commission , Mr Marín , for his very detailed analysis .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that this is yet another critical moment for the Middle East .
It is not for this Parliament to make a list of charges and to restrict ourselves to a discussion of what is at fault .
The European Union must now deal with specific measures and recommendations to restore the peace process .
These would include the following four general measures and preconditions . First , actions to end terrorist activities .
This is a necessary precondition since , in addition to its many human victims , terrorism gives rise to strong feelings of insecurity in Israel , creating problems in the development of Israel and in its participation in the peace process .
This is a very difficult undertaking and there are two aspects to it .
The first aspect is repressive : finding and capturing the terrorists .
The second is long term : eradication of the origins of terrorism .
Secondly , actions to end all those terrorist acts and the decisions that they provoke .
As an example I will refer to the subject of the settlements .
This is something that must end , as must other , related , activities .
Thirdly , actions to implement the Oslo agreements in full , since , because of their international nature , these agreements are the basis of any peace process in the Middle East .
And fourthly , actions to ensure the success of the proposed new New York process - a process that will proceed in two phases : a bipartite phase , namely Palestine and Israel , and a tripartite phase , namely Palestine , Israel and the United States .
Here we must bear in mind that this new New York process should not be a process which has to produce an immediate result within 48 hours .
Of course this will not happen .
But it should be a conference at which two things will be determined : first , the agenda for future negotiations , and secondly , and most importantly , the process to enable those negotiations to take place .
In addition there are other , more specific , proposals .
I congratulate the Council on the two proposals it has already made public , that is , the creation of a standing committee on security and the recommendation for a code of conduct .
These are two extremely important issues .
But I would like to propose the following : first , a re-examination of the European presence in the Middle East .
And secondly , in place of a special envoy , I propose that the Council , the Commission and , dare I say it , the European Parliament , should create a task force which is linked with the standing committee on security .
It would be helpful if the Middle East peace process could come under the heading of the Barcelona process and if it could become a permanent , on-going conference , within the Barcelona process for the Middle East peace process , which would be based on the creation of working groups .
And I would like to propose four such working groups : a group on security , which would deal , among other things , with the issue of terrorism and the relations with and actions towards other countries , such as the Lebanon and Syria , which play a role in the peace process . A second group which would deal with the matter of the settlements , a third working group to deal with the status of the Palestinian regions and with the status of Jerusalem , and a fourth group to examine the extremely important issue of refugees .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I personally believe that we must devote a lot of time to these negotiations and processes .
We do not need spectacular results for television at this time .
We need results with substance .
Mr President , the Middle East is an area where colonial powers have created the background to the present situation by means of divide and rule tactics , for their own advantage .
The situation appears to be far removed from any logic and full of paradoxes .
I shall just remind you of some of them .
The Arab world has again dug up the weapon of the economic boycott .
It is true that economic relations with Israel have not been broken off , but they have been put on the back burner .
People who trade with each other should also speak to each other .
There were suicide squads when the peace process was going well , as well as now when it is blocked .
The Israeli government makes agreements about Hebron , which is a positive sign , but at the same time begins to build houses in Jerusalem , which is a negative sign , to reassure their political supporters .
The closing of the borders increases the security of the Israeli citizen , but reduces it at the same time .
Islamic leaders in the mosques of Egypt , Syria , Lebanon and Iran continue to praise the Palestinian suicide squads literally as religious martyrs .
I will spare you the actual texts , but personally I am horrified by them .
This all means that the Israelis do not make a logical connection between the peace process and their own personal security .
And unfortunately the element of doing away with terrorism threatens to be an important negotiating instrument .
That can obviously not be the case .
The confidence of Palestinians and Israelis in their own leaders has decreased .
The European proposal to get the process going again by means of a code of conduct will not work , in my view .
Only the emotional consciousness of the inevitability of the existence of Palestinians and Israelis as peoples in this area of the world can stimulate the process again .
That is now exactly what the American Secretary of State is trying to encourage by letting the parties for the moment stew in their own juice , because in the end they will have to get along with each other .
But at the same time Mrs Albright has talked over the heads of the Palestinians and Israelis and over the borders of Israel to the surrounding areas .
I cannot quite understand Mr Dimitrakopoulos ' idea about a task force , but with regard to the area surrounding Israel there can certainly be a role for Europe .
It is important that the association agreements with Jordan and Egypt get off the ground as quickly as possible .
I agree with Commissioner Marín that this Parliament must do everything it can to guarantee financing for the Palestinians and the long term economy .
Because without taking into account the rational economic and social development of Israel 's neighbours , the jealousy and fear of Israel , a hard-working democracy , will remain .
Finally , Mr President , I consider it an important task for this Parliament to guarantee that it will stimulate the reconciliation process in Israel from the Meda funds .
Mr President , this is a cry for help and not a study because we can call on Mr Wohlfart and Commissioner Marín for studies , for which I thank them most sincerely .
The peace process has got into an extremely bad state .
Everyone knows that .
It seems to be as good as dead and if new impetus is not given quickly , it will die .
Even the attempts at mediation by the American Secretary of State did not manage to break the deadlock .
In a spiral of bomb attacks by Hamas and retaliatory measures , the peace process seems dead and gone , and has only produced losers .
The terrorism by Hamas must be fought in every way possible and Arafat must be made to keep his promises .
But by the long term closing off of the Palestinian areas and the freezing of 60 % of the national income of the Palestinian authorities , the Israeli government is creating its own enemies in an atmosphere of frustration , poverty and hopelessness .
The political leaders have lost the initiative owing to a lack of political guts and extremists on both sides , with escalating outrageous acts , have created a climate of mistrust and hatred that is probably stronger than two years ago .
If the momentum sinks further , there is the risk that the parties involved in the Middle East will lose their way even further in their own sandstorm and be blinded .
Where are the visionary politicians who set the peace process going ?
A new breakthrough in the deadlock is needed now .
That is easy to say , but difficult to achieve .
On the basis of the Oslo agreements we must seek a definitive solution to the disputes and in this approach there is no room for taboos and certainly no eye for an eye or tooth for a tooth approach as between Israel and the Palestinians and between Israel and Lebanon .
We are living in a modern age with modern slogans and hopefully with a modern peace .
Mr President , last Saturday , the fourth anniversary of the signing of the Oslo agreements in Washington , should have been a day of rejoicing , both for Israel and for Palestine .
It was , in fact , a day of anguish for the peace process which is now only held together by a thread .
It was also , and I am delighted , a great day of struggle .
The united gathering in Tel Aviv against the policies of the Netanyahu government and for the defence of the people is a sign of hope that we must hail .
More than ever the line of demarcation separates not Palestinians from Israelis , but those in favour of the peace process from those against .
The reaction , impressive in its dignity , of the mother of little Smadar , one of the victims of the latest attack on Israel for which Hamas claim responsibility , a criminal act that we have strongly condemned , is significant . To Benjamin Netanyahu , who was accusing Yasser Arafat when those who plant the bombs are his worst enemies , she retorted , " It is your policy that killed her ' .
This policy , which the French Minister for Foreign Affairs was right to qualify as catastrophic , will lead straight to an explosion of violence and to war , if nothing is done to counteract it in time .
If the colonization of the West Bank and Jerusalem continues , if the autonomous territories remain closed off and isolated from each other , if the port of Gaza remains blockaded , if the airport is closed , if thousands of political prisoners who are still in detention are not released , if the withdrawal of troops that was explicit in the agreements is not carried out , even if Tsahal dares to venture once more into the autonomous territories , and the worst is possible , efforts made up until now to try to guarantee the security , peace and mutual development of all the people of the region will at once be ruined .
So what can Europe do other than provide aid - emergency aid and development aid - more than ever needed by the Palestinian authority ?
The problem raised by Mr Marín regarding this is absolutely crucial .
But beyond that , what can Europe do on a political level to save peace in the Middle East ?
I will say it once again here , the immediate suspension of the association agreement between the European Union and Israel would seem to me to be a healthy measure since it would make clear to Israeli opinion that it was aimed not at Israel but at the current government in order to try to put the required political pressure on it to drive it to respect the obligations undertaken in Oslo and in Washington .
Europe often regrets not playing a more worthy role on the international scene .
Here is an opportunity to demonstrate clear political will , that of saving the peace process of the Middle East .
Mr President , the other day , the French intellectual Edgar Morin compared Israel 's Prime Minister Netanyahu to the fugitive Bosnian Serb leader Karadzic .
The comparison could be seen as exaggerated , but on reflection it has a lot of truth in it .
In Palestine both sides are indeed committing acts of violence which we all condemn , not least the latest insane acts of terrorism in Jerusalem .
The remarkable thing is , however , that on the Palestinian side it is the friends of peace who have the political power and the peace saboteurs who are hunted by the police .
In Israel it is the other way round .
According to the Israeli opposition politician Yossi Sarid , Prime Minister Netanyahu was even in agreement with the latest illegal Jewish acts of colonization in a Palestinian area in Jerusalem .
Why does Netanyahu react in this way ?
The answer is quite simple : he represents an ideological extremism which lives and thrives only in strife , only when insecurity is a part of normal Israeli life , only when an Arab threat can be portrayed with some credibility .
What would become of Netanyahu , Sharon and the other Israeli ' hawks ' if there were a final peace settlement with a Palestinian state ?
Of course , they would be swept away by the peace-loving Israeli electorate .
That is why there is , sadly , reason to be concerned about the future in the region of Palestine .
In the international press there is now talk of Palestinian revolt , a new intifada , in response to Israeli provocation .
There is also talk of Israel waging a " preventative ' war against Syria .
We have seen that kind of thing a number of times before in history .
We shall of course condemn all acts of violence .
We shall of course examine all those involved , including the Palestinian authorities , and not least Arafat 's own authoritarian methods and the opportunities for corruption which the Palestinians themselves have also now investigated .
But in the European Union 's actions there should be no doubt that the main responsibility for the current threat to the peace process lies with the current Israeli Government , not with the Israeli people .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , bombings in Israel , attacks on buses , in the market , are once again sowing grief and death .
Everyone who goes off to work in the morning has the right to return home alive in the evening , and every national authority has the right to protect its civil population .
That is an absolute fact .
To do this , is it necessarily the best thing to establish military control along all the roads of the West Bank ?
To confiscate thousands of hectares from your neighbours ?
To shut off hundreds of thousands of citizens in their town or village , thus condemning people to unemployment when their only crime is to have been born an Arab ?
Is it the best thing to blow up the home and family of someone suspected of belonging to an extremist movement ?
Is it the best thing to move colonies of people armed up to the hilt into the territory of your neighbours ?
To maintain mercenary militia in South Lebanon or to prevent the Palestinians from exporting their own produce ?
The Israeli authorities seem to think it is the best thing , in any case , it is a necessity .
The least that can be said is that if it is necessary , it is certainly not sufficient .
The renewal of attacks on Israel demonstrates that there is clearly an error in the path that has been chosen .
Obviously , such an attitude is deplorable .
If you turn your back on peace you draw together once again all the conditions for the fanatics to devote themselves to new attacks .
The European Union must join in the efforts which have been deployed tirelessly by American diplomacy for years , to whom I believe we should be grateful at least in a small way , since the few advances that have been achieved up to now , at least in the last few years , are really due to this activity .
I am sure everyone remembers the weekly trips to the Middle East by Mr Baker , to obtain a signature .

In any case , Mr Marín has reminded us , and I must admit that his comments have terrified me somewhat , that the European Union injects considerable quantities of money and energy , but probably not under the right conditions needed to make it effective .
It would be fitting therefore if this same effort could be deployed on a political level , through pressure on the Israeli government , but also , and perhaps at least in the same manner , on the Palestinian authority so that it reforms its methods and its customs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in his remarkable work , ' Christians of the Orient ' , between jihad and dhimmitude , the Israeli Jewish historian Bat Yeor observes that if Christians have often been unfaithful to the message of the love of Christ then Muslims , when they devote themselves to violence , do no more than imitate the prophet Mohamed himself , cruel leader of the war of Medina , who cut off the heads of his enemies by the thousand and gave the women and children to the men .
It is true that numerous sorats of the Koran - I am referring to the Pleiad edition , approved by the University of Al Azhar , order the annihilation of non-believers and , depending on the interests of Islam , death or a saved life for the people of the Book , Jewish or Christian , according to a statute of dhimmi .
There is unfortunately no alternative Koran .
But , opposing the fundamentalist violence of Islam , there is also the fundamentalist violence of Judaism .
I must here pay tribute to the work of a professor at the University of Tel Aviv , Israel Schak who , in his book ' 3000 Years of Israel ' courageously denounces the foundations of what the famous Jerusalem philosopher , Yoshua Leibowicz , did not hesitate to call judeo-nazism in the French newspaper ' Le Monde ' .
Let me give an example .
Believing cynically that it would go no further , the Regional Councillor for the Ile de France , the eco-Communist Konopnicki , proclaims in No 463 of " The Ark ' his admiration for the famous rabbi Élie Munk , great commentator of Maimonides who , in his book ' The Lost People ' , page 615 , claims that the Turks and the Negroes are not men and develops in some depth the need , and I quote , " to kill , in the name of the Ten Commandments , the descendants of idolaters , even young children , along with their fathers and grandfathers ' .
Rooted in Maimonides , the religious ideology of Élie Munk , to consider but one of the mentors of Konopnicki widely diffused in France and notably at the great Jewish Colbo bookshop explains , I believe , along with many others , the behaviour of the Netanyahu government , coming from both this theocratic culture and the extremist nationalism of Gordon , the mentor of Ben Gurion .
It is through this terrible confrontation , the exterminationist logic professed by the distant children of Abraham , for centuries brothers yet enemies , that unfortunately the Israeli-Arab war is perpetuated .
But Mr Netanyahu is mistaken .
Israel cannot win peace by continuing to crush the Palestinian people , which will in the end lead to a revival of Arab solidarity .
I once believed that perhaps the Afrikaners were not so wrong to want to organize , in South Africa , the separate development of peoples so different .
When I saw the reality of apartheid , its world of barbed wire , of townships and of homelands , I immediately understood the madness of both the policy and the practice .
It is the same with Israel who , although they receive immense support from the United States , will not be able to coop up indefinitely , in a number of small territories , between watchtowers , a Palestinian population - poverty-stricken but young , courageous , intelligent and enterprising .
The policy of apartheid is madness for Israel , just as it was for the Union of South Africa .
If Israel does not find a solution in keeping with the dignity of people and peoples , nothing will save it from disaster .
So when you consider that the Arab citizens of Israel do not even have the same identity cards as the Jews , you can but shudder .
I would like to put a question before I end , Mr President .
Why do some people in France , who want to grant , without limit , the rights of French people to foreigners , accept that over there , the Arabs , who are in their own country , are so badly treated ?
An error on the banks of the Seine is certainly not the same as a similar error on the banks of the Jordan .
Mr President , we still refuse to admit that the Oslo agreements are dead , because we see no alternative other than war .
If there are alternatives to Oslo , as sometimes seems to surface in press statements by Israeli spokespersons , the international community at Oslo - that is , the United States , Europe and Russia , which stood guarantor for those agreements - has the right to know about it now .
The peace process has been going through a very severe crisis , which is why every effort has to be made now to prevent it being destroyed with no alternative in sight .
There is not much time because the situation is on the brink .
For this reason , we support the proposal from the President of the Council to set up a permanent security committee between Europe and the United States to exercise the maximum possible pressure on both sides .
A code of conduct is needed to reverse the rout which is leading to catastrophe , but the next New York summit , at the end of the month , must primarily clarify the strategic position : is the peace process still in the minds and amongst the basic options of the two protagonists ?
The summit must determine whether the peace process is still valid for the Israeli government .
This is an essential point , because it looks as if the answer is no !
If it is not valid , the summit must come up with a new proposal , explicit and comprehensive , which is , as I have said , surfacing every so often in the press .
Without this fundamental clarification , no partial proposal will have any effect .
Certainly if this point is made clear in New York , the code of conduct can be approved , the measures the Palestinians intend to adopt against terrorism can be examined and a common approach can be agreed in the fight against terrorism which does not rely entirely on the armed forces and the police .
I say that because Hamas terrorism is not the only terrorism in the world .
In countries where terrorism has been isolated and defeated - and I could give many examples - it has always happened on the basis of a political defeat first and foremost , and not a police or military one .
The Israeli government seems to forget that terrorism can only be defeated when it is isolated from the people and not by carrying on as at present , creating all kinds of difficulties for Arafat , for example , political and economic , and undermining his credibility .
The terrorists can be isolated if the people see the peace making progress , see the benefits , see what the leaders , starting with Arafat and Rabin , have done in the interests of the people .
If the process is shattered the forces ranged against it will naturally gain strength , terrorism first and foremost .
Isolating terrorism is the only way .
This is a very important point because the Israeli government 's requirement for security , and the accusation against the Palestinians of not doing enough , is based on an approach to fighting terrorism which must be questioned , because it is probably a method which does not produce results .
As regards Commissioner Marín 's requests , I will be brief .
You are right : in November the European Parliament will try to do its share .
Madam President , I must say that it is with a large amount of sadness that I participate in this debate today .
We have been for a long time hoping that the peace process in the Middle East would come to some form of conclusion .
I recall very well when the European Parliament delegation visited Israel earlier this year that I came home with a great deal of sadness .
There seemed to be no unanimity within Israel or within the PLO , and the Palestinian cause generally , as to how to proceed .
When there is a lack of unanimity it is very difficult to come to a conclusion .
I listened very carefully to what the President-in-Office and the Commissioner said this morning .
I must say that I thought that Commissioner Marín was extremely frank and very open and , indeed , courageous in his remarks .
These things have to be said at the present time and Parliament will have to come to a conclusion because it has a role to play in this process .
But there are many others who have a role to play and it is not always appreciated that we need better coordination of the way we are approaching the difficulties that are currently being faced in the Middle East .
Syria , as I have mentioned before , is a key player and has a lot to answer for in terms of the failure to find a solution to the peace process which we all want to see succeed .
And likewise Iran .
Those two countries in particular should be brought to task , not only by the United States but also by the United Nations and by the European Union .
I hope that the EU in particular will try to encourage the United Nations - which at this very moment is undertaking reforms - to respond to events in the problem areas of the world .
It is not necessarily right that we always depend on the United States to be the world 's policeman .
The European Union certainly has a role to play .
We have great interests there as has been pointed out : the financial contribution we make to the Palestinians and also , of course , the trade association agreements we have with the Israelis .
But , overall , I was encouraged to hear Mr Colajanni say what may be the one thing we can all agree on - that terrorism must be isolated .
However that is to be achieved , it must be with the cooperation of Syria and with the Iranians .
I was encouraged also to hear that our relationship with the Jordanian Government - which has a key role to play in this issue - is currently good .
The Egyptians have always believed that they have a major role to play in the Middle East and I would encourage them to be full participants in this overall discussion which we must surely try to address from that international perspective .
We all hope that the discussions in Washington next week will be successful .
But let us also remind everybody that life goes on in the Middle East .
There are 30 , 000 Palestinians crossing the Israeli border every day to go to work .
We have a great opportunity as a European Union to make sure that we can bring those conclusions and peace process together so that we do not need to continue this debate on a never-ending basis .
Mr President , I believe the greatest error that Parliament could make today would be to bury the peace process prematurely .
If we look at the situation we can see that , according to the famous saying , it is serious but not desperate .
Mrs Albright 's visit to the Middle East did not have such a negative outcome as some bright spirits would have us believe .
The removal of the blockade , this is one measure which is by no means negligible when it concerns a country obliged to defend itself from the daily threat of terrorism .
What we have to try to avoid is pouring oil on the fire .
In this respect , the recent comments of the French Minister for Foreign Affairs are regrettable .
The peace process will take place between the Palestinians and the Israeli government , both democratically elected .
To insult either of them would be to insult the peace process .
Mr President , there is no doubt that it would be a serious mistake to try to reduce the current crisis in the peace process in the Middle East to a question of security .
We all roundly condemn the unacceptable outrages which have been suffered by innocent victims in Israel .
But we all know that the key to what is happening in that region lies in the failure to observe the Oslo agreement , principally on the part of Benjamin Netanyahu 's government .
Prime Minister Netanyahu is trying to renegotiate , or rather to impose something different from what was agreed , and not just in relation to the settlements .
For example , he is not carrying out the withdrawal which was agreed with the Palestinian National Authority , he is blockading the territories under that authority 's control , he is detaining thousands of prisoners .
What is Netanyahu achieving with this harmful policy ?
First , he is weakening President Arafat ; secondly , he is frustrating the Palestinians and encouraging the terrorists ; and lastly he is encouraging the Israeli extremists , who are currently committing regrettable and provocative actions such as those of Ras al Aloud .
Mr Netanyahu goes even further by carrying out actions against the Lebanon , to which that country 's army have had to respond , quite legitimately .
In other words , it is Mr Netanyahu who is mainly responsible for what is happening , because he is not keeping to the Oslo agreement and he is disregarding international law .
The United States is gradually losing its role as arbitrator in this matter .
For example , Mrs Albright is acting in a manner directly opposed to Mr Baker .
She has gone to give support to Netanyahu , not to condemn what needs to be condemned .
Europe should ask the United States to play a relatively balanced role again and to put pressure on Netanyahu , for example by freezing the current agreements with Israel , and of course encouraging aid for the Palestinian National Authority .
In this respect , I want to support Mr Marín 's proposal .
Mr President , missio pacis , mission of peace .
The bible of the old church used this translation for the name of Jerusalem .
Is it possible to maintain this name in view of the barbaric terror used by the enemies of peace ?
Not only must it be maintained , but it can be , because this city , the city of Yad Vashem and of the Grove of the Righteous of All Nations , is a symbol of the vulnerability of terrorism .
Terrorism can be vanquished , but only by one method : by the unshakeableness of the conviction that there is no alternative to peace and the peace process .
For this reason I should like here - and I am aware of the bias of my vote - in the name of my parliamentary party to call upon Prime Minister Netanyahu and his Government to fulfill the Oslo agreements to the letter , comprehensively and in the spirit of the peace process .
Because , whereas security is the central point of his policy , it is also clear that security for the Israeli people can only be achieved in this one way , begun in Washington and Oslo .
Mr President , the Alleanza Nazionale wishes to express its full solidarity with the Israeli people over the recent criminal terrorist attacks they have suffered .
At the same time we firmly condemn the resurgence and advance of Islamic fundamentalist fanaticism which , whatever right there may be on its side , has no justification for carrying out indiscriminate attacks in which innocent civilians of all ages often perish .
Having said that , there is no doubt that the peace process has received some severe blows from the oft-exchanged intransigence of Arabs and Israelis .
And , unfortunately , we must emphasize again Europe 's failure to have a strong political presence in this sector in crisis , once again left almost entirely to American diplomacy .
This , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , is the Europe we do not like , the Europe which tries or seeks to make progress in the economic and monetary sectors but remains passive or absent when it comes to political initiatives and international diplomacy : a one-armed Europe .
In fact , we would appreciate it if the European representative would work alongside the American ally for peace and actual resolution of conflict . That representative should be a position not just to make formal statements but to have his suggestions and decisions converted into binding responsibilities for the nations of Europe .
We also have the duty to ask ourselves what we can do in the present situation to halt this escalation of hatred and intolerance .
We believe the European Union should both apply all its economic and commercial leverage to penalize states which protect and subsidize terrorist groups and urge the present Israeli rulers to reconsider the new settlements policy .
To conclude , we think Shimon Peres ' remark , that winning a war - Israel has already won three - is something very different from defeating terrorism . It is wise and worth thinking about .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in order to avoid any ambiguity regarding my position I would like to state immediately that I support the draft joint resolution concerning the murderous attacks in Jerusalem and the peace process in the Middle East .
I approve of the balance and I support the appeal made , along with the proposed steps , for a resumption of the peace process .
It is the only way to ensure the long term security of the citizens and people of Israel , as well as the self-respect , dignity and liberty of the Palestinian people .
I want to devote the main part of my time to say that nothing , I say nothing , can justify terrorism , attacks against civilians and massacres of the innocent .
Terrorism always has fathers , leaders , an organization , networks , financial backers . There is never any justification !
Many countries have recent experience of this , or continue to experience it , even in Europe - Italy , Germany , France , Great Britain and Spain .
Today in Algeria thousands of innocent people are massacred in the name of an obscurantist Islamic ideology .
All of the countries were , or are , different cases , but nevertheless they suffered or suffer , have fought or are fighting terrorism .
Even in Israel , terrorism struck Jerusalem under the Pérez government , at the height of the peace discussions , as it strikes Jerusalem today under the Netanyahu government .
Only firm and massive condemnation by world opinion , unconditional and without digression , only co-ordinated organization of all civilised countries and peoples in the fight against terrorism , will make erosion of it , if not eradication , possible .
This is the price of peace in the Middle East .
This is the price of world peace .
I will conclude by saying that the victims of torture in Jerusalem , like those in Algiers , await not our tears , but this reaction .
It is the duty of Europe and our Parliament to remind everyone of that this morning !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Commissioner , regrettably this Parliament is once again forced to discuss the deterioration in the Middle East peace process , which is really frustrating .
As we have seen , peace and stability in the zone are still a long way from being achieved , and the recent acts of terrorism are simply a manifestation of injustice , and an obstacle in the way of pacification .
I think it is important to stress that none of the main protagonists in this process have the absolute right to impose their own views of the problems which exist , much less do so by means of provocation or violence .
We all realise that the Arab-Israeli conflict is complex and contains numerous factors whose solution needs a firm political will .
But we should demand that the parties concerned play their part . The Israeli Government should end its policy of provocation by means of the settlements , while the Palestinian Legislative Council should step up its fight against terrorism by arresting the activists , controlling and restoring order , and taking repressive measures against these terrorist groups .
As we have repeated many times , dialogue and strict compliance with the Oslo agreements represent the only way to reach a solution which will benefit the peace process .
Therefore , we in this Parliament should welcome the proposal made by the President of the Council , to create a permanent security committee in which the European Union and the United States can work together in order to mediate in the conflict .
To do so , the European Union needs to reinforce its identity , and respond rapidly and unanimously to events .
I am very worried by what Mr Marín said - unless I misunderstood - about the possibility that the Commission might cut off aid to the Palestinians .
In any case , Mr Marín , I believe the European Union also needs to make a major effort to get the Arab countries to collaborate more effectively in the peace process , by not harbouring terrorist groups , as well as making an economic contribution to assist Palestinian development in the face of economic aggression on the part of the Israeli Government , as we have already discussed .
Lastly , Mr President , allow me to conclude by saying that what is needed is firmness and political measures to control the zone 's stability , and the support of the international sector for continued dialogue between the parties involved .
Let us hope that the announcement of Palestinian-Israeli negotiations , at the end of this month , brings good results and that no provocation may be able to frustrate it .
Mr President , I think that , after the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzak Rabin and the accession to power of Benjamin Netanyahu , the scenario we now see unfolding is not something that could have been regarded as beyond the realms of possibility .
Unfortunately its international dimensions , beyond what has already been said , are extremely important .
Relations between Israel and all Arab countries have been blown to pieces .
Relations between Europe and those countries whose people are of the Muslim faith are , if you like , being undermined .
Relations between Greece and Turkey , the Cyprus problem , both fall within a wider zone of instability .
For this reason I believe that decisive measures need to be taken .
Such measures have never existed , they have never existed even on the part of the United Nations .
I think that the essential thing is to salvage Oslo .
We cannot abandon Oslo in the search for another reality .
Pressure needs to be exerted on Israel which is unambiguous and comprehensible , and there needs to be , of course , our support for the Palestinian principle , under the conditions that many of my colleagues have set out .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is nothing new under the sun in the Middle East .
Confronting each other , two peoples , two nations : one intolerant , colonialist , probably the only fundamentally racist state with complete impunity and the other , the Palestinian people , in search for decades for a land , their promised land , their homeland , land of their ancestors and also of their children .
It goes without saying that we unreservedly condemn the actions taken by the Palestinian terrorists .
Nothing can excuse murderous attacks , not the provocation of the Hebrew State , nor the benevolence of Uncle Sam towards Israel .
Throughout the last three years in this Assembly , I have frequently heard talk of the duty to interfere .
Has the time not come for Europe , which devotes considerable sums of money to peace in the Middle East , to make its voice heard and to impose with a firmness that would surprise the world , its will to respect the rights of peoples , of men , women and children to peace , security and liberty ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this morning a lot has been said to describe the situation , but let us look for a moment at a scene , a backdrop , which could threaten from the Middle East .
Netanyahu campaigned for election and won - I should like to remind Mr Wurtz that the Israelis elected him with a majority - on a platform of three " noes ' : no to an end to the settlements , no to the withdrawal of troops , and no to a Palestinian state .
If this is not transformed into a three-fold " yes ' , which would basically mean a return to Oslo , so that an active peace policy can be implemented , then the dangerous policy introduced by Netanyahu will not be stopped and will combine itself with another dangerous development .
Of course Arafat must stop the terrorists .
Of course we must continue to repeat that requirement , that is entirely right .
But we must also be clear about another thing : the terrorists are hitting not just Israeli civilians , but also - and that in my view is a political objective - Arafat . For those who throw bombs have , besides the basic aim of hitting Israel , an internal Palestinian aim of weakening Arafat .
If Arafat is weakened - let us even assume he is deposed - then you have the scenario of a Netanyahu operating with three noes opposing a Palestinian leadership dedicated exclusively to the use of violence , or at least a majority of the Palestinian population who want that .
Then the outlook is , in my view , clearly one of long term conflict .
That means we are in a very serious and dangerous position .
Fortunately Mrs Albright has once more achieved the necessary equidistance between Israel and terrorism during her current visit .
At first it appeared to be rather different .
If America were to adopt a unilateral position in favour of one side or the other the peace process would come to an end .
For this reason , Mr President of the Council , the European Union must adopt a much more active role - and thank you , Mr Commissioner , for mentioned this - because it is the only way we can play our part in the maintenance of peace .
Mr President , I do not think there is much left to say about the situation in the Middle East , but I should like to comment on what Vice-President Marín has said .
We should be aware , as he asks us to be , that at the moment we are sustaining the situation with funds destined not for the development but for the security of Palestinian society .
I believe that we can and should continue to do so , but there is a limit of course .
No doubt Parliament will respond positively to his request , because I believe it is necessary to ensure that people in that area can live a little better , for their own sakes of course , but for the sake of Palestine and also Israel , in order that this process may survive in such a delicate situation .
This is the message which was conveyed to the Mashreq Delegation during our last trip , by everybody we met there .
I should like to take the opportunity to say that in this respect I am very pleased with the association agreement with Jordan and that the obstacles , which were hard to justify or to understand but which still existed , have disappeared .
None of this will solve the problem , we know .
The key is not in our hands ; it is in the hands of Israel and the Palestinian National Authority .
We have no alternative but to keep on believing in Oslo - putting our trust in Oslo .
Therefore , I want to express our support for the resolution being presented , and a message of congratulation from this Parliament for the political initiatives adopted by the European Union in the last few weeks , which should continue .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to add a few words to this debate , a debate marked by - and all the speeches have shown it - a feeling of sadness and frustration in the face of the situation in the region four years after the signing of the Oslo accords .
But I still have hope , as I note that none of the speakers have succumbed to resignation and that all are agreed in saying that , even if the current period is tragic and extremely difficult , even if some speak of a last chance for the peace process , it is necessary to try to keep trying , in the absence , as has been said , of any other solution .
Let us be clear . The consequences would be tragic for Israel and for the Palestinians , for their neighbours , but also for the international community .
As a doctor by profession , I have to say that the patient is in danger of dying , perhaps in agony .
But emergency resuscitation is still possible , and on this point I agree with the comments of my friend , Manuel Marín . I strongly doubt that the closure of borders , ports and airports , the withholding of tax receipts , the cutting off of what corresponds to vital oxygen for the patient , is the most appropriate way of saving him .
It is the duty of the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament to support the efforts deployed at an international level , not only by the United States but also by our special envoy , and to seize this last chance .
Success is possible , if a security committee is first of all created .
It is essential to take into consideration the legitimate concerns of Israel with regard to the security of its citizens and to condemn and isolate terrorism .
Mr Arafat alone will not be able to overcome terrorism .
This seems obvious to me .
He needs help , but to achieve this , it is equally necessary to offer prospects to the Palestinian youth who are currently experiencing an extremely difficult situation , to say the least .
At the same time we must also try to draw up the details of how the security committee would be run , a committee which sounds like a good idea in theory but within which there will be clashes which will require neutral arbitration .
As for the code of conduct , I am well aware that it is not a miracle cure , but it is an instrument which could be useful as long as there is the courage to maintain political pressure on both sides in the peace process at a political level within the European Union .
This is equally the duty of other partners involved in the process .
I will conclude by thanking all those who , in a truly exhaustive manner , have reiterated their support for this peace process in the Middle East .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
ONP and universal telecommunications service
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0263 / 97 ) on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , concerning the common position of the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive on the application of open network provision ( ONP ) to voice telephony and on universal service for telecommunications in a competitive environment ( C4-0256 / 97-96 / 0226 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Mrs Read ) .
Mr President , I am delighted to introduce the second reading of this proposal from the Commission , particularly as this basic voice-telephony service is the one which is the most important to consumers .
It is for that reason that a number of my amendments concentrate on the rights of consumers , the right of blind and deaf consumers and others at the margins while , of course , reinforcing the principle of universal service and adding some extra comments on it .
I would remind you very briefly of the definition of universal service in the Interconnection Directive , for which I was also responsible .
I quote : ' a defined minimum set of services of specified quality which is available to all users , independent of their geographical location and , in the light of specific national conditions , at an affordable price ' .
The Commission will notice that one of the amendments in the name of my group calls for a biannual report on the progress of universal service to be made to Parliament .
I think that would be of value to the Commission to have some scrutiny and comment - constructive comment , I hope - from Parliament .
I note with approval that at first reading the Commission and Council took on board a number of my own proposals on the partial inclusion of mobile telephony in the scope of this directive , even though , at the time , Parliament did not agree .
I am quite certain , and perhaps the Commission would want to comment on this , that from the point of view of the consumer , mobile telephones and fixed-point telephones , will very soon be virtually one market .
I have also tabled two amendments on the timetable of transposition and implementation .
I know it is always difficult if Parliament gives any leeway on implementation - it is taken as a red light to Member States that they need not hurry .
I do appreciate the importance of the general liberalization deadline of 1 January 1998 but it did seem , in the view of my group too , that two months for Member States to transpose really was less than adequate .
I would like to voice my own disappointment , and that of a number of colleagues , that the Council did not even consider a number of Parliament 's first reading amendments , particularly when we were asked to do our work swiftly and in fact did do so .
I think it has set an unfortunate climate for the second reading and any possible further conciliations .
The last point is on the question of directories , and I have been heavily lobbied about that : the question of privacy , rights of confidentiality , the right to be included in directories at no cost to the consumer and , not at this stage but eventually , an examination of how publishers of directories and others who will benefit from the profits of this sector should at some stage be asked to make a contribution to universal service .
That is a very brief description , in view of the time , of the broad thrust .
I hope the Commission will be able to accept these amendments , as indeed they accepted many of the first reading amendments .
I would also thank colleagues in other political groups with whom I have worked very hard to come up with some compromises .
We will , of course , have a major review in 1999 from the Commission about the whole thrust of telecommunications legislation and I am sure that this third attempt at liberalization of voice telephony will again be reviewed in 1999 .
I commend the second reading to this House .
Mr President , it is a pleasure to speak for the first time when you are sitting in the Chair .
Since the rapporteur has been conciliatory , our Group will also support the report on the whole .
The most important thing now is for the matter to progress .
We shall then wait and see how the regulations work and what amendments are proposed .
In her explanatory statement , the rapporteur said she was disappointed that mobile telephony is not included in its entirety in this report .
I would like to say that I am pleased about that because , for example , where funding is concerned , it provides development opportunities for that part of telephony .
Development opportunities are what are needed today .
As I said , the report is conciliatory .
It tries to compromise between standardization at the European level and respect for national differences .
Unfortunately , I think that certain parts of the report have gone too far in removing references to national differences .
There are well-intentioned proposals to take special groups into account .
It is right that the Member States should be allowed to decide in what way various special groups should be taken into consideration , either through tax policy or social services .
However , we are concerned that what is said about free directory enquiry services will turn out to be another proposal where the best can be described as the enemy of the good .
I have an example from my homeland .
There we have in an excellent way been able through competition to allow a small telephone company to take over responsibility for directory enquiry services for all the country 's blind people , and today they have a high level of service .
If this proposal goes through , I do not believe that there would be the same interest in developing quality .
We also support the data protection aspect .
I believe it is important that this report also proposes that the subscriber should be able to ensure that all information , or certain parts of it , can be kept secret .
This is necessary in an insecure world where people are increasingly able to combine different lists , which makes elderly people feel their situation is very insecure .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I wish to congratulate Mel Read most warmly on the excellent work she has done , sometimes under great pressure .
I shall straight away mention the important points from the report that are of interest to my group .
To begin with , I would state that the Council of Ministers has adopted a number of important amendments from the European Parliament and those tabled by the European People 's Party at first reading in particular .
I would remind you of our amendments with regard , for example , to tariff restructuring and number portability .
Furthermore , the Group of the European People 's Party is pleased that by means of this directive the European citizen will be guaranteed an extended range of essential telecom services at his disposal .
After all , every citizen has the right to an affordable connection , access to emergency services , a fair contract and access to public telephone booths .
However , improvements could be made .
As far as the extra-universal provision of services is concerned , there are quite a few differences between the various Member States which means that the market participants ' contributions requested for the universal provision of services , vary .
We have repeatedly received complaints from the new parties in the market .
The European People 's Party takes the view that for the basket of services determined at EU level , the parties in the market may be required to make a contribution , but that contributions for extra requirements must be produced from other sources of financing .
This variation and the high contribution create a very uncertain investment climate for the telecommunications sector , prevent the creation of the internal market and we believe that it costs jobs .
So Amendment No 11 is vitally important for us .
My group also wants more attention to be paid to the rights of the disabled , the blind and the hard of hearing , a tariff for telecom services determined more at EU level and , to a certain extent , more consumer protection .
We are therefore supporting a number of amendments in that area .
We are well-disposed to more attention being paid to the rights of the disabled , the blind and the hard of hearing .
One can of course also ask the question of whether special arrangements for them do not belong in more general legislation or whether regulations could be established at national level through the subsidiarity principle .
But access , for example , to telephone booths is very important for the smooth functioning of the disabled in society and their integration .
The affordability of the universal service should be determined more at EU level .
My group supports this .
After all , a Member State could be inclined to set a tariff that was so low that a de facto monopoly situation would remain and sound monitoring of this from the Commission by means of guidelines is an excellent instrument .
We have decided to support Amendment No 26 by the Group of the Party of European Socialists because the universal provision of services is not a fixed but a dynamic concept .
Interesting new developments keep on coming .
Through the advent of the Internet , for example , and especially through Intranets , enormous cost-savings are anticipated in the field of sending documents by post for companies .
But we can also expect that drastic changes will take place in voice telephony .
Microsoft , for example , is starting a service whereby consumers will have access via their televisions to entertainment services supplied via the Internet .
So that means we must take those changes into account .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner to respond .
Mr President , we are very positive towards this report as far as strengthening the rights of users and consumers is concerned , and also as far as improving access to alternative services for the disabled , the blind , the partially-sighted , the deaf and the hard of hearing is concerned , in that they will get free directory enquiry services .
We also think it is a good thing subscribers have the right at no extra cost to withhold information about themselves , and that this information will not be made available for commercial purposes .
Nor will it be possible to use the information in such a way without the consumers and users having given their permission .
The Member States will be ensuring the provision of telephone services .
We therefore think it should also be the Member States who ultimately determine the charges .
However , there can be discussion and agreement at EU level on reasonable prices .
However , as far as guaranteeing quality and cost levels is concerned , we believe , like the Council and the Commission , that this is a matter for the Member States .
The proposal that the Commission should check the quality twice a year is rather excessive .
I also think it is unnecessary .
Mr President , in view of the late hour it would be simplest if I were just to give the Commission 's views on the amendments you are about to vote on .
We have discussed the matter many times and it is surely unnecessary to go into the basic details yet again .
We can accept Amendments Nos 4 , 5 and 16 , and , in principle , Nos 14 , 15 , 19 and 26 as well , with a few reservations .
We are not in a position to accept Amendments Nos 12 , 13 and 24 to the indexes , because they do not accord with the provisions of the data protection directive .
We can hardly pass something which contradicts legislation we have already passed .
We cannot accept Amendment No 25 , but we will accept No16 .
We accept Amendments Nos 3 , 7 and 17 on handicapped users .
We should like to point out , however , that comprehensive treatment of all possible cases is not relevant in the legislative part and nor can it be incorporated there .
We would do better to put this into the explanations and notes .
We accept Amendments Nos 6 and 10 , but oppose Nos 1 , 8 , 9 and 23 .
We can support Amendments Nos 11 and 2 in principle , and Nos 21 , 22 and 20 entirely .
What Fernand Herman said about the date was completely right : if we set the ratification date at 1 January next year , not all Member States will be able to comply .
It has to be said , however , that we are already working on the basis for a permanent directive , whose ratification requirements would not be affected by this directive .
This means that many Member States have already been working in the direction set down here in detail .
So it is not entirely impossible .
What I find particularly convincing is the argument put forward by Fernand Herman : we should not in any way cast doubt upon the date of 1 January 1998 .
We should not create any misunderstandings , so I feel we should leave well alone and not accept Amendments Nos 27 and 28 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in a few moments .
Votes
Mr President , I am speaking on a point of procedure motion , Rule 126 , a brief point of order , Rule 127 , and place of meeting , Rule 11 of the Rules of Procedure .
Excuse my nerves , this is my maiden speech in this House .
On the place of meeting , there are irritated nationalists in every country , but there are also reasonable Europeans , more than one would think .
The time seems right to find a lasting and reasonable solution regarding where we meet , satisfactory for Strasbourg and Brussels , for the French and for others , in short for all the MEPs , for France and for Europe .
Let us not allow the ultranationalists and the impatient media to prevent the reasonable and decent spirits - I emphasize these two words reasonable and decent - to try to succeed .
Our Parliament cannot be taken seriously - and this is so important - unless lasting and consensual rules are put in place , but we , the French , must remain specifically French until it is confirmed to us that reason can triumph .
Mr Duhamel , this is the first time that you have spoken . But you are a well-known constitutionalist .
May I remind you that points of procedure are different from substantive debates .
They must therefore accord with the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , I am speaking on a point of procedure on Rule 122 .
The agenda for the sitting indicates that there will be no explanations of vote in this voting time because under Rule 122 explanations of vote should take place only after the final vote and in this case there will be no final vote .
I have to say that it is not reasonable to deprive MEPs of their explanations of vote .
They attend , they vote , they have the right to explain why they have voted in a particular way .
If you want me to follow procedure I will , by saying , effectively , that although there is no global vote on the list of votes , there are indeed several final votes , since different weekly sessions are decided one after the other .
Therefore , Mr President , I request that explanations of vote be allowed .
Mr Berthu , you have a good memory , you will remember that you already expressed that interpretation last year .
My predecessor confirmed that there would not be any explanations of vote on this point .
You could have referred it to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure if you were not in agreement with this interpretation . You did not .
I agree with the interpretation of my predecessor . There will be no explanations of vote .
Mr President , briefly .
A huge number of Members were very happy with your original draft calendar for the part-sessions , which brought the July part-session forward by one week .
Is there an explanation for why it has now been changed , so that it is in the middle of July instead of at the beginning of July ?
Can Mrs Green or Mr Martens explain this last minute change , which many of us are very unhappy about ?
Mr Haarder , now is not the time to explain the reasons behind the decisions taken by the Conference of Presidents , in which each group votes and explains its vote if it thinks it appropriate to do so .
What I can tell you , and all honourable Members , is that there will be a separate vote on that point , so the House will be able to make a separate decision on it .
( Parliament adopted the calendar of 1998 part-sessions as amended )
Mr President , first I would like to express my wholehearted approval the excellent speech made by our new colleague , Mr Stéphane Buffetaut , last night when he presented our concept of an innovative employment service in Europe to this House .
I would like to add that this question raises , more widely , the problem of the scope of the European Parliament .
Indeed , the European Parliament is not a parliament which enjoys limitless sovereignty .
It is a parliament with an area of work allocated to it within the framework of the treaty signed by the different peoples of Europe , a treaty which we must respect .
Mr President , in my view that treaty has just been violated by the preceding vote , which has cut a week 's sitting in October out of next year 's session .
This decision is contrary to the letter of the Edinburgh decision of 1992 , which will be confirmed , if need be , by the future Treaty of Amsterdam .
Moreover , if this House felt there were too many days of session in the calendar for next year presented by the secretariat , then the days corresponding to additional sessions are the ones that should be cut and not the days of normal sessions .
The amendment from the Europe of Nations Group , Amendment No 19 , intended to cut the November mini-session was a move in that direction .
We note with regret that the House has taken an inconsistent decision by rejecting our amendment and cutting a normal part-session .
Mr Berthu , I note that you are mixing the Rovsing report up with other votes .
Nevertheless , the Chair allowed you could express your opinion by using the explanation of vote for a different vote , which is equivalent to a flagrant breach of the Rules of Procedure .
I think you will appreciate the consideration the Chair has shown you .
The Rovsing report is important because it concerns innovations within EU countries .
Unfortunately , I must say that I do not agree with all of the conclusions reached .
In many cases , liberalization , deregulation and EU harmonization appear to be the major issues , which I cannot agree with .
Greater coordination at the EU level , also covering research , appears to be a passable recipe .
But I am not convinced , for example , that research is best looked after at the EU level instead of at regional or national level .
The experience so far in Sweden is that many research projects are aimed at what the EU thinks is good so that they can get EU funding rather than putting the research itself first .
That is tragic .
There are also , of course , good conclusions in Mr Rovsing 's report , including point 3 and point 12 which concern environmental requirements and the setting up of a capital market for expanding companies to support ' risk ' companies which are involved with new high-technology products .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.50 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

NGOs in environmental protection
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0264 / 97 ) on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection on the common position of the Council with a view to the adoption of the Council Decision on a Community action programme promoting non-governmental organizations which are primarily active in the field of environmental protection ( C4-0217 / 97-95 / 0336 ( SYN ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mrs Flemming ) .
I would also like to welcome the Commissioner , Mrs Bjerregaard .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner .
I would like first of all to thank my colleague Mr Rübig for the considerable work which he did on this report at first reading .
I should also like to thank the Commission .
Cooperation with the Commission was exceptionally pleasant and helpful .
Ten out of 21 amendments were already accepted after the first reading , and I hope very much that possibly a majority of the six amendments I shall introduce today will again accord with the Commission 's intentions .
At this second reading my first main point is that a financial reference framework has no place in this action programme .
I am also concerned that cross-frontier European cooperation with environmental organizations should be strengthened , particularly in central and eastern Europe , but also in other countries bordering on the EU .
This was a request from an English colleague in the Committee on the Environment , and I am pleased to accept her proposal .
She has Russia particularly in mind here , and I think that is very sensible .
When one thinks what a catastrophic state the environment has got into in these former Communist countries , how little public environmental awareness there is , then one can hardly overstate the importance of cooperation with environmental organizations .
Particularly in view of the highly important cooperation with NGOs in former Communist countries , I am not at all happy about the proposed sum of ECU 10.6 million over four years . Perhaps , Madam Commissioner , we could allocate this ECU 10.6 million in one year .
Then we would all be very happy , I think .
I am very hopeful that the Commission will agree to Amendment No 4 , under which not 50 % , but 60 % of the operational and administrative costs foreseen in the budget are to be set aside for the Community .
Organizations which have been found guilty by a court in the European Community during the last two years , should generally not be financed , according to the resolution .
We introduced this amendment in English , and an error has occurred in translation .
The English word " offence ' that we used was translated as " Vergehen ' .
I want to state here , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , that this translation does not reflect our intentions .
We mean the word " Verbrechen ' .
English is not my mother tongue , so perhaps we should have introduced the amendment in German .
Possibly we should have used the word " crime ' in English .
I already know that there is no harmonization of the criminal law , but when one is aware that in Austria , for example , a crime ( ' Verbrechen ' ) occurs when a premeditated deed could incur a sentence of life or more than three years in gaol , then the correct translation for it in other languages cannot be hard to find .
We want to exclude by this means any possible penalty within an administrative procedure : when someone parks illegally , or when a demonstration is not registered , we are not interested in the slightest .
Libel and slander would not fall into this category either - no indictable offence which is punishable by a sentence of up to three years .
All that does not fall within the meaning of " Verbrechen ' as far as I am concerned , but I admit that it does qualify for " Vergehen ' , which was incorrectly introduced here in translation .
Over the next few years we must above all achieve success for western Europe in the former communist countries .
The west has a really great task here , with its knowledge and its success in technical know-how , and this task can only be achieved if we work closely together with the local environmental organizations , and try to raise the awareness , not only of the population , but of the political authorities there at present .
Now my last item . I really hope , Madam Commissioner , that you also include , as I do , animal welfare organizations in the term environmental protection organizations , and will allow these highly committed organizations to receive just some of the financial benefits .
Mr President , national agencies working on ways to protect the environment are doing a serious job to change public opinion on the environment and its preservation .
Without a national viewpoint committed to protecting the environment , politicians will turn a deaf ear to environmental demands .
This is perfectly visible in countries where there is an active green movement , which have gone the furthest in national legislation on environmental matters .
Community appropriation for such environmental agencies is well justified .
It is also justified to extend aid to cover the work the agencies are doing in cooperation with central and eastern European countries .
One of the biggest problems with countries applying for EU membership is how EU regulation levels are to be achieved , and that is particularly so with the environment .
Thus , cooperation on environmental issues and cooperation between the agencies should form a proper part of any strategy to promote membership for the eastern European countries .
The Member States and our citizens are affected by everything that happens on our borders .
Cross-border cooperation among the environmental agencies might have a dramatic effect on general awareness in the nations and the possible creation of environmental projects at grass roots level .
And Community aid should be extended to the work the agencies are doing with others besides our neighbours in eastern and central Europe .
From north to south there are border zones where environmental problems , along with poverty , are burning issues .
I made the suggestion that this aid should be extended beyond EU borders .
I am delighted that it was approved by the committee , just as it was approved by the rapporteur .
Actually , I heard from the interpretation that the person who made the suggestion was English .
I am Finnish .
I totally disagree that the problems , which , for example , are associated with St. Petersburg , Murmansk , the Kola Peninsula , or South Africa , are solvable merely through the actions of the agencies , but any small-scale action in these regions means more than any in our own internal market regions .
An ECU invested there would yield more , through the environmental agencies , the EU or the various Member States , than anywhere else .
Mrs Flemming , in her otherwise excellent report , slipped in a rather dubious amendment in the final part .
The rapporteur suggests an amendment to article 3 , section 3 , which she explained ; an amendment where she personally tries to define what activities in the Community may be granted funding .
In my opinion , this is a very bureaucratic amendment .
We cannot at this stage know which activities qualify for funding and which do not .
Mr President . Non-governmental environmental protection organizations play a particularly important role in Europe .
We are bound to the principle of the eco-social market economy and ecology represents an important basic constituent of life for us .
But we also live in a democracy , and these organizations must also obey the rules of democracy .
In this programme it is our absolute priority to support environmental organizations at European level , and not merely in the Europe of the Fifteen , but particularly in geographical Europe as well , that is , particularly in the countries surrounding the European Community .
We want to place environmental education above all at the centre , because the environment is also a matter of attitude and one cannot begin early enough to teach young people how important a clean , healthy environment is for us all .
For this we need research .
We simply must find methods that allow us to demonstrate to young people where the path leads .
We need an objective base , and we must depart from such power words as fear , from stirring up fear , from deriding things .
I believe we have to move on towards providing a positive example .
In accordance with the methods of new public management and best practice , we should look for ideal situations around the world , which we could adopt for our own use .
We should utilize benchmarking , that is , we should evaluate where the environmental situation can be improved , with what means it can be improved , and we should make the necessary infrastructure available to these organizations .
It is essential that creative forces in the market place should continuously make us aware of where there are weaknesses in the system , and it is our duty to prove that we are looking for the best path .
For this reason we want to raise the funding .
Not 50 % , but 60 % of the costs should be refunded .
We maintain that the whole framework should be better financed , but we also expect from the environmental organizations that they operate according to the democratic principles usual for us in Europe .
We also want correct accounting , that is , we want no funding which is not subject to controls , or which flows into channels where it cannot be scrutinized , and which simply give environmental organizations a bad image .
For this reason we demand that when more than ECU 100 , 000 is spent , we should have at least a qualified book-keeper , a balance sheet and a correct profit and loss account , so that the European taxpayer can see that his money is being used in a lawful and orderly manner .
We must also say quite clearly , and I should like to stress this to the Commission , what we do not want .
We do not want the funds to be spent on general education , on the public in general , or on work that often follows objectives which fail to place environmental issues at the forefront .
We want specifically to illuminate the ecological situation and to achieve improvements there .
Furthermore , we ask that criminal organizations , terrorists , those who attack our system by really criminal means , should receive no European Union money .
That is an absolutely essential principle .
It is intolerable , in the light of our duty towards the people of Europe , for us to be supporting criminals or terrorists .
I should be pleased if we were to gain support for this from all other democratic parties in this Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the aim of the recommendation that is today submitted for second reading is to ensure the legal and financial security of an existing practice which consists of co-financing the activities of certain non-governmental organizations particularly active in environmental protection at a European level , by adopting a four-year Community action programme .
The establishment of a Community action programme for the promotion of NGOs working in environmental protection seems to me , in this context , a useful way of avoiding loss of control over how Community funds destined for environmental protection associations are used .
Mrs Flemming emphasizes the need to monitor and supervise the possibilities for co-financing NGO activities by reinforcing selection and monitoring criteria and by protecting our Parliament 's power to determine the amount of the financial appropriation .
Nevertheless , I would like to add that it seems to me irresponsible to rashly increase the grants accorded to environmental protection NGOs in respect of their information activities , of which the concrete results are difficult to evaluate .
It must not be forgotten , indeed , that protecting our environment also means protecting man and his future .
Antoine de Saint Exupéry considered not that we inherited the earth from our parents , but that we were borrowing it from our children .
Children hold the key to the future .
It is therefore important to protect their environment , be it natural , social , cultural or family .
This is why I would like to see NGOs for the protection of children , who carry out remarkable work on the ground , recognised with the same legitimacy as environmental NGOs by the European institutions and Community support measuring up to what is at stake on a human level in their action .
Organizations fighting child abuse obtained this year , for the first time and , as we know , due to pressure of events , no more than ECU 1.5 million , that is , half of the budget of ECU 3 million allocated for fighting violence against women .
We are still a long way from the amounts granted to environmental NGOs .
It therefore seems to me extremely important for Parliament to act on this issue in the near future and that we continue to fight for a solid legal basis and a multi-annual framework for the protection of the children of Europe .
Mr President , since this is a second reading , I will pay particular attention to the proposed amendments , but before I do so I would like to thank both the rapporteurs for the work that has been done so far .
There are only six amendments in all .
The Group of the Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party is able to support the five amendments from the committee , and I will return to one of them , but we cannot support Amendment No 6 tabled by the rapporteur .
In fact we think that in the general area there are some restrictions which are inappropriate considering that many different countries are going to cooperate and it is undeniable that the conditions are not the same in all countries .
As far as the penalty terms are concerned , I am confident that we can leave that kind of thing to the Commission .
I know nothing about whether money will be distributed to illegal and / or convicted organizations .
I shall concentrate on Amendment No 2 where the Commission has included a contribution to a multinational approach as its final criterion .
It is not that we have problems with the wording as such , but we believe the wording which was arrived at in committee , or at least by part of the committee , is understood more as a guide in the sense that we would very much like to see a concentration on cooperation with the central and eastern European organizations .
The reason we put so much emphasis on this is , of course , because we are confronting the biggest task in Europe , the enlargement to include the central and eastern European countries , and this enlargement will only succeed if all forces concentrate on it .
We believe that the NGOs could make a major contribution to this work .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I do not think there are going to be any problems with this document .
The Commission had already accepted several of the amendments presented at first reading , and this document by Mrs Flemming was approved unanimously by the Committee on the Environment .
Most of the Members of this House who made comments felt that this is a good report , and that perhaps it should stress the question of finance for transborder cooperation and the use of objective criteria in the choice of projects . As Mrs Flemming mentions , it is most important that the projects should involve education , and that environmental education should be included in general education .
It is clear that the people who report attacks on the environment have usually been educated about environmental protection . The commissioner will smile because I nearly always give an example , but only yesterday a pressure group of environmental NGOs was here in Strasbourg .
They are very worried about what is going to happen to Doñana National Park , which is part of mankind 's heritage and a biosphere reserve . We had already raised questions to the Commission about Doñana because a residential development had been approved .
These NGOs are complaining that once one development is allowed , there are another three waiting to surround the park . The nature of the reserve means that it could be endangered .
Before we have a European network of protected zones in the year 2000 , some of these zones will probably have lost their special characteristics and their prospects for the future . That is why it is so important to help the NGOs , because I know from my experience in the Committee on the Environment that they alert us to potential problems .
We cannot cover the whole of Europe , and they are the ones who warn us about what is happening in our continent 's natural spaces . They do not only help European Members of Parliament .
I believe they also help the European Commission in this way .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is a high technocratic awareness of politics in the European Union , and much doubt about the capability of democracy in a complex society . Because of this it is now particularly important to remind ourselves that awareness of the threat , the danger to the environment does not emanate from politics or the established parties , but from the population , from the core of civil society , with its thousands of civic actions and community initiatives .
To this extent we obviously welcome the European Union 's attempt to support non-governmental environmental organizations .
They are to be thanked for the greatest political revolution that has taken place in the last few decades .
For this reason I am even more astounded by an attempt at general discrimination against these groups , which is meeting with extreme outrage throughout Europe . I refer to the amendment attempting to re-introduce a concept long thought to be extinct : a prohibition of finance for environmental groups that have been sentenced by the courts .
The translation confusion reflects the confused , diffuse and emotional way the matter has been presented .
Ladies and gentlemen , without civil disobedience , without the culture of civil disobedience , the environmental protection movement would never have occurred in Europe .
From Wackersdorf to Hainburg ; almost national myths are connected with them , where ordinary people tried to defend themselves against politics and the political establishment .
The environmental groups in Europe are deeply concerned by the attempt generally to condemn them here .
There has not been one single case in the last ten years , and yet - just imagine it , ladies and gentlemen - there is an attempt in this House to pass a resolution restricting cultural subsidies or economic support for something which has never happened !
On behalf of the Greens , I reject this attempt at defamation most emphatically .
Mr President , I had prepared myself in the one minute available to me to speak about the penalty terms which the environmental organizations are so opposed to .
Now Mrs Flemming is saying that it is only a question of sentences of at least three years . But , firstly , who can ensure that all countries interpret it in that way ?
And , secondly , is it at all reasonable to believe that environmental organizations will commit such crimes ?
What they were thinking of must have been , for example , that in 1995 Finnish environmental activists were convicted by a court for an action against a fish farm which had the parasite G. salaris , which kills salmon .
They were convicted even through the action got the Finnish Agriculture Minister to close the fish farm .
This week a date was set for the trial of Bellona employee Alexander Nikitin .
He has now been charged with spying because he wrote a report on radioactive pollution in Murmansk .
This is , of course , the EU , but is it really so hard to imagine that there are also sensitive areas here which environmental organizations must stay away from because they might be brought before the courts and sentenced ?
I think we should vote against Amendment No 6 , and if Parliament does not assume this responsibility , then I hope that the Commission will reject it .
Mr President , my group 's position on budget line B4-306 is a reticent one . This budget finances three activities : awareness raising , grants to non-governmental organizations and publications .
Clearly it relates to campaigning funds .
The way they are planned , the grants to NGOs seem to us questionable .
Firstly , they risk overloading the European budget at a time when it would be more sensible to look for savings rather than extra expenses .
Secondly , it is always risky to entrust public money to private organizations .
Moreover the rapporteur agrees , by proposing a sub-section 3a to ensure financial control of the funded organizations .
Lastly , some associations funded are , in fact , politically active organizations which should survive through money from their members ' subscriptions , not the taxpayers ' money .
This is notably the case with Friends of the Earth , an organization operational in a number of European countries , which received in 1996 , ECU 601 , 668 , or Greenpeace , which devoted itself in France throughout this summer to a veritable campaign of disinformation and panic amongst the population of Nord-Cotentin , where the nuclear reprocessing plant of the Hague is established .
This was a truly scandalous piece of disinformation , of panicspreading , of manipulation of people .
In any case it is clear that such actions must not be funded by public money .
This is the reason why we wish to see the maximum control possible over grants provided to different nongovernmental associations and organizations .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Flemming for her work on this report .
Some of the debate so far has shown , however , that we have quite different views on what an environmental organization actually is .
This action programme to promote non-governmental organizations concerns fundamental questions about society 's participation and influence with regard to EU policy .
Social and political institutions which are shielded from civil society risk losing their legitimacy .
The citizens ' awareness and ability to participate in the debate are fundamental to democracy .
The EU 's legitimacy can never be taken care of through some kind of artificial information campaign aimed at convincing the citizens of decisions which have already been taken .
Instead , as in this action programme , it is support and encouragement for broad co-operation on the European level which is important .
That is why it is interesting to see that in the first reading Parliament gained a hearing for the demand to strengthen the organizations ' independent role in the programme .
The benefit should not lie in using environmental organizations to communicate the EU 's policy , but in taking advantage of the experience and views which the organizations themselves possess .
Since I am convinced that the action programme is important , I concur with Mrs Flemming 's criticism of both the fact that the Council set a reference amount and also the size of this reference amount ; ECU 2.65 million per year is far too small a sum to cope with these tasks .
My principal criticism , however , concerns article 3.2 which indicates the criteria for selecting the activities in question .
To simply indicate some kind of cost-benefit , a lasting multiplier effect at European level , and a contribution to a multinational approach suggests a certain amount of self-interested steering on the part of the Commission .
In particular , the criterion of contributing to a multinational approach should be deleted entirely to avoid the suspicion that we are doing this for our own sake .
On the Committee on Environment we have together formulated a number of additional criteria which strongly emphasize the action programme 's aim of strengthening the influence of citizens through clearer focussing on integration in education .
I think it is strange that these criteria did not gain a hearing at first reading .
However , I sympathise most strongly with the point on cooperation between environmental organizations within the EU and other states , especially the countries which have now applied for membership and which will soon begin negotiations for membership of the EU .
We know that this will be a great challenge both for the Union and for the environmental sector .
Regarding Amendment No 6 from the Group of the European People 's Party , I would like to say that we shall , of course , make demands on the organizations who apply for funding from the EU .
They will have to be able to show that they used previous funding in a proper way . Book-keeping and auditing are two important parts of this .
However , I do not believe in drawing up some kind of morality clause to say that only organizations without convictions will be able to get funding from the EU .
Moreover , I am quite convinced that criminal legislation is not harmonized within the EU .
What is carried out by an organization or perhaps by an individual or by a group of individuals is a difficult and complicated question .
I therefore think that the wording in Amendment No 6 is wholly unnecessary .
Finally , I would again like to stress that our Community actually needs active , critical , independent voluntary organizations .
We need an impetus which gets us going and drives us on .
With that I move to support the work of the Committee on Environment and to reject Amendment No 6 .
Mr President , our group welcomes Mrs Flemming 's report .
The organizations which work in the area of the environment play a decisive role in the development of environmental policy and awareness of environmental problems .
It is therefore quite right to give them a stronger position , which this proposal entails .
We are going to vote for the amendments which have been adopted by the Committee , that is , not to be bound by these very tight financial limits , to be able to give a higher level of cofinancing from the EU 's side and that there should be thorough checks on whether the funds have been used correctly .
We shall , of course , also vote for Amendment No 2 , which clarifies the criteria for the grants .
Just like several others here , I think it is particularly good that we are stressing international cooperation in relation to central and eastern Europe .
However , we are not going to vote for Amendment No 6 from the Group of the European People 's Party .
I shall try to explain this a little further .
We think the limits it creates on how these grants can be used are too restrictive .
The amendment contains several points .
Point a ) is on not giving grants for information aimed at the general public .
We consider this to be a much too restrictive limit to set for this kind of support .
It is in fact a very important part of the role of environmental organizations to influence public opinion .
Point d ) of the same amendment states that an organization which has been convicted by a court shall not be able to receive a grant .
It is obvious that you should not be able to give support to organizations that use violence or which may be regarded as criminal .
However , we all know that many environmental movements use civil disobedience and extra-parliamentary action in various ways .
These are very serious organizations doing extensive environmental work .
I believe it is entirely wrong to automatically exclude all these organizations through such a formulation .
Finally , I would like to say something about the contribution from our French colleague who attacked Greenpeace .
I think that we should also reflect on the history of France and Greenpeace a little further back in time .
It is not very many years since the French security service sank one of Greenpeace 's vessels in a New Zealand harbour .
We can remember that too .
Mr President , I find I can fully support this report .
The report covers the cofinancing of the administrative activities of NGOs operating in the environmental field , and seeks to institutionalize the cooperation planned under the fifth framework programme for environmental research .
In particular , in my opinion , support for NGOs engaged in environmental protection needs to be strengthened .
Amongst other things , we believe it is appropriate to include cross-border projects with the central and eastern European organizations and professional training in the priorities and , above all , to raise the ceiling for European Union financial participation in the projects to 60 % .
None of this corresponds to the Council 's determination to cap the budget for the four-year programme at ECU 10.6 million , a figure we regard as grossly inadequate .
Non-governmental organizations fulfill an important function , particularly in the environmental and social sectors .
Some have become a sort of political conscience - and I am thinking here particularly of Greenpeace or the WWF - and so carry out a public function .
It is thus correct that they be supported by official means .
It is obvious that criminal and terrorist organizations are not deserving of support .
However , in case Mr Rübig is applauding at this point , his attempt to discredit named environmental organizations leaves a very nasty taste in the mouth .
The danger exists - and you may have noticed from which side the applause has just come - and one has to proceed here with particular caution .
For this reason I suggest that the proposer of the amendment , for whom I have high regard , most particularly because of her personal resistance , should perhaps withdraw Amendment No 6 .
Mr President , I would like to begin , as others here have done , by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Flemming , and also the previous rapporteur , Mr Rübig .
A great deal of excellent work has been done .
Most speakers have spoken of the important role of NGOs .
I fully share that view .
They are important for channelling the citizens ' desires and misgivings , and they are also an important source for the Commission 's work .
I also share the view expressed by Mrs Dybkjær and many other speakers that the importance of the NGOs is very great in connection with the development of the new democracies in central and eastern Europe , and I shall come back to that in connection with the amendments .
As you know , the aim of this proposal is to bring about a specific legal basis for a practice which has already worked satisfactorily for a number of years .
Therefore the proposal is also a concrete expression of the Commission 's appreciation of the contribution of these NGOs to the improvement of the environment .
So the text should , of course , be as clear as possible , and it is also in that spirit that we have examined the proposed amendments .
We can accept wholly , partly or in principle , five of the six amendments .
Amendments Nos 1 and 3 are acceptable in full .
They are in accordance with the Commission 's rejection of the Council 's desire to introduce a financial reference base into the text .
Amendment No 4 , whereby the Commission can finance up to 60 % of an NGO 's budget , is acceptable in full .
Part of Amendment No 2 concerning the criteria for grants is acceptable in principle , and , in any case , this is really about what Mrs Dybkjær touched on , that is , a change in the wording so that we talk about cross-border cooperation instead .
Amendment No 5 concerning financial controls is acceptable in principle , but here too it will be necessary to achieve the greatest possible clarity .
Like several other speakers here today , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 6 because it would be inappropriate to introduce such exclusion criteria into the draft decision .
I would like to thank Parliament once again for the thorough debate and also for the interest it has thereby shown in the active participation of NGOs in the political work .
Thank you , Mrs Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
CO2 and other greenhouse gas emissions
The next item is report ( A4-0253 / 97 ) by Mr Fitzsimons , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Decision amending Decision 93 / 389 / EEC for a monitoring mechanism of Community CO2 and other Greenhouse gas emissions ( COM ( 96 ) 0369 - C4-0540 / 96-96 / 0192 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Mr Fitzsimons is ill .
The poor man has pneumonia .
He has asked me to step in at the last minute to replace him and , of course , to present his apologies .
I will therefore try to present his report to you .
I know it is a document which is close to his heart .
We know that our colleagues in the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection are well aware of the problems of climate change and the increase in the greenhouse effect .
This is why I am happy to repeat that there is a wide consensus on the need to inform public opinion , which is greatly concerned about the effects of global warming and the concentration and accumulation of gases which increase the greenhouse effect .
It is even clearer that human activity contributes to this phenomenon .
In December 1995 , the intergovernmental group on climate change , a panel composed of over 2 , 000 eminent scientists , noted its concern regarding greenhouse gas emissions .
According to these scientists , if the current level of emission is maintained , this could raise the temperature of the earth 's surface in the year 2000 by two degrees in relation to 1990 .
The subsequent consequences , as you might expect , could be tragic : a rise in sea levels , desertification and so on .
According to the United Nations group in charge of studying the consequences of greenhouse gas emissions , an increase in temperature of more than a one degree Celsius could create irreversible damage to our eco-system , without considering the immediate consequences on the economy and the social consequences that it could have on individuals .
The European Parliament has always been very active in this area , providing endless reports and resolutions , forcing the individual states to take restrictive measures and to adopt a clear agenda .
The Rio Summit in 1992 , made this goodwill concrete .
More than 150 countries signed the framework convention of the United Nations on climate change through which a consensus has been set in motion , the objective of which is to stabilize CO2 emissions so that they are the same in the year 2000 as they were in 1990 .
The discussions and meetings that followed should be concluded at the Kyoto Summit in December 1997 if , as we hope , an agreement can be reached with the aim of strengthening the convention on climate change and taking more restrictive measures to enable a clear reduction in all greenhouse gases .
In March 1997 , despite different approaches by certain Member States , the Environment Council , under the Dutch presidency , was able to agree on a European Union proposal for the Kyoto Summit .
Its objective is the reduction by 15 % , as compared to 1990 , of greenhouse gases from now until the year 2000 .
Furthermore , a ' basket ' of gases should be considered and monitored with regard to the risk they could represent in terms of global warming .
The Commission 's proposal under examination aims to amend the Council 's decision of 1993 regarding the monitoring mechanism for anthropogenic emissions , that is , those caused by human activity including CO2 emissions and other greenhouse gases .
The new proposal aims at updating the following decisions : extending the monitoring past the year 2000 to take into account community emissions , limitations and reductions after the year 2000 , extending monitoring to a greater number of greenhouse gases , CO2 not being the only gas concerned .
The proposal will thus cover methane , carbon monoxide , the nitrogenous oxides and volatile organic compounds , as well as emissions of other greenhouse gases such as the chlorofluorocarbons which are found in aerosols , fridges , etcetera and others which are already banned by the Montreal protocol .
Our rapporteur , Mr Fitzsimons , is drawing up several requests .
He hopes that the dates of 2005 and 2010 for a 15 % reduction , as proposed by the Council , will be taken up by the Commission .
He is very much in favour of monitoring greenhouse gases other than CO2 .
Thus for some , such as methane , used notably in agriculture , and nitrous oxide , which is produced by industry , the margins of error are very important and a great deal of research is still necessary .
Monitoring gas by gas , rather than a global ' basket ' therefore seems more sound and reliable .
He equally considers that the monitoring of carbon sinks , that is , the role the forest plays , is not justified .
This type of monitoring is not reliable .
I am nearly finished , Mr President .
Information-sharing is another problem .
Some Member States still do not have official objectives , others are incapable of providing basic data .
This is why the rapporteur has submitted an amendment requesting the Commission to guarantee the accuracy of data .
Finally , we are perfectly happy to accept Mrs Schleicher 's amendment which requests that the methods of the intergovernmental group on climate change be taken up by individual Member States .
I will however ask Mrs Schleicher if she will accept an oral addition clarifying that the methods must conform to the norms most recently adopted in the framework of the United Nations convention .
Mr President , at the end of the summer and with a lovely sunny day outside , a lot of people probably think that global warming is really quite a pleasant thing .
But we know in reality that it leads to a great deal of unstable and dangerous weather conditions and is going to have some very serious effects across the world .
I do not intend to give a lecture here today about climate change because we have rehearsed this issue many , many times in Parliament .
We know that the main purpose of this legislation on the monitoring of greenhouse gases is twofold .
First , it aims to build a framework in which we can measure these emissions against the reduction targets to which we committed ourselves at Rio .
Secondly , they are designed at a more local level to assist in alerting people to occasions and the locations when air pollution is putting health at risk .
In 1993 what was put in place as the original monitoring device was , frankly , little better than an acknowledgement and agreement at the European level of existing practice in the Member States .
Despite calls by Parliament for harmonization of national measurement and inventory compilation and for more transparency at that time , this was a little too much for the Council of Ministers to agree on .
Certainly stabilization of emissions has not taken place .
I expect that we are going to find that some fairly shocking emission levels will be found when the environment agency brings out its next Dobris report shortly .
We have just learned , for instance , that in London , the European Union guidelines for NOx have been breached right across that city for pretty well the whole of last year .
The Commission 's attempt to revise and improve on the 1983 decision is therefore very welcome .
Not only do we need a better and more comprehensive monitoring mechanism for greenhouse gas emissions now , but it is essential to put in place a mechanism to cover monitoring post-2000 .
It is particularly important to take greater account of the greenhouse gases other than CO2 , such as methane and nitrogen oxide .
In December we are going to Kyoto to try and persuade the world to agree to a 15 % reduction in emissions of a " basket ' of greenhouse gases between 1990 and 2010 .
It would be helpful to think that we were making some useful progress ourselves .
Evidence sadly shows that we may not reach our own targets .
The Commission , in the cautious mode it adopts these days , was very vague about its timetable .
Therefore my group supports the amendments for a report each year on cumulative emissions of greenhouse gases and projected cumulative emissions up to 2005 , 2010 and 2020 .
We believe that this cumulative monitoring is essential to prevent countries from allowing excessive emissions throughout a time scale , and only lowering them right at the end to meet a target .
This would not be a great help in the global warming stakes .
Furthermore we believe it is better to determine whether targets are being achieved using a gas-by-gas approach rather than the all-in basket approach .
On the substance of the amendments , we support all those from the committee but we are not in favour of Mrs Schleicher 's Amendment No 13 , which appears to be unnecessarily restrictive .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the current great horror scenario is global warming , that is , the warming greenhouse effect harmful to the environment , an increase in ocean levels , or growth of deserts .
It also means the opposite : destruction of the ozone layer , which would have the result of making all life on Earth impossible . The theories are based on model experiments which appear to provide incontrovertible evidence that these environmental effects are caused by emissions resulting from human activity .
Model calculations are only as good , however , as the assumptions on which they are based .
This is the Achilles heel of the matter , in my view .
We humans simply know too little .
Why , for example , did Ice Ages arise thousands of years ago , and disappear again ?
Why does El Niño occur in a particular cycle off the South American west coast and influence the weather ?
What influence have ocean currents and seas in any case ?
What is the influence of cloud formation ?
Is it coincidental that at the moment doubts are increasing again about the effectiveness of current climate models , which are being created at enormous cost throughout the World ?
As many serious scientists complain , the major problem lies in the fact that no , or too few , data are available from many parts of the world , often because the poor state of the detection stations makes the data unusable , or incapable of comparison .
This scenario illuminates the importance of today 's report on the proposed European Union systems for observing and recording CO2 and other greenhouse gases .
The European Union has been making efforts to improve the area coverage of detection stations in every country of the Union even since the 1980s .
It is important not only to reduce CFCs and stop their use , but that gradually all other poisonous materials with similar effects are detected .
This proposal by the Commission is a further step in this direction , which our group supports without reservation .
We do have , however , like the rapporteur , a few improvements to make .
Firstly , the estimated values must in future , if we require them , be produced from unified criteria . Yet these are not obtainable .
I have , though , serious doubts about the value of such estimated values a long time in advance , over and above that they give rise to considerable bureaucratic effort .
Secondly , as a result of the Rio Agreement all relevant measures of the European Union and member states are included into the international work of UNEP , OECD and IPCC , the multilateral groups for climate changes .
For this amendment to be put into operation at all , Member States must test for emissions according to a unified procedure to be laid down in this directive .
This procedure should be that currently being developed by the IPCC .
This is the reason for my amendment motion .
To learn more we must measure more . But that costs money .
We have a responsibility to future generations , however , not only to deal carefully with non-renewable natural resources , but also with that rare commodity , money .
It seems to me to be more responsible to invest money worldwide in detection stations , than to put it into estimated figures which are partially politically inspired .
I regret that my colleague , Mr Fitzsimons , cannot be here , as he was responsible for the other two reports and made important contributions to improvements which can we fully support , all except for one : Amendment No 5 .
I should like to propose , however , that an addition be made to my amendment , because that idea came from him .
If I could learn from the Commission how the proposal is looking , it might be improved by an addition .
I should have no objection to that .
I would be very interested to learn , therefore , how the Commission views the matter .
Mr President , in the Netherlands , the month of August was the hottest month since temperature measurements began in the 18th Century .
We have been able to establish that since the 18th century the seven hottest years have occurred since 1980 , that is to say , in the last 17 years .
The figures from the IPCC again showed us last year that there is quite definitely a greenhouse effect .
Despite this , the emissions of carbon dioxide continue to increase .
In the Netherlands , the emissions from 1990 until this year have increased by 8 % , while they should decrease by 10 % by the year 2010 .
How difficult it will be to change this situation !
As our colleague , Mr Fitzsimons , who unfortunately cannot be here today , so rightly said in his report , a very good monitoring system and reporting system for the emission of greenhouse gases is really necessary , because with it we shall be able to assess the results of the policy meaningfully .
My group also considers it to be right that in its proposal the Commission goes further than the year 2000 because in the Environment Council agreements were made for the key year 2010 .
Therefore the European Union 's legislation must be adapted .
A reduction in the emissions of greenhouse gases demands drastic measures that will have very great consequences for the economy .
Such difficult political decisions must be able to be monitored properly .
The discussion often revolves around a few percentage points .
If there is no adequate measuring system , the debate will be very easy to manipulate .
We are speaking today about the monitoring systems and we are doing so at a time when Europe is prospering economically , but economic growth unfortunately means an increase in the emissions of greenhouse gases .
Let us be sensible and use the economic recovery to pay more attention to this environmental pollution .
Mr President , the decision that we are discussing here is none other than a means to an end and that end is the pushing back of the greenhouse effect .
My group finds it alarming that recently throughout the world so little priority has been given to this objective .
It is a fact that the European union plays an exemplary role in the run up to Kyoto .
Not only in drawing up ambitious objectives , but also with regard to their implementation .
Therefore I feel it is a good thing that the Commission has made this proposal to amend the decision .
Monitoring is extremely important in order to check the emission of greenhouse gases .
The data must be reliable and comparable , otherwise monitoring is impossible .
Also , the fact that it is no longer only carbon dioxide but all greenhouse gases that must be measured , is quite right , especially because the other gases cause a considerable part of the greenhouse effect .
Recently a small movement has emerged in the scientific world that is trying to undermine the conclusions of the IPCC , by pointing to other causes of the increase in temperature .
The changes in the intensity of solar radiation are apparently mainly responsible for the temperature fluctuations on earth .
I think that is a dangerous development .
First of all , because you then ignore the precautionary principle and secondly because the existing theory does demonstrate convincingly that the greenhouse effect is manmade .
Already the EU objective is in danger of being exceeded by 5 % before the year 2000 .
So doubt about the influence of greenhouse gases is particularly worrying .
I therefore wholeheartedly support the Commission 's proposal and the amendments by the Environment Committee .
Mr President , everything in nature is closely linked : we all play a part in environmental equilibrium and in turn it affects our well-being .
Today the consumption-at-all-costs society is taking a toll on that well-being through unfettered progress which is taking place at the price of increasingly intolerable environmental disequilibrium .
This is true of emissions of greenhouse gases , responsible amongst other things for global warming , a highly dangerous phenomenon for the planet 's eco-system .
The Fitzsimons report underlines the importance of monitoring these emissions in order to assess the progress achieved on European standards .
We are in agreement with the rapporteur when he proposes the strengthening of the Community control mechanism beyond 2000 , also taking account of other greenhouse gas emissions deriving from industrial activities .
Finally , we trust the traditional control methods will combine transparency with interchangeability .
Mr President , I believe the Commission 's text is extremely important , and its message should be conveyed to everybody - not just to Governments , but to all operators and to all of us , because we share the responsibility for this phenomenon .
The Commission says that there is uncertainty about the chances of reaching agreement about this reduction in the year 2000 , and that coherent overall strategies must be put into operation immediately .
I think that this is the political message , and that is where this Parliament will support the Commission in this case .
We have now heard most of the representatives of the political groups , and I think we are unanimous here .
We have to demand that governments really do keep the international agreements .
I was a representative of this Parliament at the Rio Conference , where all the Heads of State and of Government promised to take respectful and responsible measures .
Nevertheless , these precautionary measures are not being adhered to . This call for responsibility is the most important part of the Commission 's communication , followed of course by the implementation of the measures and national plans .
I think the message has not sunk in , and many governments have not faced up to the reality . Even the " polluter pays ' principle is not being applied in the way it should be .
It has been interpreted as meaning that he who pays has the right to pollute .
This was not the original sense of the principle ; rather , that the producer and the consumer of a product should pay all of its costs . The whole of society needs to be told that , in the case we are considering , it costs money to breathe - and so it should .
Manufacturers must take all the necessary measures to prevent pollution as much as possible . This is the reason for continuing to demand that they use the best available technology , although this is not the time to talk about that .
I think the amendments which have been presented are good and can be implemented . I believe we have enough scientific justification and social concern to demand that governments comply with them .
I believe this is the essential principle . We cannot support any economic policy which uses short term economic interests to justify endangering people 's health and well-being , and the natural world as a whole .
This communication , I repeat , has our total support , as we have just seen .
Mr President , I would like to make a few remarks on the subject of the greenhouse effect .
It is true that we are observing a global warming , but as Mrs Schleicher has suggested in her speech , there is nothing to prove that this warming comes from the emission of greenhouse gases produced by human activity .
I would simply like to make a few sensible remarks .
We note that in the Alps , the glaciers have been melting since 1820 .
At that time , the Industrial Revolution could not have yet been having any significant effect .
Similarly there are today glaciers re-covering the tips of the Alps which were free of ice and where troops passed in the 12th or 13th century .
And as we know very well , Erik the Red , after crossing the Atlantic , found a land which he called Greenland simply because it was warm and green .
However , I do not think that their boats produced greenhouse gases .
There is thus undoubtedly a great deal of exaggeration in this field when human activity is accused of global warming .
Having said that , it is also true that you cannot be too careful and that it is certainly necessary to try to limit the production of greenhouse gases .
Carbon dioxide , CO2 , is responsible for 65 % of greenhouse gases and it is interesting to see how many tonnes of carbon dioxide per inhabitant were emitted into the atmosphere in 1995 , country by country in Europe : Germany , 2.9 tonnes ; Austria , 1.9 tonnes ; Belgium , 3.2 tonnes ; Denmark , 3.2 tonnes ; Spain , 1.8 tonnes ; Finland , 3.6 tonnes ; Ireland , 2.7 tonnes ; Italy , 2 tonnes ; Greece , 2 tonnes ; Luxembourg , 6 tonnes ; Great Britain , 2.5 tonnes ; France , 1.7 tonnes .
Why does France discharge less carbon dioxide than other countries ?
Is it because there are less towns in France ?
No .
Is it because there are less cars in France ?
No .
Do we use less heating ?
No .
Do we use less light ?
No .
The truth is , if there are less greenhouse gases produced in France than elsewhere , it is for a very simple reason , that in France there are more nuclear power stations than elsewhere .
Ecologists have long had a slogan , ' Nuclear power , no thank you ' translated into the different languages of the Community .
But when you look at the results on the level of greenhouse gases , you should rather want to say , ' nuclear power , yes please ! ' .
Mr President , I will try to concentrate on the amendments which have been proposed , but I would first like to thank the Committee on the Environment and the rapporteur , Mr Fitzsimons , although he is unable to be present today .
I would then like to ask Mr d 'Aboville to convey my best wishes for his health , and I would like to thank Mr d 'Aboville for having deputized for him here today .
Almost all the proposed amendments are an improvement on the quality and clarity of the proposal .
As you know , the aim of the proposal is to amend the Council 's Decision of 1993 which introduced the supervision mechanism referred to .
It will generally bring the mechanism up to date by continuing it after the year 2000 and by extending it to cover all the greenhouse gases not covered by the Montreal protocol .
There were some individual questions about that from some of the speakers .
The Commission is able to accept all the amendments with the exception of Amendment No 5 .
Amendments Nos 7 and 13 are acceptable in principal , but they require some changes .
The accepted amendments are , as I have already said , welcome , either because they clarify the regulations or because of the idea behind them .
The Commission does not accept amendment 5 because it places additional burdens on the Member States without giving clear benefits .
Amendment No 7 is acceptable in principle , because the Member States are required to submit national programmes no later than three months after the Council 's adoption of the Commission 's proposal , and because the Commission will carry out a follow-up assessment no more than six months after that , and so we are sure that we can find a sensible solution for those Member States who drew up plans a short while ago .
As I said , Amendment No 13 on the compilation and reporting of data is acceptable in principle .
We are not happy with the present wording .
It is possible that , within the comments which came from Mr d 'Aboville , there are opportunities to arrive at an improved text in the area concerned .
In conclusion , I believe that we can look forward to this proposal helping to ensure that the Community and the Member States fulfil their current and future obligations in accordance with the UN 's Framework Convention on Climate Change and the goals we hope to see in the Kyoto Protocol .
And finally , I would like to thank you for the debate here today .
Thank you , Mrs Bjerregaard .
I would like to join you in sending my best wishes to Mr Fitzsimons .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Europe and Japan : the next steps
The next item is the report ( A4-0259 / 97 ) by Mr Moorhouse , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament ' Europe and Japan : the next steps ' ( COM ( 95 ) 0073 - C4-0147 / 95 ) .
Mr President , this is the third time that , as rapporteur , I have had the honour of presenting a report from the Committee on External Economic Relations on relations between the EU and Japan .
As a former chairman of our delegation to Japan , Mr President , you are well aware of that .
This particular report is wider in scope , dealing not only with trade and economic relations but also with increasingly vital political aspects , which I rather feel we have tended to neglect as the European Union .
Some ten years ago when I presented a draft motion for a resolution in the Committee on External Economic Relations , political groups were very much at odds on what our approach to Japan should be .
That report , indeed , was adopted by a relatively narrow majority .
Happily , however , we are now much more at one , which no doubt says something about changing attitudes but equally may have to do with the changing nature of Japan-EU relations .
As far as political aspects are concerned , we owe a great deal to the 1991 Japanese Government which , together with the Council of Ministers , agreed on a joint declaration which inter alia highlighted political and security issues , bringing a much better balance to the relationship .
We believe Japan should be encouraged to be more involved in international affairs .
In this connection , I refer the House to paragraph 4 of the resolution in which we advocate a restructuring of the United Nations system , and in particular the Security Council , which has clear implications .
However , inevitably a report of this nature is rapidly overtaken by events .
I refer , for instance , to the EU-Japan trade surplus , which had halved between 1992 and 1996 to just ECU 17bn - a big figure , of course , but it had halved .
Alas , from the European point of view , it is now growing again as domestic consumption in Japan has fallen and exports remain the only buoyant part of its economy .
Perhaps the Commissioner will want to comment on future prospects .
Much of the report deals with the perennial chestnuts of market access and foreign direct investment .
The former is hardly new territory but some degree of progress can , nonetheless , be discerned , however slow that may be .
What is of great concern is the inadequate progress over the last ten years on EU direct investment in Japan and the liberalization of the market in services - maybe with some qualification .
We welcome the recent Commission announcement that a study is to be carried out to investigate the obstacles to investment .
I would not wish to second-guess the study , but the Commission has lots of experience in dealing with the Japanese .
Could the Commissioner not tell us what his own concerns are and what he intends to do about them ?
To what extent can we improve the situation bilaterally ?
Or do we have to wait for the painfully slow process of extracting concessions within the WTO context ?
That brings me to Euro-Japanese relations within the WTO .
I think we can readily agree that we wish to cooperate closely with Japan , and paragraphs 20 , 22 and 23 of the resolution deal with this very subject .
However , does the Commissioner share the view that this cooperation could be jeopardized , say by the SinoJapanese negotiations on tariffs and on quotas , which may have the effect of undermining EU-Japanese attempts to reach agreements within the WTO ?
I put the question .
In conclusion , the preparations for the Kyoto Conference in December demonstrate for all to see how important the deepening political and diplomatic triangular relationship between the EU , the USA and Japan is for the exercise of global leadership in international fora .
I look forward to hearing what the Commissioner has to say to reassure us that stale , old trade squabbles will not be allowed to sour the political and diplomatic atmosphere between the world 's three great trading powers as a result of Japan 's domestic economic difficulties .
One last word : there is so much else one could say and time does not allow me to do so , but let me congratulate the Commission on the ongoing executive training programme for young European executives going to Japan - some 600 or so .
This certainly deserves every support , and we in the Committee on External Economic Relations will give it that support .
Thank you very much Mr Moorhouse .
You are quite right that I am listening to this debate with particular interest .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Commissioner , for several decades , and especially since the last world war , European interests in Asia , and especially Japan , have been in decline , while United States interests have grown , taking their place .
As the great victors of the war in the Pacific , the United States has been able to impose its rules on the foreign policy of this zone and increase its economic interests throughout Asia , with particular incidence on Japan .
However , in the last few years , political and economic relations between the European Union and Japan have seen a moderate development .
The meetings of the European institutions with their Japanese counterparts and the normal bilateral contacts between the Member States and Japan have contributed to this development .
In continuing and deepening this policy , the Commission published a document on the next steps in relations between Europe and Japan .
The Commission 's proposal to strengthen these relations deserves our full support , both for the reciprocal advantages and mutual interests , and for the external relations equilibrium of Japan , which finds in the European Union a credible partner on the international scene .
We think there are advantages for the European Union in active - and I do mean active - and concerted support , with Japan , for the policy of world peace and security , as well as the continued development of a multilateral and open economic policy .
It is in the European Union 's interests for Japan to be a factor for political stability in its region and in the world , to support the multilateral free trade system , to encourage democracy and greater respect for human rights in Asia .
We believe four things are needed to achieve this : one , the European Union should support Japan 's aspirations to play a major political role on the world scene , notably in the restructuring of the United Nations , which is currently under discussion .
Two , Japan should give more support to European Union policies in Asia .
Three , political dialogue with Japan should include human rights issues , especially in other Asian states .
Four , there should be greater participation by Japan in international peace missions .
To conclude , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would say that developed political relations between the European Union and Japan is a crucial factor for better equilibrium in foreign policy on the world scene .
And I want to refer very particularly to the existing disequilibrium , in the zone which includes Japan , between the foreign policy of the European Union and the foreign policy of the United States .
For these reasons , we support Mr Moorhouse 's enlightened report and the Commission 's communication , and we intend our support to be active - and for that purpose we are at the disposal of the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur for the clarifications he has provided regarding the deepening of collaboration between the European Union and Japan , and to congratulate Sir Leon Brittan , the Commissioner , as well as the Commission , for the pragmatic approach of the Commission 's text .
Within the framework of globalization of markets and commerce , as within that of political dialogue , relations between the European Union and Japan will from now on play a vital role within the World Trade Organization , both in the framework of annual summits and ministerial meetings , and in interparliamentary dialogue within the delegation on relations with Japan , which I have the honour of chairing .
You will know , Mr President , as former chairman of this delegation , that the strengthening of political , economic and industrial links has become essential with the third millennium in sight .
On a political level , within the framework of the new partnership between Europe and Asia , Japan can indeed play a preponderant role .
It seems to me that our historic and cultural links even accord us a pivotal role , all the more so , given that , since the fall of the Berlin wall , the sociological similarities between the European Union and Japan are more and more striking : ageing of the population , strengthening of administrative authorities , threats to employment and , nevertheless , positioning on the international market .
Whilst working for the achievement of common objectives aimed at preserving stability in Asia , Japan is becoming a preferred contact for Europe in terms of relations with Asiatic countries .
On an economic level , the situation is on balance positive .
Indeed , during the last few years , the surplus on the balance of payments on current account in relation to the world economy has shown a significant fall .
Therefore the imbalance that exists between European Union investments in Japan and Japanese investments in Europe should rapidly even out .
The negotiation of a compromise regarding the conclusion of a multi-lateral agreement on investment would give further guarantees to foreign investors who are looking to establish themselves on the Japanese market .
In this context , the programme of deregulation , commenced by Japan in March 1995 , represents a starting point in terms of a global agreement that could also include the details of a mutual recognition of products .
Finally , I can only rejoice in the fact that scientific and technical cooperation between the European Union and Japan is progressing steadily .
Glyn Ford mentioned it earlier - he is moreover the author of a report on this subject - as the meeting of high level scientific experts which will take place in two weeks time in Tokyo shows - and I am pleased to be personally participating in this - with eminent members of the international scientific community .
It is in this particular context that I am in favour of the amendments submitted , aimed at reinforcing scientific and technological co-operation between Japan and the European Union .
The European Union is thus establishing the details of a dialogue which will serve the mutual and reciprocal interests of both Japan and the Union , with a view to preparing the next stages of our political and economic relations .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to compliment Mr Moorhouse on behalf of the Group of the Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party on his excellent report .
Mr President , the uneven balance of trade between Europe and Japan has greatly concerned the Parliament for many years .
My group welcomes the recent drop in the trade surplus , but nevertheless feels that too little progress is being made in the liberalization of the Japanese market .
Particularly in the field of the removal of administrative barriers and the mutual recognition of certificates and tests , there is still a long way to go .
It is these very barriers that mean high costs for the individual entrepreneur and reduce his competitiveness .
The Japanese market is not sufficiently accessible and the recent flight of capital from Japan is possibly a consequence of this .
The number of scientific and technological cooperation projects between the European Union and Japan is fairly small .
In view of the fact that Japan is the country with the highest research and development expenditure in the world , expressed as a percentage of the gross national product , it is regrettable that there is little cooperation in this area .
In a global economy with increasing competition , it is no longer sufficient only to cooperate with European partners on R & D. International cooperation with countries outside the Union must be given greater priority in the fifth framework programme for research and technology policy .
This must of course occur on the basis of reciprocity .
The Union should make an effort at all levels to involve Japan in our Community life , both political and economic .
My Group will wholeheartedly support this .
Mr , President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is a very good idea for the Commission to think about how the dialogue and cooperation between the European Union and Japan should be conducted in future .
After all , these are two of the most economically powerful units in the world , if one looks at this trio illustration .
At any rate , and this is a negative record , the most environmental sins are produced in these two blocs together !
The greatest power is concentrated in these two blocs to make them precursors for the production of another form of economy , an economy that no longer continues to carry out irresponsible economic plunder of the world 's resources .
There is little point in the Japanese protecting their forests in Japan , whilst in Asia or Latin America they relentlessly clear the land of trees to make disposable chopsticks !
That may very well be a cultural viewpoint , but it is not enough for me .
Yet there was not a word on it in the original wording of the resolution to the Commission awaiting our votes today .
We actually had to include in the text such obvious ideas , as that there was a common interest in global environmental stability .
Instead of an agreement on a common procedure for the path towards a stable future , I find in the text the suggestion that Japan and the EU should give each other mutual support , in order to secure each other 's global economic spheres of influence .
To return to the point about the environment : there still rings in our ears Japan 's vehement rejection at the Kyoto World Climate Conference of any binding declaration on a reduction of emissions .
As though nothing had occurred , our declaration now says that we should each act together on the environment within the WTO .
We know quite well what is possible on the environment within the WTO .
The Singapore Conference showed that perfectly clearly .
I have a high regard for Mr Moorhouse as an excellent rapporteur and I can substantiate much of what is in his report .
I think it is very important at this point that the EU and Japan should together consider as a single de facto power base in this trio how a social , ecological and cooperative economy , with cooperative world trade , could be made possible .
For it is of no use to us - neither Japan nor ourselves - if one day we are first and Japan third , because someone will have to pay for this deficit .
Our concern is to bring in all countries , so that we can escape from these deficitary , ecologically and socially damaging conditions .
I feel it is most important to plan the future exchange of culture and points of view on this , and not to consider how best to deregulate the most . Each country should decide for itself , how it should like to construct its economy .
One thing I can say : many deregulating procedures in this world have had just the opposite effect .
The rich can afford them and the poor can neither visit a hospital nor make a telephone call ; nor in any other way participate in the good things of this Earth .
Madam President , I would similarly like to congratulate Mr Moorhouse for his report , and make a few comments .
The reduction over the last few years of the commercial deficit between the European Union and Japan , often presented as a victory , is in fact no more than a mirage due to currency fluctuations .
Indeed , the strengthening of the yen in relation to the dollar has strongly handicapped Japanese exports and has led to massive relocations of entire sections of Japanese industry .
This is the reality !
At the moment , now that the yen is falling , we are noting a considerable increase in Japanese exports to the European Union .
The mirage has thus gone but the obstacles remain .
Of course , with the exception of certain products such as copper , footwear and some agricultural products , the Japanese customs duties are no longer restricting access to the market .
On the other hand , the non-acceptance , by Japan , of international norms and procedures with regard to testing and approval poses a serious problem for our trade with this country .
On this crucial question , the Japanese authorities should tolerate from Europe what they tolerate from the United States .
The Union should clearly reject any difference in treatment .
We are today requesting that the Japanese authorities guarantee free trade within the country , without having to go through such monopolistic groups as the ' keretsu ' .
If a real effort is not made in this area we will be forced to reconsider the complete opening of our borders to Japanese cars in 1999 .
As for direct investment , the figures are even more overwhelming .
Indeed , according to Eurostat , the Union has reduced its investments in Japan on average by ECU 300 million per year between 1992 and 1995 .
Consequently , the imbalance of trade with this country will continue to grow over the coming years if nothing is done .
However , positive points do exist in the area of science and technology , telecommunications , financial services and transport , where advanced cooperation has been established between the Union and Japan .
The Commission must today , therefore , make a precise evaluation of relations between the Union and Japan , taking into account all aspects including the monetary and provide a forecast on the subject to Parliament .
Clear and precise measures must be proposed so that European products free themselves from the ' keretsu ' and so that the Japanese authorities are convinced of the procedures for testing and international agreement .
Madam President , bilateral negotiations continue and will continue long after playing their role on an international business level .
Yesterday 's debate on bananas demonstrated to what extent the WTO was not sufficiently independent to deal with some matters of crucial importance for the European Union .
Let us not get caught up in multilateral negotiations which often really benefit no-one but the American multinationals and let us develop a true dialogue with Japan , including on the subjects of human rights and the death penalty , which still exists in their country .
It is in this way that a true community foreign policy will be born .
Madam President , we have noted in this report devoted to the future of economic relations between Europe and Japan certain useful assessments and recommendations , but also some important gaps .
The report correctly highlights the need for the Commission to be more attentive to the effects of bilateralism with regard to Japan , which is assiduously practiced by the United States , who are becoming , in addition , the eulogists of multilateralism , in order to avoid possible discrimination of our service and manufacturing industries in the Japanese market in relation to their American equivalents .
This is clearly the case in essential sectors such as semi-conductors , mobile phones , and automobile parts .
If the Commission really wants to defend the interests of European business - and this is what its role should be - it should follow the recommendations of Mr Moorhouse who correctly recommends a much more aggressive policy if we want to avoid the vice being tightened around our companies ' necks by , on the one hand , criticism of the Europe from the WTO because of American complaints and on the other hand , the American-Japanese sectoral agreements negotiated without taking any account of our interests .
But should this report not have considered , as a priority , a certain number of sectors strategic for Europe , in particular the car industry ?
I noted no analysis on the effect of the steps , inspired by American protectionist measures , which the Commission has taken in terms of import quotas for Japanese vehicles , and I noted no recommendation for the future .
Do the numbers fixed and the timetable accepted effectively protect the interests of our manufacturers and the numerous SMEs that depend on them ?
What will be the consequences of the ending of quotas and what compensation will be requested ?
In the same fashion , nothing is said of the way Japan clings to protecting her agricultural and livestock resources : agricultural products , processed agricultural products , fish produce .
How can it be that this net exporter of goods , services and investments can manage to protect its achievements in the area of production and agricultural prices , thus escaping the alignment of its agriculture with world prices and maintaining the uniqueness of Japanese agriculture ?
Can Japan develop an agricultural model suited to its needs whilst we are unable to develop one suited to ours ?
In this respect , will Japan be a model to follow ?
Mr President , I would have liked to see , in an otherwise relevant report on many points , some substantial development of these important questions .
Madam President , the clear message from the Moorhouse report , as many speakers have stressed , is that in the last ten years there have been significant developments in relations between the European Union and Japan .
We are now engaged in many more areas than 10 or 50 years ago .
At the same time I think it is clear that there is still a certain distance in cultural and political terms between Europe and Japan .
Although the United States , Japan and Europe are often described as the three sides of the triangle , very clearly , in Japanese terms , relations between Europe and Japan are of what they would call a ' younger brother ' nature compared to those between Europe and the United States and the United States and Japan .
There are certainly no grounds for complacency .
We cannot take it for granted that relations between Japan and Europe will develop as closely as those between Europe and the United States or between the United States and Japan .
On top of that , we are forging ever closer relations with other parts of Asia .
Relations with China are ' young ' in the same way as the overall security relationship which Japan has with the United States .
For that country , we remain the fundamental anchor . That element is very often overlooked in Europe .
We are appealing for exactly the same kind of treatment .
The question I would like to put to Sir Leon is whether the time has not come to look for a broader , more strategic objective in our relationship .
It is strange that of all the countries in the world , the European Union has no bilateral agreements with either the United States or Japan .
We have had an agreement with China since 1984 and this is certainly going to develop .
In the case of the United States , our links are of a quite different nature .
The question therefore is whether it would be wise to work toward a strategic framework agreement , enveloping the various links which we have in the scientific , economic , political , cultural and environmental fields as a way of saying that this is the development which gives us a strategic link to the future .
Madam President , the report by Mr Moorhouse , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , has been carefully prepared .
I was not able to participate in it myself , but I greatly appreciate it .
In its communication to the Council , the European Commission places the emphasis on intensifying political relations with Japan .
The rapporteur rightly corrects this approach .
The policy of the European Union must above all be geared to the improvement of trading relations with Japan .
European companies still experience problems in accessing the Japanese market .
Japan 's continuing high trade surplus vis-à-vis the European Union is an indication of this .
Direct investments also are still a long way from being in balance .
In the communication and the report the various trade barriers are described .
We may request that Japan make clear promises about the lifting of these barriers .
The intentions expressed by Japan at the summit in the Hague on 25 June give some hope of this .
The World Trade Organization is , in my view , the appropriate forum in which to raise trading relations with Japan .
The United States have chosen an aggressive unilateral approach to Japan ; that is not appropriate for the European Union .
Not only is the position of the European Union different , but the American approach has only achieved limited results .
The strategy of the Commission and the rapporteur , of constant , broad insistence on change , is what I consider to be the correct path .
Here , it is important that multilateral agreements on direct investments and financial services come about quickly .
The Commission makes the strange proposal of supporting Japan in its demand to obtain a permanent seat on the Security Council .
This seems to me to be premature and , moreover , the question arises of whether such a political stand in fact falls within the powers of the Commission .
So it was wise of the Council not to adopt that proposal .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , may I first of all thank and congratulate Mr Moorhouse for his admirable report , with which I almost entirely agree , and to thank him and others such as Mr Ford and Mr Pompidou for the kind remarks they have made about the evolution of Commission policy and my role in it .


It is no exaggeration to say that of all the developments in external affairs , in the years I have been involved , the evolution of policy , progress and attitudes to relations between Europe and Japan has been the most substantial if not the most dramatic .
It has not been dramatic because it has not been achieved by any single leap or single agreement but it has been the most substantial because we have moved from a time when , as has been said , relations - largely trade relations - have been contentious to a time when trade relations have greatly improved and when relations have been considerably broadened to cover political activities as well as economic activities .
Reference has been made in relation to political activities , for example to the question of KEDO by Mr Ford .
That is of fundamental importance because it shows that the European Union is prepared to participate in an arrangement which costs us a bit with the United States , Japan and Korea of profound importance for the security of the region .
It is a symbol of our much greater interest in the whole .
The question was also raised of how have we come to make the progress we have made and what further progress is there to be made .
This has come about through adopting an approach that is significantly different from the United States and certainly in my mind more suitable for us and at least as successful .
It has not been a soft approach .
It has not been an approach which simply says we will go along with whatever the Japanese do .
We have been even-handed .
We have insisted in our relations with Japan , that there should be no discrimination against us compared with the United States .
Here I beg to differ from what Mr Souchet said .
He mentioned semi-conductors .
It is interesting that we were able to hold out and indeed to delay the whole of the information technology agreement , which was fundamentally in our interest , unless and until we reached a point when the exclusive features of the agreement between Japan and the United States with regard to semi-conductors were brought to an end and we were brought into the semi-conductor council as full partners .
That is an example of the way in which , through the use of multilateral measures as well as bilateral pressures , we are able to defend ourselves against that which was objectionable whether it came from the United States , or from Japan , or both .
But also we have been free and ready to take whatever line is appropriate .
For example , when Japan was threatened by the United States with measures in the automobile sector , we incurred a considerable degree of hostility in the United States by saying that what the United States was threatening would be contrary to the international rules of the WTO .
The effect was that the United States did not proceed with those threats .
Our interest was not a theoretical one because any move the Japanese were forced to take would have been at the expense of European industry .
So we were able effectively to defend ourselves .
As far as Japan is concerned , we did not hesitate to take action in the WTO when it came to discrimination in the taxation of spirits and we were successful .
I made it clear throughout to our Japanese friends that this was not being done in a hostile way but rather by using the international system to achieve the objectives which it was there for , namely the peaceful resolution of disputes .
I hope when people talk about bananas they will remember that case as well .
Nonetheless , it is indeed a fact that as a consequence of these measures , which have been non-confrontational , but not wet or weak , we have been able to develop a trading position with Japan and gain access to the Japanese market .
Above all , we have been able to show that our own experience in deregulation is valid for Japan .
The speaker who said that the Japanese , for their own internal reasons , are now very concerned about deregulation to modernize the economy was absolutely right .
We have been able to show that we can teach , through our own hardwon experience , something about that .
As to the future , progress still needs to be made .
Mr Moorhouse referred to the upturn in the deficit once again and reference was made by Mrs Sainjon to the impact of currency changes on the trade figures .
That is always the case and always will be .
Therefore we need to press on and to insist on further deregulation and to give advice as to how that could be done .
We need also to continue with the trade disputes where we have complaints about what has happened , for example in the harbour area , and in some agricultural areas as well .
But we do so in a spirit of cooperation .
What has been said by many speakers in the course of this debate about science and technology and the further advances that can be made has great validity .
So , I believe that a policy of friendship and cooperation , while at the same time putting forward European interests using the bilateral and multilateral means at our disposal combined with support for Japan playing a larger role in the world , as Mr Moorhouse has suggested , and by us assisting in that process through being ready to participate ourselves , as in KEDO , and to put our money where our mouth is .
This combination of approaches has in the past decade proved to be the right one , as is shown by the fact that the Commission and all parts of the House have come together in an unusual display of very substantial unity in support of a policy which is in the interests of Europe .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Universal telecommunications service
The next item is the report ( A4-0270 / 97 ) by Mr van Velzen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission communication on assessment criteria for national schemes for the costing and financing of universal service in telecommunications and guidelines for Member States on operation of such schemes .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the Netherlands the largest telecom operator is going to put on the market a telecom card with a smell as a marketing stunt .
The largest newspaper in the Netherlands ran a report about it last week .
Where will the deregulation of the European telecom market lead us next , Mr Commissioner ?
In December a card will come onto the market that will smell of pine , freesias , strawberries or mint .
Mr Commissioner , I promise that I shall give you one of these cards as soon as they are on the market .
But now to more serious matters .
The cost calculation of the universal service is a very technical but extremely important subject as it involves enormous amounts of money .
In various telecommunications directives we have defined what the content of the universal service for the telecommunications sector is - that is in the ONP voice telephony report by Mrs Read - and how the financing must be regulated - that is in the interconnection directive and in the full competition directive .
This communication gives points of departure for Member States to calculate the costs of universal service .
Doubts have been expressed by the Committee on Legal Affairs of this House about the legal status of this communication .
The provisions of a communication are after all not legally enforceable and , according to the Court of Justice , may not create new obligations .
And there the problem begins , because operators need clear guidelines in this field whereas the legal status of a communication now prevents this .
This is a fundamental problem because we get a great number of messages from telecom companies that universal service tariffs are too high in a number of Member States to be able to make profitable investments .
In addition , the term " universal service ' itself creates uncertainly because it is not always defined clearly .
I wish to speak of my extreme concern here .
The European Institutions can make splendid EU legislation , but in the end it is up to the willingness to invest of new entrants on the market whether the liberalization will actually work .
There must be a strict limit to what Member States can finance via a universal service mechanism .
Indeed , a large contribution for the service falsifies the competition , creates high tariffs for the consumer and is harmful to the development of the European economy .
I said that this morning when we were dealing with the other report by Mrs Read .
The best thing would of course be a new directive in this field , but that would probably not be feasible at the moment , just before full liberalization , nor do we wish to open Pandora 's box , but to close it .
In the short term , a technical review of the Commission 's communication would be a step in the right direction , together with Amendment No 11 to Mrs Read 's report that was adopted this morning .
That gives the operators clarity .
A technical review is also necessary and I should like to illustrate that for you with a few examples .
To begin with : interconnection tariffs , access deficit contributions and universal service tariffs are mixed up whereas they are completely different concepts : universal service tariffs may only reflect the actual costs of the universal service and ensure a contribution by the parties on the market for the operator that has the universal service obligation ; interconnection tariffs are taken into account by a network operator for the use of his facilities .
Access deficits arise from an unbalanced tariff structure .
In the annex to the communication it says that the rules on access deficits are of a temporary nature and may continue until 1 January 2000 .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy is in full agreement .
After all , tariff restructuring is an essential characteristic of the liberalized market and access deficits do not belong there .
But it should just be clarified .
I understand from my contacts that the Commission considers ONP voice telephony to be the place where that must be regulated .
But I cannot find anything really clear about it there .
Clarification of all of this in a corrigendum to this communication would be very helpful .
And then there is the essential question : who will provide the universal service and how will the costs be determined ?
To begin with the latter , the net costs : Community legislation states that the net costs must be calculated on an objective , transparent and non-discriminatory basis .
Everyone in the sector knows that in a liberalized environment the cost calculation must be future-orientated .
However , the exact cost items and types of cost that may be calculated are not mentioned in the legislation and the sector really needs that now .
Paragraphs 1 to 7 of the guidelines to this communication provide good points of departure .
Unfortunately , though , there is no legislation here .
And then there is the matter of supplying the universal service .
As the Commission indicates in this communication , it may not automatically be assumed that the current provider of the universal service must continue to provide the service in a free market .
It must also be possible to designate different suppliers for different regions of a country .
That is an essential issue , because I also believe that the company that can supply a universal service under the best conditions and most efficiently , must also do this .
That is appropriate in the liberalized market , but where do we find that in the EU legislation ?
The supply of the service can , moreover , have considerable commercial and marketing advantages for the telecom company .
In calculating the net costs , account should also be taken here of the " pay or play ' approach .
But this is not to be found in the current legislation .
I am therefore worried about the clarity with which the operators can work at the moment with regard to the matter of financing a universal service .
I would ask the Commissioner urgently whether he is prepared to undertake a technical review of this communication .
Madam President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr van Velzen , on a thorough piece of work , as we have come to expect of him .
I want to highlight some of the dilemmas arising from this proposal from the Commission .
The first is one that Mr van Velzen has already touched on : the use of a communication in this matter .
I am sure the Commissioner and Members of this House will know that the Court has already taken a view in a very similar instance and there is , of course , the worry that this particular course might lead to further actions in the courts brought by the operators or others who are affected .
The second dilemma is also touched on in Mr van Velzen 's report - although not directly highlighted in his contribution .
I do not want to be too critical about this , because a number of aspects of this question of the financing of universal service , and indeed of the definitions , are contained in a variety of pieces of legislation - some of which , but not all , is logical .
We in this Parliament accept that the pressure to meet the deadline , indeed the commercial and industrial pressures of the progress of liberalization , make some cross-over almost inevitable .
I sometimes feel when I come into this House and speak on telecommunications matters , that I could dip into a bag and pull out almost any speech and it would be appropriate to that particular proposal .
The third dilemma is that we attach such importance to the development of a universal service in telecommunications that we want to seize on almost any progress .
As you can see from Mr van Velzen 's report , we see considerable merit in the substance of what the Commission has come up with .
However , I and my group still feel that it would be best to have a directive that draws together the various pieces of legislation in this field into one overall legislative text .
It was unfortunate that this morning we were unable to hear from the Commissioner as fully as we would have liked on the proposals concerning voice telephony . However , I was very pleased that the amendment asking for a biennial report to this Parliament from the Commission was adopted , and I very much hope that Parliament and Commission together can use that to consolidate some of this work .
I was also glad to see that paragraph 10 of Mr Van Velzen 's report ' stresses that universal service is an evolving concept which can eventually be expanded ' .
He and I might disagree on the pace of that expansion but it is very important for documents like this to acknowledge that there is a case for changing our definition as developments in technology and on the market move forward .
I hope that the Commissioner will give consideration to the points that have already been raised , because this is an example where , both in the definition and in the funding of universal service , the citizens of Europe can derive some very real value in their own personal , domestic and business lives from what is coming out of the European Union .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report is part of a strategy for change working through the privatization of sectors of activity which are linked to a notion or concept of public service .
This being the Community , not to say the universal , strategy , it is inevitably taking shape in a very different way in the various Member States and giving rise to a variety of interpretations and rates of implementation , which the rapporteur begins by emphasizing , speaking , indeed , of great divergencies in interpretation and extent , primarily relating to the uncertain climate of investment and problems of competition .
The report also refers to the " inequalities in the level of service for European citizens ' , but it seems obvious , at least to the committee responsible for the report , that the price and cost perspective predominates .
Besides , and this is our greater concern , the concept of universal service is an evolving concept - point 10 of the resolution - and we are fighting for a concept of public service fitted to citizens ' rights , which are not to be replaced by this new evolving concept , totally dominated by the logic of prices , accessibility notwithstanding - for whom and at what point ? - and costs .
The other reservation we have in this debate relates to the possibility of universal service mechanisms being created , even if not explicitly , which correspond to opening up the possibility or pretext of subsidiarity of private interests - which would have already taken advantage of the process of privatization to appropriate what formerly belonged to the collectivity - so that the universal services can be brought into being through these private services or activities , subsidizing them so that prices are accessible without squeezing the cost ratios and profits of these private interests , or even allowing them to make greater profits .
That is the underlying logic of this process and this dynamic .
But it should not prevent us from denouncing it and reconsidering the logic , the process and the dynamic .
Madam President , I would like to begin by thanking Mr van Velzen for this report and for having done his best to analyse and bring clarity to a very complicated matter .
We have talked about telecommunications and universal services from many aspects today in various reports .
There are , just as the previous speaker pointed out , very many different definitions of what universal services entail .
There are different ways of carrying out the deregulation which is now taking place .
I believe it will have to continue to appear a little like this in future too , since there are different traditions and cultures .
We cannot suddenly decide how it will look and what the definition will be .
It has to take time and we have to accept what we call variety and flexibility .
As far as this communication from the Commission is concerned , it is the case that the Member States can decide on , among other things , the financing of universal services and how this shall take place .
It is currently carried out through taxes or by redistributing income between the various operators .
In addition we have various directives .
There is Community law , the competition directive , the interoperability directive and the telephony directive .
There are a number of directives which even give the Member States guidelines on how this is to be done .
Now we have a very comprehensive communication from the Commission on further guidelines on how costs shall be calculated and how the costs shall be divided between the operators .
I believe this communication from the Commission , together with the directives which already exist , is quite sufficient .
To demand another directive , as the rapporteur does , I consider to be going too far .
I think we need the flexibility that exists today .
I therefore support the Commission in this case .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to congratulate Mr van Velzen on his report and the relevance of his proposals .
The area of telecommunications is going through unprecedented upheaval : optic fibres , mobile phones , Internet , deregulation , all of this is the biggest maelstrom which has ever shaken the , until now , protected universe of telecommunications .
But the strategic alliances which are today forming between European companies must not be dictated only by the demands of the most important clients nor only by the pursuit of new value added services .
The interests of the company employees must also be taken into account along with , of course , those of private users and citizens .
The citizens must not be abandoned on the hard shoulder of the information superhighway .
It is up to us to protect access for all to the new technologies and to make sure that private operators , newly arrived on the market , do not set up only in urban areas where they can obviously expect a fast profit .
It introduces then , into the policies that we are to define , a certain obligatory mission of universal service according to social expectations and thanks to the possibilities offered by the new technologies .
If it is necessary to develop a European concept of universal service , it is clearly understood that each State must be able to develop its own concept of public service action and to guarantee all users a connection to the network without price increases for , as you know , the vast majority of citizens do not care if the price of communication between Strasbourg and St Petersburg has fallen by half !
The interest of the citizen-consumer seems to me to be the indispensable element to take into account .
It is the only one in a position to go beyond certain dogmatic conflicts .
It is probable that free competition in the telecommunications sector is today the structure best adapted to the mission of public service , but I want to draw the Commission 's attention to the fact that , without a European regional policy , without a policy on social cohesion , deregulation will only benefit interests devoid of democratic legitimacy .
Madam President , I am of course grateful for the Commissioner 's reply and as always , it was very instructive .
I am also pleased that the Commissioner promises that he is willing to correct the unclear phrasing .
But I also asked the Commissioner whether at the same time he would consider a number of the gaps that I mentioned , such as who will supply the universal service , the pay and play principle and how will future-orientated costs be calculated ?
And if we could consider it in the same way , I believe that not only for the Member States , but particularly for the operators , it becomes clear what they have to stick to and what the point of departure is for the Member States .
I think that is essential , because we have now entered a very important phase and there are problems in a number of Member States with regard to the financing of the universal service .
Perhaps the Commissioner would respond to this ?
Mr van Velzen , if you will allow me to say so , you are now behaving rather contradictorily .
On one hand you are saying this communication must not in any way be mandatory , and we shall have to watch out lest we end up in the devil of a mess .
Yet now you are saying it is not quite complete , because this and that belong in it .
I think we should leave well alone for the time being .
We shall correct the impression which might lead to a false interpretation , and anyway we shall have an opportunity in at most two years to have look for ourselves how matters have developed .
I am also prepared , if a - let us say - problem case should arise , to discuss with the Member concerned how one might best remedy it .
But as I have said , up to now we have had no such case .
There is no problem with the universal service .
There are problems with interconnection and with other market accesses , charges , etc .
There we have any number of problems , but we have the regulations .
We have not a single problem with the universal service .
If a problem should arise I should willingly examine what else one might do in addition to solve it. but it seems to me a bit extreme to say that we should write into this in detail anything that might at some time possibly happen in some Member State . I would ask you to let the matter rest with what I have said .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.25 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m. )

Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time to the Council ( B4-0520 / 97 ) .
Question No 1 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0591 / 97 )
Subject : The Maghreb during the Luxembourg Presidency
Within the context of Euromediterranean policy , what progress does the Luxembourg Presidency foresee in the political and security fields ?
Is Euromediterranean policy not experiencing a major downturn ?
Ladies and gentlemen , in reply to the first question relating to the Maghreb and the way in which the Luxembourg Presidency intends to advance the dossier between the European Union and the countries of this part of the world , I would say that the European Union attaches a unique importance to its relations with the countries in question .
I happen to know that , this morning , a long discussion was dedicated to the situation in some of these countries or in those bordering the region , and I would like to expand on this briefly in order to emphasize the interest of the Council in the Maghreb .
Within the CFSP , the Union follows the domestic situation of the countries of the Maghreb very closely , and these are analysed in depth at regular meetings of the Mashrek / Maghreb Working Group .
Within the framework of Euromediterranean policy , bilateral relations have been strengthened by the Barcelona process .
The countries of the Maghreb play an active role in the partnership and have proved their determination to contribute to the success of the said process .
The Luxembourg Presidency has the firm intention to continue this policy of strengthening relations with Algeria , Morocco and Tunisia , both through the intermediary of the Barcelona process , of which the next meeting of senior officials responsible for politics and security will take place on 23 and 24 October , and at a bilateral level .
Concerning bilateral relations , the ratification by national parliaments of the association agreement with Tunisia is extremely advanced and the European Parliament has already given its assent .
It is therefore possible that this agreement will come into effect before the end of the year .
Given these conditions , it is not impossible that a meeting of the EU / Tunisia Association Council may be held under the Luxembourg Presidency . This will enable us to take a bearing on the situation of the agreement and to examine from a wider perspective the future of relations between Tunisia and the European Union .
This meeting will also be an opportunity to commence an exchange of views on political questions of common interest within the framework for political dialogue foreseen by the agreement .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his helpfulness , both in answering my question and in this morning 's debate on Algeria , which he has also mentioned .
Most of all , I should like express my appreciation of the goodwill being shown by the Luxembourg Presidency .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you have mentioned some important meetings and work in progress .
But it is important to recognize that these meetings are not enough , and that in the phase of activity which Euromediterranean policy is now entering there are far more meetings than concrete actions .
However , there are tragedies taking place every day , to which our European institutions must respond - the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
Today , more than 20 people were killed at sea in an accident involving a motor launch in the Straits of Gibraltar .
Deaths are caused far too frequently in this way .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , in view of the goodwill of the Luxembourg Presidency , I should like there to be a response to this problem , and some specific action found to help prevent these tragic events .
Today 's tragedy - they are retrieving the bodies at this very moment - deserves a response . We know that the effective way to prevent this emigration , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , is to invest - in six industrial zones in northern Morocco .
That is what we need to put an effective end to this carnage .
Please , do something about it .
It is not a question of civil servants or meetings , but of actions and urgent investments .
Thank you , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , but allow me to remind you that the time allocated for a supplementary question is one minute , and you have taken twice as long .
Once again , this Presidency asks you to please observe the rules because there are many questions and Mr Wohlfart will not be able to answer them all if every Member of the House who speaks takes twice the allotted time .
Mr Wohlfart , you may now reply to Mrs Izquierdo Rojo 's long question .
I will endeavour to make my answer shorter but also a little more concrete .
I do not want to go back to the debate of this morning which was devoted to the situation in Algeria .
In conclusion to that debate , I underlined the fact that not only the Council , but also the Commission and Parliament , had a role to play and I have been won over to the idea put forward by your friends in the European Parliament , that is , the establishment of direct contact with your counterparts in the Algerian Parliament .
The Algerian situation affects us all .
You say that action is required and that meetings are not going to move things on .
My reply to that is , whilst respecting your approach , the method of gathering the antagonists around the negotiating table has been the subject of wide consensus , as participants at this morning 's debate will have noticed .
You say that it is essential that Morocco gains investment .
My reply is that I am in agreement with you .
I visited to this country , and I can see that it is confronted by an enormous historic challenge , through this partnership association itself .
It is an economy which is currently more than 40 % dependent on agriculture , a country which in twelve years time wants to see a free trade zone achieved with Europe .
Of course they are in need of our investment , and the Community and the Presidency will do their best to make sure that the association agreement with Morocco , already signed , is ratified by all the Member States as quickly as possible .
I would like to give you an example that struck me .
Last week I accompanied the Prime Minister , Mr Junker , to Ukraine , within the context of a visit linked both to the European Union / Ukraine summit and to bilateral relations .
Investment was thus one subject on the agenda .
During the press conference , a journalist asked the two Prime Ministers if they had reached an agreement on investment .
They had had no more than one hour to talk to each other !
By telling you this story what I am trying to say is that investments are vital for Morocco , of course , but let us first create - and here I am in agreement with you - the necessary conditions for political and economic stability .
Once a favourable climate has been established , investments will be attracted to the region .
Mr President .
I am very grateful for what you have said .
I should like to put just one question about that : how do you assess the situation in Morocco particularly with regard to the investments you mentioned ?
My impression of Morocco is that it is the most stable Mahgreb country and we need it .
Secondly , I should like to ask you how long the negotiations with Morocco will continue , in your view , and when can Morocco be brought in the negotiations to something like the position now occupied by Tunisia ?
That is very important , because we need Morocco as the neighbour of what one can regard as the most explosive Mahgreb state , namely Algeria .
My last question is , how do you view the chances of talking to the Parliament there ?
This Parliament only represents a small part of the population .
Is it not time to question also those small groups who are not represented in Parliament because they are excluded ?
I would like to reply to the three questions from Mr von Habsburg . Firstly , by giving him my personal impression concerning Morocco .
I visited this country at the head of a delegation of businessmen as recently as June of this year .
I , along with many of those who accompanied me , was completely surprised by the efforts made within the context of economic and institutional reform in this country , even if it is still lagging compared to the current level of development in Tunisia .
I believe there are solid opportunities .
I was equally surprised to note that our delegation included around ten businesses from Luxembourg - for a small country this is a lot - who are ready to forge ahead and participate in true partnership between the two countries , a partnership that the Luxembourg government , for its part , is going to provide with the financial means to try to promote , as best it can , investment in Morocco .
I believe the second question depends somewhat on the speed at which the parliaments of the different Member States ratify this agreement .
It is very important for Morocco . This point was insisted upon .
We have tried hard to get this message across , not only at the level of the Council of Ministers but equally in all the bodies of the European Union .
This political message is that the partnership must now become effective .
Once again , I hope that we will have done our duty within the Fifteen by the end of the year and , in my opinion , if the conditions are fulfilled , I think that in five or six years time Morocco could reach the same level as Tunisia , a country which , and this equally surprised me , has achieved an exceptional level of development for a country in this region .
Mr von Habsburg will have to forgive me but I believe , regarding his third question , which is a completely legitimate one , that the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs of this Parliament is better placed to reply to this question regarding the establishment of contact between this Parliament and members of parliamentary and other political forces in Algeria .
Question No 2 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0597 / 97 )
Subject : Peripheral regions and eurotaxes
With regard to the ' eurotax ' on road haulage within the European Union , what is the Council 's view of the fact that Finland and Spain still do not enjoy the status of peripheral regions ?
I will do my best to reply to Mr Camisón Asensio .
First of all , the Council would not be able to foresee the results of ongoing discussions on the proposal for a directive concerning taxation of heavy goods vehicles using certain road systems . I am talking about the eurotax disc .
The Council however would like to clarify that the dispensation regarding rights of use which figures in Directive 93 / 89 / EEC only permits the granting of a temporary reduction in the rates of duty on usage to certain Member States disadvantaged by their weak economic development and by their particular geographical location , on occasion by political conflict in third countries .
It is convenient at the same time to note that the idea of a peripheral region did not feature in the text of Directive 93 / 89 / EEC - which was overruled by the Court of Justice - whose objective was , I repeat , and the honourable member knows very well , to come to the aid of certain Member States handicapped by their late development or their particular geographic location .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we had been informed in committees of this House that during the June Transport Council the Dutch Presidency was confronted by a highly confusing situation as regards this matter .
One of the contradictions was the proposal that Ireland , Portugal and Greece should benefit temporarily from a 50 % reduction in eurotax utilization rights , because of their peripheral positions .
Of course , we think this proposal is reasonable and fair .
However , during the debates this benefit was denied to Finland and Spain because they were not considered to be peripheral countries . We think this is illogical .
It seems to us unacceptable to deny the peripheral nature of a country such as Spain , when a Tarifa promontory is virtually in Africa , or Finland , which touches the North Pole .
Let us hope the Luxembourg Presidency will find a more reasonable solution .
I will try to give an answer that I hope will be satisfactory to the honourable gentleman .
We have to recognize that during the session of 17 June this year , the Committee on Transport could not come to an agreement .
The honourable Member has already recalled in part certain difficulties on which political consensus was not possible , without even considering that a unanimous vote was also required .
I would therefore like to say the following : the Luxembourg Presidency intends to conduct bilateral relations at the highest political level in order to unblock this issue .
It is a commitment I take on behalf of the Presidency and on behalf of my colleague , Mrs Delvaux , who is responsible for the Committee on Transport .
But I would also add that the Presidency will not include this matter on the agenda of the Council unless the bilateral contacts have brought about a true political will to come to a solution .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 3 and 4 will be taken together .
The Council will explain to us how two such different questions can be considered the same .
Question No 3 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0599 / 97 )
Subject : Right of asylum for nationals of EU Member States
There is a protocol to the Amsterdam Treaty containing a sole article whose purpose is to regulate and restrict the right of nationals of EU Member States to have applications for asylum considered in a Member State other than that of which they are a national .
The practical implications of the article are disputed .
Would it be correct to interpret paragraph ( d ) as allowing Member States , notwithstanding this article , to examine any application for asylum in accordance with their national practices ?
Would it be correct to interpret the article as not in any way limiting Member States ' rights individually to consider and approve applications for asylum by nationals of EU Member States ?
Question No 4 by Ulla Sandbæk ( H-0505 / 97 )
Subject : The Maastricht II Treaty and the environmental guarantee
Implementation of the environmental guarantee ( Article 100a ( 4 ) ) requires the approval of the Commission .
According to the provisional text of the new Maastricht II Treaty , the Commission will be obliged to give its views within six months .
How far will the Member States be able to implement the environmental guarantee , and thus introduce higher environmental standards , during the six months the Commission has to confirm whether the Member State may implement the environmental guarantee ?
It may at first seem strange , I agree , Mr President , but I will try to tell you why I hope to convince the Members of Parliament of this step .
The Presidency proposes to reply simultaneously to the questions put by Mrs Sandbæk and Mr Sjöstedt , which both relate to the interpretation to be given to the arrangements agreed at the time of the Amsterdam Summit with regard to revision of treaties .
In reply to these questions , I must underline that at this stage it is premature , in the opinion of the Council , to undertake an interpretation of the protocol in question .
In this perspective , it is advisable to keep in our minds the fact that the treaty of which this protocol is a part has not only not yet come into effect , but what is more has yet to be signed , something which will take place , if I am not mistaken , on 2 October next .
Given these conditions , the Council considers that any exegesis of texts fixed in Amsterdam would at the moment be inappropriate , all the more so given that the only institution skilled in interpreting the texts of treaties is the Court of Justice of the European Union .
I am convinced that once the treaty has been not only signed but also ratified by the various Member States and when , in certain Member States , it will also have passed the test of a referendum , we will be able to come back to this question .
At the moment , for the reasons I have just given , I do not wish to enter into the details and engage in a most perilous exercise .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for that reply , even though I think it is wholly unacceptable that the Council will not discuss the treaty which the European Council has just concluded .
We are now involved in a democratic process with referendums in some Member States and parliamentary debates in others .
It is therefore quite essential and a question of democracy to be able to know what it is that is to be decided on .
The Council must be prepared to provide information where the treaty is unclear and ambiguous , such as with regard to the refugee question , that is , whether the right of asylum will be restricted and at the same time remain in place .
Yesterday I discussed the same question on the right of asylum with the Commission , which was prepared to discuss this question even though it is the Council which has taken the decision .
However , the Commission referred me to the Council and said that it was clearly the Council which should respond to this question , since it is the Council which is responsible .
I therefore expect an answer to the question .
At the risk of upsetting the honourable Member , I must say that if a process of ratification and referendum is underway in different countries , it would be dangerous for the Presidency , or the Council , to give interpretations that might be likely to cause misunderstandings in certain countries .
You know very well , you have just mentioned it , that it is a democratic process in which parliaments and even , by means of referendums , populations , are called to make a political choice .
Therefore , for the reasons I have just given , it would be completely inappropriate for the President-in-Office of the Council to engage in this exercise of interpretation at the moment .
Consequently , I will not throw the ball back into your court , by replying that the Commission has said that you should have referred to the Council in this matter .
Each one of the institutions has its own remit .
Once again , it is not the intention of the Presidency-in-Office to hide anything , however , I would wish this discussion to be withheld until after ratification , which will provide the necessary elements required . But I do understand , as a former Member of Parliament , that it is sometimes very hard to receive a reply that is not satisfying .
The reason why I have asked this question is , you see , because we are going to have a referendum in Denmark and because I shall be going out and explaining to the voters what is in the Amsterdam Treaty , and once they know , they will be able to decide how they want to vote .
I will have to tell them that I have asked the Council , which should have an interpretation of this , since it is the Council which wrote the text , but that the Council said that it did not know what it meant by the text .
And then I will also have to tell my constituents that they will have to buy a pig in a poke , that I cannot explain to them what the Council has written , and the Council will not explain to them what it has written ; that the Council thinks they should go and vote in a referendum completely in the dark because it thinks that they should have sufficient faith in it and expect everything to be surely interpreted for the best .
It is totally unreasonable to say that people should vote on something which you cannot even get interpreted .
Not only do you write in a way which is incomprehensible , but you then refuse to explain it before a referendum .
I must say that the last sentence of the honourable lady 's speech pleased me much more than the first .
She said that we were not ready to interpret the texts , whereas in the beginning she said that we were acting as if we did not know the texts .
This is a small difference that I note in passing .
Madam , I have complete faith in you .
You have , of course , read the texts and are able to interpret them as well as , if not better , than I. So I am sure that , as a Member of Parliament who respects the electorate , you will interpret them appropriately .
The electorate , I am convinced , will not be forced to buy a pig in a poke .
Thank you very much , Mr Wohlfart .
I think the Presidency 's position has been made clear , but Mr Lindqvist would like to ask a supplementary question .
I shall let him speak , because the rules allow me to do so , but I would remind you all that prolonging a debate which is always going to receive the same reply uses up time which is needed to answer other questions .
Mr Lindqvist has the floor for a supplementary question .
I have to say that I am amazed too that we cannot get any answer from the Council .
To respond by saying that it is too early or that it is inconvenient , or that it could even be dangerous , is a very strange way to respond to questions from Members of Parliament who are going to debate these questions in their respective homelands , in some cases prior to a referendum .
What are we to do when we get the same kinds of questions from the general public if we cannot get the smallest piece of information from the President-in-Office of the Council ?
I am concerned to say the least .
I believe the same can be said of many others .
I have understood that we will not get an answer today .
I note that that will clearly continue to be the case until the Member States have had their referendums and made their yes or no decisions in the national parliaments . That is , we will not get any information until the debates in the respective Member States are over .
That is how I understood the answer .
I am very concerned and unhappy about this answer from the Council .
To go back to Mrs Sandbæk 's expression concerning a cat , I see that we could spend another hour playing cat and mouse on this subject .
But I am not going to take the place of the nationally elected Members of Parliament who , I am confident , will be able to interpret the texts as they have been agreed .
They will also be able , as will both you and your colleague here present , to read the text and thus convince their electorate .
Moreover , it is also out of respect for your electorate that , as President-in-Office of the Council , I do not wish to set myself up as judge and thus replace the national Members of Parliament and their different governments .
Question No 5 by Hans Lindqvist ( H-0606 / 97 )
Subject : EU structural Funds
Agenda 2000 proposes that Objective 6 should cease to be a separate area of aid and should be incorporated within Objective 1 .
' Special arrangements ' are to be made for the areas concerned .
What are the implications for Sweden in terms of aid from the EU 's structural Funds as a result of this change ?
The work of the Council relating to the communication of the Agenda 2000 Committee , has only just begun .
As you know , ladies and gentlemen , at the time of its meeting on 22 July this year , the Council listened to a report by the President , Mr Santer , on Agenda 2000 , as well as to the Commission 's opinion on countries which could be candidates for admission .
On that occasion the Council agreed to proceed , at its next meeting , which in fact took place last Monday , to a first discussion of general orientation on the group of questions .
It indicated in particular its agreement on the work method presented by the Presidency for the guidelines for the various dossiers .
In accordance with the conclusions of the European Council of Amsterdam , the Council will proceed to an in-depth study of the dossiers in question and will present a detailed report to the European Council in Luxembourg next December .
We consider that at this stage it would be premature to take any position on the question of the reform of Union structural policies , which moreover only make up one element of this package .
Thank you for your answer .
Sweden and Finland were given a special , new objective within the structural funds in connection with the accession negotiations , objective 6 .
It arose because the northern part of Europe where we live is very sparsely populated and had special reasons to get extra aid .
It is now being proposed in Agenda 2000 that objective area 6 should disappear as a specific area for aid , that is , exactly what Sweden , among others , negotiated .
It will be included in objective area 1 .
In the available documents , it is stated that special arrangements will ensure that aid is provided more or less as before , but under objective 1 .
There is now a proposal from the Swedish government , which must be connected with the EU , to turn the whole of northern Sweden into one large aid area , which would mean that what was originally the aid area for special sparsely-populated districts will find it more difficult to get money .
There is a great deal of uncertainty and I would therefore very much like to have a somewhat clearer answer than the one I have received .
Let me first of all say that at the first exchange of views at the General Affairs Council , the two country delegations Mr Lindqvist has just mentioned informed us in their speeches of the concerns they shared with the honourable gentleman .
He has himself made allusion , in his supplementary question , to the issue of the disappearance of objective 6 . This is the proposal of the Commission which , in its communication on Agenda 2000 , in the chapter relating to economic and social cohesion , proposes , for reasons of eligibility and efficiency , to reduce the number of current objectives to three .
Of these , two are regional objectives and one a horizontal objective dedicated to human resources . It also stated that those currently eligible under objective 6 but not under objective 1 should benefit from individual arrangements .
For the moment the Council has not yet settled on a line of action .
We have agreed our work method for the different aspects connected with Agenda 2000 , which consists of doing the spadework on the different problems which are being raised in the different spheres , notably that of structural funds .
It will then be proposed that , at the highest ministerial level in the different Councils which are in charge of preparing the Luxembourg Summit - Ecofin and others - the wishes of the various Member States should as far as possible be taken into account . At the same time it is understood that an orientation is emerging , which for the moment seems to me quite clear , by which a large majority of Member States would not want to go beyond the 1.27 % finance ceiling which was fixed up until 2006 .
But many other questions merit a response and the Presidency is in the process of getting down to this task .
It is also the objective of the different informal Councils which , as you know Mr Lindqvist , often move things on substantially .
In any case we are going to get on with the work of seeking a consensus at the level of the Fifteen .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 6 and 7 fall .

Question No 8 by Mr Imaz San Miguel has been withdrawn .
Question No 9 by Hugh McMahon ( H-0614 / 97 )
Subject : Philoxenia 1997-2000 ( European tourism )
Does the Luxembourg Presidency intend to pursue the adoption of the Philoxenia programme designed to assist European tourism during its term in office ?
Concerning the adoption of a programme aimed at promoting European tourism , the work group of the Council which was set up for this reason , will recommence its work as from tomorrow .
The objective sought is precisely to derive an agreement on the content of this programme before the end of December 1997 , in other words this year , and the Presidency proposes to present as the basis for work a document which will take into account the discussions held up until now at the level of the Council .
Once this agreement has been reached , the Presidency envisages calling a meeting of the Council dedicated to tourism in order to proceed to the adoption of a programme on this subject and to establish definitively the actions to be promoted in the tourism sector .
These actions should mainly be aimed at objectives which have gained sufficient support within the Council , such as the development of information and the co-operation of the involved actors .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for a very full answer .
Perhaps he would clarify one point for me .
Would the conference which is to be held take place during the Luxembourg presidency or the British presidency ?
I will try , but Mr McMahon is a specialist with regard to Question Time .
I will say to the honourable Member that that depends not only on the Presidency but also on the will of certain Member States who , up until now , have been very respectful regarding the principle of subsidiarity .
So , either the Luxembourg Presidency will handle it , if a political agreement is found , or it will be necessary to put your confidence in the British Presidency to resolve the problem .
The following questions and answers are going to take even less time because Mr Sören Wibe , the author of Question No 10 , is not present and nor Mr Watson , the author of Question No 11 .


I cannot see Mr Alavanos , the author of Question No 12 .
So the next question is No 13 .



But I see that Mr Wibe has just arrived .
Mr Wohlfart , if you do not mind , I suggest you answer Mrs Jensen first , since she was already here , and then we will go back to Mr Wibe 's question , since he has now arrived .

Question No 13 by Kirsten Jensen ( H-0635 / 97 )
Subject : The situation in Burma
What political conclusions does the Council intend to draw from Burma 's admittance to ASEAN ?
.
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my answer to the question raised by the honourable Member of Parliament will be a little longer than that which I have just given .
Regarding the political consequences that the Council envisages in the admission of Burma to ASEAN , I can indicate to honourable Members that at the General Affairs Council on 26 June last , the following conclusions were drawn , which I think everyone already knows .
The Council has examined the effect on the European Union of the membership of certain countries , notably Burma , in ASEAN .
It has underlined that the deterioration of the situation with regard to human rights in Burma is the subject of grave concern for the European Union .
On several occasions the European Union has expressed its concern in the face of events in Burma and recently , on 30th May , the anniversary of the 1990 elections , the European Union adopted a statement inviting the State Law and Order Restoration Council , more commonly known as SLORC , to mark this occasion by freeing those people detained and to commence a true dialogue with groups in favour of democracy .
Furthermore , the Council requested SLORC to accept a visit from the United Nations special rapporteur in the near future .
Furthermore , the Council underlined the importance it gave to the strengthening and deepening of EU-ASEAN relations , in accordance with the conclusions of the ministerial meeting between the European Union and ASEAN countries , held in Singapore in February 1997 .
The Council confirmed the EU 's attachment to EU-ASEAN dialogue , in particular on human rights and democratic principles .
It hopes that joining ASEAN will contribute to the promotion of these fundamental values in Burma .
It considers that EU-ASEAN dialogue should be an occasion for examining the situation in this country .
Given that the current circumstances , which have led the European Union to extend its common position for a new 6 month period , prevent the commencement of negotiations on the possible membership of Burma to the ECASEAN cooperation agreement , the Council considers that Burma 's presence at ministerial meetings within the framework of the ASEAN post-ministerial conference and the ASEAN Regional Forum ( ARFPMC ) does not automatically mean it will participate as an observer at the next EU-ASEAN Joint Cooperation Committee which will be held in November 1997 and other meetings within the EU-ASEAN institutional framework .
The Council has reaffirmed that Burma 's membership of ASEAN does not automatically imply that it will become a member of the Asia-Europe Meeting , that is ASEM .
Concerning the possible adoption of new measures against Burma , the Council has agreed to return to this question shortly and to examine it according to the results of ministerial meetings , ASEAN ( Regional Forum post ministerial meeting ) and how the situation evolves .
This is the position that has been communicated by Mr Poos , President of the Council of the European Union , to ASEAN on the occasion of ASEAN 's post-ministerial conference which was held in Kuala Lumpur on 28 July last .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for that excellent answer , but I have just a few things I would like to ask him about .
Are there positive signs in this critical dialogue ?
How are our trade relations with the area developing ?
Are we not , in fact , politically in a situation like the one in connection with South Africa when apartheid existed , when , fortunately , Europe realised , if a little late , that continuous strong pressure should be brought to bear to change the conditions in the country .
It is human rights that are under attack .
It is democracy that is under attack .
And , as you know , this Parliament is very concerned about the situation of the elected representatives in Burma .
I believe that you used terms like " call on ' , ' demand an answer ' and so on .
That is perhaps a little too diplomatic given the seriousness of the situation .
You must excuse me , Mrs Jensen , if I have been too diplomatic .
Normally in Luxembourg I do not have the reputation of a great diplomat because I always have a tendency to , shall we say , say what I think .
So , I will be brief in replying to your questions .
Unfortunately , concerning progress in the area of human rights in Burma itself , I think there has been very little .
Moreover , I would be happy , Madam , for you to put your question to the Commission regarding trade .
I am not able to give you the figures that you are interested in .
It is not that I do not want to , but the truth is I cannot .
To come to your question concerning South Africa , on the subject of increased pressure , I think I can say from a personal point of view that the policy of the carrot and the stick , as it was called in 1990 / 91 , has born fruit .
Even if in the beginning it was hotly disputed by our ACP friends - I remember a ministerial meeting where this policy was disputed - I believe that in the end it bore fruit .
I hope it will be the same for a country which is close to your heart .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to interpret the Rules generously and invite the President-in-Office of the Council to reply to Question 10 , although this means going back a little bit .
This is the question by Mr Sören Wibe , who is now with us .
I invite you to reply to his question , if that is possible .
Question No 10 by Sören Wibe ( H-0618 / 97 )
Subject : Development of democracy in Europe
On paper all the countries in Europe are now democracies , which is totally unique in historical perspective .
However , there are differences of degree in terms of functioning democracies , democratic freedoms and rights , rule of law etc. and , if they are scrutinized more closely , some countries reveal major shortcomings .
The countries with the most significant shortcomings at present are Croatia and Belarus .
Although their presidents were elected democratically , control over TV and radio was such that only one message -the incumbent president 's - came across to voters .
Voters were not even schooled in the implications of democracy .
They have lived all their lives under authoritarian rule and do not know their rights or how to conduct themselves to question political messages .
The question is what can be done to put pressure on those regimes in Europe which rule their countries in authoritarian fashion and through tight control of the media .
Has the Council discussed diplomatic protests and economic isolation of countries such as Croatia and Bailers , which do not respect the fundamental democratic freedoms and rights that must prevail in a democratic Europe ?
.
( FR ) Please be assured , ladies and gentlemen , as to the flexibility of the President-in-Office of the Council with regard to the procedure proposed by the President .
In fact , the question is extremely important and I have a great deal of sympathy with overworked Members of Parliament .
I was one myself a few years ago . This is why I yield willingly to this exercise .
Concerning the problems raised by Mr Sören Wibe , I believe that a question on the development of democracy in Europe is worthy of an appropriate response from the Council .
First of all , I would like to assure Mr Wibe concerning respect for democracy and human rights , which are always at the heart of the fundamental principles which the European Union defends and to which the Council gives special attention .
In the two cases mentioned , Bailers and Croatia , as in other countries where values are under threat , the Council is endeavouring , with vigilance and determination , to exercise its influence with the aim of promoting democratic values as far as is possible .
I would like to draw up an appraisal with regard to Bailers .
The Council is following the development of the situation in the Republic of Bailers with acute concern and is actively endeavouring to put pressure on the authorities of that country so that they re-establish full respect for the democratic practices and principles that are accepted at an international level , along with freedom of the press .
A European Union survey mission , led by a former Dutch Minister of Justice , was sent to Bailers in January of this year in order to investigate the legality of the 1996 constitutional referendums , to evaluate how far the principle of the separation of powers is respected and to establish whether the opposition or the media were the subjects of harassment .
The mission noted serious constitutional and political dysfunctions in Bailers .
Given the conclusions of the mission , in February of this year the Council defined the global approach within which future relations between the European Union and Bailers would be framed .
Moreover , in April , the Council adopted a critical position and reminded Bailers that cooperation between the European Union and that country could not continue without a convincing effort on the part of Bailers to put in place a political system which is in accordance with accepted international norms .
Furthermore , the Council urged the Bailers authorities to respect its commitment to initiate talks with the thirteenth Supreme Soviet , elected with the aim of establishing a true separation of powers and of commencing a dialogue within a tripartite work group which is made up of representatives of the Bailers government , of the thirteenth Supreme Soviet and of experts from the European Union , the Council of Europe and the CSCE .

The Council of 15 September , that is last Monday , were forced to note that no progress had been made over the last months in the area of political and economic reforms in Bailers and that the political and constitutional situation , along with continual violations of human rights and fundamental liberties , in particular freedom of the press , was still very worrying .
Consequently , The Council decided to take the following measures .
Firstly , suspension of Union participation in the tripartite work group .
Secondly , refusal to support the membership of Bailers in the Council of Europe .
Thirdly , refusal to conclude the interim agreement and the partnership and cooperation agreement .
Fourthly , restrictions on bilateral ministerial contact .
Fifthly , a freeze on technical assistance programmes from the Community and Member States with the exception of humanitarian and regional projects and those which directly support the process of democratization .
With regard to Croatia , in April of this year the Council adopted various conclusions relating to the implementation of conditionality with a view to developing a coherent strategy on the part of the European Union to be applied to relations with those south-east European countries not linked to the European Union by an association agreement , in this instance Bosnia-Herzegovina , Croatia , the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania .
In order to consolidate peace and stability in the region and to contribute to its economic revival , the European Union aims to develop bilateral relations with the countries of this region , in a context which favours democracy , rule of law , the establishment of stricter standards with regard to human rights and minority rights , movement towards a market economy and the strengthening of co-operation between these countries .
In an annexe to the conclusions the Council included a number factors by which the level of respect for the conditions relating to democratic principles , human rights , rule of law , respect and protection of minorities and movement towards a market economy could be scrutinised .
The Council explicitly included freedom of expression , including the media , separately in the list .
I can assure you , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that the European Union is very closely following , and evaluating regularly , the progress made in the countries of this region , including Croatia , in terms of satisfying the demands of conditionality .
As these countries were reminded by the Council at the time of the session of 16 and 17 June in Amsterdam , rigorous respect for human rights and the rights of minorities in all countries , including repatriation of displaced people and refugees , remains an essential condition in the improvement of relations between the European Union and Croatia .
The progressive implementation of the conditions specified in the conclusions of 29 April will enable a progressive strengthening of relations , provided of course that there is a political and economic evaluation , global and permanent , through which each country , including Croatia , will be judged on an individual basis .
Furthermore , the European Union continues to ask Croatia , and other countries in the region , to respect fundamental democratic rights and liberties which , according to us , must prevail in European democracies .
I would firstly like to say thank you for the generosity which has been shown to me .
Even though I arrived late , I have had both an answer and a chance to reply .
I would also like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his answer which I thought was very exhaustive .
As far as the plans for Bailers are concerned , I am not actually acquainted with the details .
It is clear that we have also shown our economic muscle there to put pressure on the regime .
I believe in fact that that is the language which Bailers 's leaders understand .
However , there was one thing I could not understand from your answer , so I have a small follow-up question : have we any means of putting economic pressure on the regime in Croatia ?
Within this global context , I think I have underlined on two or three occasions the concept of conditionality .
I have also emphasized the fact that the countries of southern Europe which are not linked to the Union by an association agreement , notably Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia , would now be submitted to this conditionality , which naturally also implies the area of economic relations .
Mr President .
Croatia is a young democracy that is also suffering from the aftermath of a war .
There is certainly much there to be improved , but I think it is inadmissible to lump it in with Byelorussia , a dictatorship .
I should like mainly to say at this point that the President of the Council has rightly drawn attention to the human and minority rights - I am myself a great supporter of minority rights - but he has done this on a day when one of the largest Member States of the European Union has declared that it would not ratify the Minorities Convention of the Council of Europe .
We must watch out that we do not fall into an ambiguous situation here and apply double standards .
I believe it is above all important that we soon give Croatia associate status - I was the rapporteur for the association agreement with Slovenia .
Even the Slovenes , who had a period of tension with Croatia , have said that it would be in their own interests for Croatia to be bound to the EU .
Briefly I will say that I entirely share the approach of the honourable Member in making a distinction , which also exists in the eyes of the Council , between Bailers and Croatia .
I think we are agreed on this .
Thank you , Mr Wohlfart .
As the author is not present , Question No 11 falls .
Mr Wohlfart , you and I between us have created a precedent , which is a dangerous thing to do .
As it turns out , Mr Alavanos , the author of Question No 12 , is now with us .
Chronologically and from a strict interpretation of the Rules , this question should have fallen .
But , given that we have made one exception , I propose that we make a second one , and I beg you to be kind enough to reply to the question .
Question No 12 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0632 / 97 )
Subject : Joint Declaration by Turkey and the ' TRNC '
On 19 July 1997 Turkey and the self-styled " Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus ' ( TRNC ) signed a joint declaration which contains the following provisions :
" At any international conference concerning Cyprus , Turkish delegations shall include " TRNC ' representatives .
For this purpose a framework agreement shall be concluded between these two " states ' together with a cooperation protocol of the " foreign ministers ' .
In order to prevent the economy of the " TRNC ' being affected by unjust embargoes , economic and financial union shall be established between Turkey and the " TRNC ' .
Will the Council say whether it will receive any delegation from Turkey which declares that it includes representatives of the " TRNC ' , if and when it is asked to do so ?
What does it intend to do to ensure that the ban on imports of goods from the occupied part of Cyprus to the Community market continues ?
Since we share responsibility for this procedure , I will do the same with regard to Mr Alavanos ' question .
Firstly , on the subject of the Cypriot question , the Union is pursuing two objectives which are both clear and distinct .
On the one hand it is involved in the Cypriot question in accordance with the resolutions of the United Nations Security Council aiming for a bi-zonal federation with community aim and , on the other hand , it is working towards the membership of Cyprus in the European Union .
For its part , the Presidency remains determined to contribute significantly to the search for a solution to the Cypriot question .
I would like to note to the honourable Member that the Presidency recently made a visit to Athens and Ankara at the end of August .
The Presidency 's representative for Cyprus will closely follow the daily development of the situation .
In this context , allow me , Mr President , to strongly assert that the European Union only recognises one government , that of the Republic of Cyprus , naturally .
With regard to exchanges with the northern part of Cyprus , let me remind you of the ruling of the European Court of Justice on 5 July 1994 confirming that certificates coming from the north of Cyprus cannot be accepted .
In view of the realization of a customs union with Turkey , the Council and the Commission are committed to showing vigilance in order to avoid any misappropriation of trade or other violation of community benefits , including recourse to the case law of the Court to which I have just referred , which would result from the prevailing situation in the northern part of Cyprus .
The effective implementation of the Association Council agreement , signed between the Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs and the self-proclaimed authorities of northern Cyprus on 7 August last , means that the situation would need to be seriously reconsidered and would have , in any case , more general political implications as I have just explained .
Mr President , I would like to thank you for having created a precedent and for having thus enabled my question to be debated , and for the wisdom you and the President-in-Office have shown when tackling this issue .
I would also like to thank the President-in-Office for the full and very positive answer that he gave to my question .
I would like to take this opportunity to bring up a wholly related issue , more specifically the fact that last week Ankara decided not to allow ships flying the Cypriot flag , flying the flag of the Republic of Cyprus , to enter its ports .
That is to say ships , flying the flag of the Republic of Cyprus , the flag of a country associated with the European Union , of a country which is in the process of acceding to the European Union , have been prohibited from approaching Turkish ports since last week .
Up until a few days ago they had been approaching Turkish ports . Do you think that this action is in keeping with the spirit of the customs union and with the spirit of respect for the basic principles that govern it ?
Provided more information is obtained by the appropriate departments , if what we have just been told turns out to be correct , this would be completely unacceptable .
Question No 14 by Christine Oddy ( H-0638 / 97 )
Subject : Sri Lankan assassination
Is the Council aware of the assassination of Mr A. Thanqathurai , Member of Parliament in Sri Lanka and a leading official of the Tamil United Liberation Front ( TULF ) , an organization committed to non-violence in politics ?
What moves will the Council take to press for a peaceful solution to the escalation of violence in Sri Lanka ?
As President-in-Office of the Council I take note of the constant interest of the honourable Member regarding the situation in Sri Lanka , especially with regard to the respect , or rather lack of respect , for human rights .
However , the Council was not aware of the tragic and deplorable events which the honourable Member mentions in her question .
Concerning the position of the European Union on the situation of civil war in Sri Lanka , the honourable Member could usefully refer to the replies to questions that she herself raised during the sessions of last May and July .
I thank the President-in-Office for his kind remarks and concern .
However , the situation is not getting any better .
There are atrocities on both side all the time and the civilian population is being squeezed .
Would the President-in-Office use his good offices to try to facilitate some kind of high level political peace process , perhaps using the offices of Mary Robinson who is now human rights representative for the United Nations ?
Following the reply to Mrs Oddy 's question I have just noticed that nearly all of the issues tackled today , whether at the level of statements , or through questions that are put to me for reply , deal with violence , terrorism and non-respect of human rights .
I find this most distressing .
Concerning Mrs Oddy 's proposal to consider the possibility of putting Mary Robinson in charge of a special mission aimed at promoting a rapprochement between the two sides and to put an end to the conflict which is raging in the country , I am completely open to this proposal .
I will , moreover , be meeting Mrs Robinson in my role as President-inOffice of the Council during the annual session of the United Nations in New York .
This will be one of the subjects of the meeting .
Thank you for your proposal .
Question No 15 by Richard Howitt ( H-0646 / 97 )
Subject : Regional representation at meetings
Can the Council specify on how many occasions and on which issues regional levels of government have been represented at Council meetings rather than central government since the ratification of the Maastricht Treaty ?
Given the current moves in the UK towards devolution for Scotland and Wales and also the proposed establishment of regional chambers in England , can the Council confirm that it welcomes participation at its official meetings by representatives from the regions instead of those from central government ?
My reply is the following .
Without prejudice to article 146 , first paragraph of the EC treaty which foresees that the Council is made up of one representative at ministerial level from each Member State , if there is a minister who is skilled at advising the government of his state and the rules relating to quorum are met which , as you know , demand the minimum presence of the Council to be able to proceed to a vote , then it is for each member of the Council to make up his delegation in the way which seems most appropriate to him .
Consequently , on a ministerial level , article 146 stipulates that a Member State can be represented by a regional minister , provided of course that he is skilled at advising the government of the Member State in question .
I do not think I listed as much a detail in that answer as perhaps I hoped for when I first put the question .
We know of course that both the Belgian and German members of the European Union have at the very least put forward ministers from regional government from within their own country at Council meetings .
An exercise should perhaps be conducted in order to enumerate the number of occasions that is taking place with those Member States or with others to demonstrate that regional government can play a role in the European to bring our decisions closer to the citizen and to improve our decision-making .
In the context of that and of my question , which I notice the President-in-Office did not refer to , would he now welcome the decision which has now taken place in Scotland through the referendum to support a Scottish Parliament ?
There will be a referendum in Wales tomorrow when the people will have a chance to decide to set up their own Assembly .
Will he join me in welcoming that and will he agree with me that this demonstrates that countries and regions of the UK are finally taking their places in a Europe of the regions ?
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his very full answer .
As the only Scottish Member present and one who voted the double Yes in the referendum last week , I should like to say that we are particularly interested , in particular as it concerns one area which he did not mention , namely fishing .
Three-quarters of the United Kingdom 's catch is landed in Scotland .
Fishing is one of the powers which will be devolved to a Scottish Parliament .
So the situation will be that in agriculture and fishing the powers will be devolved from the national parliament to the Scottish Parliament .
So what would the President-in-Office think about a Scottish fisheries minister - who would not necessarily be of the same party as the UK Government - going to Fisheries and Agriculture Councils ?
Thank you very much , Mr McMahon .
Mr Wohlfart may now reply to Mr McMahon 's question , if he would like to do so .
What an interesting question !
I must admit that I am not a fisherman , but I think that the question goes further than fishing for pleasure .
If an arrangement exists between the national government and the future regional government , why not ?
If there is a transfer of power in favour of our future Scottish colleague who will be in charge of fishing , there will not be a problem , even if he belongs to a different party from the prime minister .
I do not know .
Anyway , it is the rules of democracy that will apply .
Question No 16 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0648 / 97 )
Subject : The Czech Republic 's accession to the EU
Despite its Europe Agreement and efforts to accede to the EU , the Czech Republic intends to continue preventing foreigners , including EU citizens , from acquiring real estate and also to exclude EU citizens from the privatization of agricultural property .
How does the Council Presidency view this , especially as different conditions have been imposed on Slovenia in the association agreement , and how does this attitude fit in with the pre-accession strategy ?
The honourable Member 's questions regarding the possibility of foreigners acquiring property and agricultural land in the Czech Republic have been dealt with during the negotiations aimed at concluding a European association agreement with this country .
At the request of the Czechs , the Community had accepted the inclusion , in the chapter devoted to the right of establishment ( article 45 and following ) , a certain number of exceptions to the general principle of treatment of nationals that the Czech Republic must grant to Community companies and nationals .
Thus the possession , use , sale and rent of property will form part of the dispensations of annexe 16b granted to the Czech Republic until the end of the transition period and the implementation of the agreement .
As far as the purchase and sale of agricultural land and forest is concerned , it figures amongst the dispensations of annexe 16c , which are permanent in character .
It should be noted , moreover , that similar clauses figure in the European agreements concluded with other eastern and central European countries .
In as far as prospects for the membership of the Czech Republic to the Union are concerned , the necessary decisions on the whole of the enlargement process will be taken , according to the conclusions of the Amsterdam Summit , by the Luxembourg European Council next December , on the basis of a detailed report by the General Affairs Council on the recommendations regarding requests for membership , as well as on the basis of Agenda 2000 .
The Council notes the honourable Member 's remarks and will make sure they are taken into account during the process of negotiation of new members .
Thank you , Mr President , for the very precise answer .
I just want to say that in Slovenia a special regulation has been passed with the association agreement , and I believe that a regulation mentioned during the accession negotiations can hardly take second place to the association of Slovenia .
One should not operate with two sets of laws here .
That was the first point I wished to mention .
The other is the specific question of whether one or more Member States had mentioned this point in the Council , or if that will happen only in Luxemburg .
With regard to Slovenia , a different solution has been applied .
Secondly , concerning the Czech Republic and other countries which have signed association agreements , the Council 's opinion is that the problems are similar but that they appear in different contexts .
Consequently , they call for different solutions with regard to content .
I think this is my first element of appraisal .
With regard to the question of whether I know if other delegations have already brought up the problem that you mention in your supplementary question within the General Affairs Council , I must admit that I do not attend all of the General Affairs Councils .
Nevertheless , as far as I know , the problem has not yet been raised .
As the author is not present , Question No 17 falls .
Question No 18 by Bertel Haarder ( H-0658 / 97 )
Subject : Fraud in connection with the EU 's financial interests
The Member States are required to provide information about irregularities in connection with the administration of the EU 's financial interests and it is their responsibility entirely to recover unduly paid sums .
Experience shows , however , that the Member States are not fulfilling their obligation to recover such sums .
How does the Council explain the fact that only one third of the sums involved in fraud cases prior to 1993 have so far been returned to the EU and is this not in contempt of Article 209a of the Treaty ?
Will the Council ensure that there are no impediments to prevent the Commission using every means available to recover the sums owed ?
The situation we are in is quite ludicrous .
The Council has again and again spoken of how we should combat fraud in the Union , and then it transpires that nearly all the States do not help to combat fraud and that they do not help to pay back to the Union the money which has been wrongfully paid out .
I am asking the question because I know that Commissioner Anita Gradin feels very isolated in this matter .
She does not feel that she gets help from the Council and so I would like to ask you , Mr Wohlfart : will you promise to take the matter up at some time or other during the Luxembourg Presidency , to speak sternly to the Ministers , and to ask them to go home and get the money paid back to the Union which they owe .
That is the least one can ask if one wants to talk at all about combatting fraud .
Mr Haarder somewhat overestimates my ministerial capacities for tax recovery .
Nevertheless , I will endeavour to satisfy him as regards the Council 's intentions because it is a question which I believe is of interest not only to the European Parliament and the Commission but also to our taxpayers .
I would first of all like to refer to the conclusions passed by the Ecofin Council .
I have the document with me , and I can assure Mr Haarder that it contains the elements which should , in part , satisfy him .
But as time is pressing , I am not going to read it now .
However , I can hand it over to Mr Haarder whilst reminding him that our Luxembourg Prime Minister , Mr JeanClaude Juncker , is also Minister of Finance .
I know him and he will not hesitate to make the problem of fraud recovery one of his main themes , especially as he has just put a Luxembourg Member of Parliament in charge of drawing up an exhaustive report on tax fraud in our country .
Question No 19 by Concepció Ferrer ( H-0670 / 97 )
Subject : Respect for social standards
The Dutch Social Affairs and Labour Minister , Ad Melkert , suggested that the EU Social Affairs and Labour Ministers might hold a meeting with their Asian counterparts in Geneva two days before the June Council meeting , with a view to discussing the question of respect for social standards and the extension of WTO control procedures in accordance with the Singapore agreements .
Did this meeting take place ? If so , what was the outcome ?
I can inform the honourable Member that in his capacity as President of the Employment and Social Affairs Council , Minister Ad Melkert did indeed meet representatives of certain Asian countries on the fringes of the ILO conference in Geneva on 10 June 1997 .
The main theme of the exchange of views that took place on this occasion was that of respect for international work standards .
Mr Melkert reported on these discussions to his colleagues during the Council of 27 June and underlined the usefulness of such contacts .
It was agreed that such meetings should be pursued in the future .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , thank you for your answer .
Bearing in mind that this Parliament still considers ( as it has always done ) that it is important to comply with the minimal social guidelines recommended by the International Labour Organization , and insofar as these social guidelines are linked to respect for fundamental rights , the freedom to form trade unions , and the abolition of compulsory and child labour , I would beg that we should encourage this discussion . We should not be satisfied simply with information and exchanges of opinion , but a decided effort should really be made .
We need to do this in order to adhere to one of our basic objectives , which is to encourage respect for human rights and defend the European social model . Nor should we forget to defend the jobs of many of our workers , because this is the reason - one of the reasons - for the delocalization of our companies .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 20 and 21 lapse .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.00 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Green paper on commerce
The next item is the report ( A4-0254 / 97 ) by Mr Garosci , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission 's Green Paper on commerce ( COM ( 96 ) 0530-C40646 / 96 )
Mr President , I have an evening all to myself - or rather , all for commerce - and I think it deserves this special sitting devoted to the distribution system and the Commission 's Green Paper .
The Green Paper on commerce was in fact completed at the end of 1996 after almost two years of preparation .
It is an important document , for two reasons especially : it is the first comprehensive text by the European institutions on a sector which has always been underestimated historically and poorly understood in all its forms , a sector which has given and can give much to the economy and society , and which deserved to have its substance and potential tackled and analysed earlier . Undervaluing it has meant the loss of vast entrepreneurial and employment opportunities .
A few figures suffice to remind us of the value of commerce .
It is the second largest provider of jobs in the European Union , with 4.5 million commercial business , one third of all European businesses , 95 per cent of which have less than 10 employees , 22 million direct jobs , 16 per cent of the European workforce , 55 per cent of employees in the retail sector are women , 3.4 million retail businesses employ 15 million people , 1.1 million wholesale businesses with 7 million jobs , and 13 per cent of the value added of the European economy .
The Green Paper is the result of the political and executive attention paid to commerce since 1994 , with greater involvement of the Community institutions , which had previously been more concerned with other economic sectors and larger companies , certainly not concentrating on commerce and small and medium-sized firms .
Commerce is actually more concentrated in small and medium-sized firms and it is thanks to the growing attention and commitment of DG XXIII that a document has finally been produced which both analyses and evaluates the substance and the opportunities for the second most important economic sector in the European Union .
Precisely because of its responsibilities ( commerce , tourism , small and medium-sized businesses ) , DG XXIII needs to be strengthened , just as the sectors it deals with are being strengthened , to maintain increasingly continuous contact with the indispensable consultative structures which represent commerce - the Economic and Social Committee , the Commerce and Distribution Committee - and also to be in a position to expand its own number of participants in order to allow every state and every commercial formula to be represented in Europe in this highly important sector for the economic and social future .
It is an indisputable fact that few other sectors are as valuable to society as commerce .
Historically the community has always congregated in the cafés and shops , and there is still an extraordinary vitality in historic centres and commercial centres today .
Hence the need , recognized in the Green Paper , to monitor and devote attention and resources to all the various forms of commercial distribution
In the last analysis , it will be up to consumers to choose their own sales outlets from amongst the various opportunities that the market offers : small , medium-sized or large , specialist or multi-specialized , traditional or selfservice , local shops or out-of-town shopping centres .
Their choices derive from their differing social composition : young , old , families , singles , etcetera .
The duty of commerce is to offer a response to all these requests , seeking to anticipate and interpret changes in consumer preference , because the final consumer is entitled to the whole range of distribution formulae .
I will rapidly list the sectors commerce is involved in and for which commerce should speak up for itself .
I am thinking of the association between commercial operators , medium-sized and small in particular , of a better relationship between wholesale and retail , of the way the branded goods industry operates , of the general role of industrial and agricultural production , of the synergy with tourism and services , of the developing technology , of the spread of electronic commerce , of the international context and the importance of trading companies , of the recovery of historic centres with more appropriate town planning , of environmental protection - also through more efficient packaging and logistics systems - of direct sales , of fair and reliable commerce , of the growth in new and modern forms of commercial , franchising , mail order sales and so on .
With the Green Paper on commerce all the public and private institutions and the direct players in the market , large and small , were invited to take part in discussion to lead , within two years , to the completion of a final white paper .
The governments of the Member States , in their different ways , and naturally upholding the principle of subsidiarity , must be the first to adopt the suggestions of the Green Paper to standardize , where possible , and set up a comprehensive programme for their country 's commercial system .
If the economic and social changes already in progress are not enough , tomorrow , or at the latest the day after tomorrow , they must begin to think in terms of the single European currency , an instrument which will be successful only if it is fully taken up and supported in time in the commercial universe .
The European citizen and consumer will not discover the Euro at the bank , but rather in the shops , the supermarkets , the travel agencies , the restaurants , and wherever there is a businessman , an office worker , a cashier able to explain the way the single currency works .
And to the extent that they can shorten the time it takes to understand the Euro , the costs of introduction will be less , because they absolutely cannot fall on the shoulders of the final consumer .
It is for the consumer , after all , that millions of businessmen and their assistants devote every possible effort every day , bringing their products and services ever closer to a changing market .
Mr Garosci , I respected your hard work and I allowed you to greatly exceed your time , as we have the opportunity to do that today , but I would not wish to exaggerate .
Mr President , the scope of the sector has already been described and I am not going to repeat it .
But there are few sectors that are as dynamic as the commercial sector and I would take as an example the development in the field of electronic trade .
In the United States developments are occurring quicker than in Europe .
However , the first shifts and particularly in the record and book trade have already been observed .
In electronic trade there is also a new payment system which must obtain the confidence of both the consumer and the entrepreneur in order to be a success , and without that confidence the entrepreneur will not invest .
Perhaps the Commission can chip in and give that confidence a basis .
With commercial distribution we are talking about a sector full of contrasts .
There are large chains of department stores , there are chains of retail stores , there are franchise chains and self-employed entrepreneurs who keep going through outstanding quality and specialities and which sometimes join forces , for example in purchasing cooperatives .
But these same self-employed entrepreneurs have to deal with gigantic changes in payment systems such as the euro and the electronic purse .
The sector must comply with the most complex legislation in the world in the areas of , among other things , food hygiene , the environment and above all competition together with our national cartel opponents .
We are making cooperation between the last self-employed entrepreneurs as difficult as possible .
Administrative and tax obligations , just think , for example , of VAT , have become almost unbearable .
Everyone acknowledges that a new VAT system would be very helpful to this sector .
Can the Commissioner say whether progress has been made with regard to the problems with the Member States in this field , that up to now have prevented the introduction of the new system ?
There are quite a few of them .
Up to now there has not been a European vision of what is happening in the market and of the greatly changing market position in the field , where producers and the distribution sector itself , in a reaction to each other , join forces in constantly changing " coalitions ' in order to maintain their mutual positions in the negotiations on prices , quality and shelf space in the supermarkets for their brands .
Moreover , with regard to this position of power , and I would draw the Commissioner 's attention to this , I think that , for example , in a country such as the Netherlands , some chains still remain .
So you see that the free competition in the end again results in monopolies , which can never have been the intention .
With the euro everyone can get involved .
But this sector should be given a due amount of attention .
The distribution sector will be the natural place where the Euro will be brought into circulation , where the old currency will be withdrawn and where very many adjustments will have to be made without it being a matter of a working off effect such as with import and export companies , whereby the costs to commerce are disproportionate .
I should therefore like to ask the Commission to urge the Member States from 1999 to make possible tax reserves and extended rebates .
Subsidies are too bureaucratic : there won 't be a penny for the risk-bearing entrepreneur .
I don 't believe in subsidies .
There is also a large social claim on the distribution sector .
Christa Randzio-Plath has already spoken about this .
You see vast rural areas and empty areas of town lose their quality of life through ageing and dereliction , decay and a sense of insecurity .
The economic basis for the sector is therefore lost .
Greatly changing consumer preferences do the rest .
Elderly people and young families bear the consequences .
But perhaps the new forms of distribution , such as electronic trade , will bring a solution .
Reviewing all of this and assessing the pressure to which the self-employed entrepreneur is exposed , I feel most strongly that the Commission pays far too little attention to such an important dynamic sector .
It took years before the Commission even wanted to talk to this sector .
And the sector is constantly informed , in accordance with the Commission 's conditions , in a consultation procedure set up by the Commission , the CCD .
And that was fine when the sector was still in its infancy from the European point of view . But the sector has now grown up .
I would say to the Commission , treat this sector as an adult , treat it as it is .
And the Commission must also adjust its own house in order to be able to serve and guide this important sector , that is going to function in an increasingly European way .
That means that changes should be made to DG XXIII .
Mr President , firstly on behalf of my group I should like to stress the importance of our colleague Riccardo Garosci 's report , which we support unreservedly .
I should also like to say how pleased we are that the Commission has become increasingly willing to give more attention to the commercial sector , as shown by the production of this Green Paper on commerce .
The report being considered today stresses the quantitative and qualitative characteristics of the commercial sector within the European Union 's economies .
The process of intense change which our economies have undergone , and the development of all developed economies obviously mean that the service sector is increasingly important , and commerce plays a key role in this .
We are well aware of this . In my country , Catalonia , we have a slogan that " trade is life ' because it is a motive force which drives economic activity .
Obviously , it is the most important outlet for manufacturing activity , which is also a very important basic element of our economies .
Furthermore , as shown in this Green Paper and emphasized in Mr Garosci 's report , commerce has very important social effects in the area of employment and the promotion of private enterprise , which normally starts at SME level .
As Mrs Peijs said , it is a factor in the regeneration of both rural and urban areas .
I had ten points prepared to comment on , but since there is not enough time to mention them all , I shall summarize them basically in three . Firstly , commerce has positive effects within modern society and in the development of economies similar to our own European , developed models ; secondly , we must help the commercial sector to adapt to a very intense and dynamic transformation ( and action from the European Commission is essential on this point ) ; and thirdly , European Union programmes , especially the application of the structural funds , must be adapted to the capabilities of the commercial sector .
Since I do not want to take advantage of the President 's patience , I have condensed my ten prepared comments into those three basic points .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I find aspects of this report very important and I am very glad to be able to underline that .
First of all , the report draws attention to the importance of commerce as a network of social relationships which should be incorporated into a global view of economic relationships which takes account of the productive , regional , environmental and social angles .
And in this perspective , I would like to stress the significance of the role of local commerce in economic and social cohesion , and state my agreement with the provision of point 18 , especially as regards information for those concerned , however long or short their experience of the meanderings of access to Community funds which might benefit them and which are essential if the weakest links in an indispensable network are to resist the dynamic of the competitive steamroller .
So I also applaud the restatement of the cultural function of commerce , at point 45 , which I believe should be even more closely linked to the role of local commerce in economic and social cohesion , because nothing has done more damage to cultural characteristics as the out-of -town shopping centres , all trying to be the biggest in the town , the region , the country , the peninsula , Europe , the world .
And to be so big , so huge , so vast , they are all the same on various scales , and they squeeze out local commerce and oppress the citizens with their ostentatious arrogance and insidious financial facilities .
For the same reason , and because I think this report is so positive , I fear that it may fail to become an oasis of good sense in the encroaching desert of subjecting everything to financial laws and mechanisms , which is even present in the report itself when it puts forward the idea - which seems to me the wrong way round - that the commercial sector can , or even must , serve as an instrument in spreading awareness and use of the Euro , the single currency .
This wrong way round approach has been reinforced by the rapporteur and other Members in their speeches .
The question is , what is this instrument for and who is it for ?
But later .
On this calm night , let us accentuate the positive points , rare as they are and necessary as they are , until the contradictions become clear .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , we are very pleased that the vast sector of trade is at last being tackled by the Commission in a Green Paper , although the figures mentioned are totally out of date as they date from the beginning of the 1990s .
This Green Paper should be particularly important because of the predominant role that trade plays in the search for new pools of jobs , since it is the second largest employer in the Community .
But whilst the Commission asks businessmen to trade with the Euro , is there not a risk of a cost-benefit imbalance for small businesses , which constitute the majority in this sector .
In fact , the Commission puts individual businessmen , SMEs and large companies all in the same basket , whilst it is clear that the financial repercussions and the difficulties of implementing the Euro with regard to clients , in terms of conversion , rounding up or down and information will not be felt in the same way by such different structures , even though they are all part of the trade sector .
We regret that the Commission did not tackle the question of protection of small businesses except within the framework of relations and co-operation with hypermarkets , while it seems to have skimmed over the main problem when it mentions the equilibrium to be found between the best price for the consumer and the non-disappearance of individual traders in relation to large integrated companies .
In this area we think that every country of the Union , and in particular France , has a role to play in terms of the defence of small traders and the promotion of labelled local produce in the face of the hypermarkets and their central buying , even if , once again , the defence of our identity clashes with supranational community regulations .
In terms of deregulation , it is interesting to note that the Commission starts from the point of a double acknowledgement , firstly that trade must be flexible , competitive and therefore not tied up in overly strict regulations , secondly that such regulation of commercial activity falls within the remit of the Member States .
But it hastens to justify centralised European regulations through the obligation to respect community rules concerning competition , establishment rights and free movement of goods and services .
In view of the desired reduction in administrative charges , notably to the benefit of SMEs , the soft focus maintained by the Commission must be noted .
It is certainly praiseworthy to speak of the role that trade can play in social cohesion , mainly the retail outlets found in overly built-up town centres or in the under-populated countryside , but the difficulty is in finding the balance between this social role and a necessary concentration as an instrument in the face of world competition .
It therefore appears that the Commission is content to note the difficulties in the trade sector in its Green Paper without proposing solutions .
It is paradoxical to ask contributors to the said sector to find their own solutions whilst refusing them these solutions because of non-respect of community law relating to competition .
Mr President , colleagues , the commission has finally produced this long-awaited Green Paper on the retail trade .
Retail companies have long been the second largest employer in the EU .
There are four and a half million retail traders in the area , and they employ twenty-two million people .
But how is it possible that , with unemployment the biggest nightmare in the union area , we are worsening the situation by taking away the better service of the corner shop and replacing it with pollution-making supermarkets .
An irrational structure has been created on purpose It takes a hundred cars to pick up the equivalent of one car load , from outside the city .
The result is unemployment , pollution , traffic jams and dying city centres .
Besides , aren 't the hypermarkets starting to remind you of those special boxes they use for rat experiments , with their one-way corridors and automatic doors ?
The corner shop should also be a part of that famous principle of community spirit .
My proposal is that we start humanising and reviving our cities , rather than kill them off .
Corner shop services could diversify into postal services , computer networking facilities and meal services for the elderly and disabled .
The Union summit conference on employment to be held in November should decide , for example , on a three percent interest subsidy for the small and medium business sector , which gives employment .
Shops are important employers and so they should come in for this kind of subsidy .
Thus employment and the quality of life both improve simultaneously .
The report emphasizes aiding innovative marketing activity on the part of small and medium-sized retail businesses , and supporting regional development and local skills .
We can all be united on this , as it is very important to give guarantees to the regional retailer at a time of accelerating competition .
We must invest in aid to the retail trade through structural funding right away also because the sector employs more women than men , which is obviously right .
In Mr Garosci 's excellent report and in the Commission 's Green Paper faith is expressed in the role of electronic shopping as a way of reviving remote rural areas .
Rural development by electronic means can only be a good thing .
But electronic shopping at the moment favours existing supermarkets , not small village shops .
Mr Garosci 's report also touches on how , when there is a common currency for Europe , it will be just that retail sector which will be affected in the most obvious way .
In a shop you spend money .
When discussing the single currency and its preparatory stage we should not forget , however , along with shop workers , bank staff who will be doing all the practical work leading up to the single currency , and this under the threat of future unemployment We would be taking it out of one pocket to put it in the next if we aided women 's employment in retail and at the same time witness perfectly able women bank employees in their forties and fifties being relegated to the dole queues .
The Commission 's Green Paper on commerce is an important document , too , because it tackles the inexorable onslaught of the supermarkets .
It appeals against the problems of pollution among other things .
For example , the concentration of supermarkets in Finland is driven by the tyranny of big business , where local shops cannot use regional sub-suppliers , but have to order from central firms just like everyone else .
The Commission , however , encourages regional co-operation and condemns vertical development .
I fully support the Commission 's proposal since , if we do not reverse these frightening trends in shopping , the natural demand will not be met .
The uniform supply trends we are seeing now do not grant the customers freedom of choice , and retail as it is cannot grow .
Mr President , the Commission 's initiative on commerce is extremely well-judged , as is the position taken by the European Parliament based on the report by Mr Garosci , whom I also congratulate .
The sector 's significance is demonstrated by impressive figures . It provides 13 % of Union GDP and employs 22 thousand people ( 2.3 thousand more in 1992 than in 1982 ) in 4.5 million businesses , 95 % of which have less than 10 employees , distributed throughout the territory from the great cities to the most remote villages .
So commerce has an irreplaceable role in the economy and in society .
The idea that nothing new would develop is already outdated , even an intermediate stage , pushing up prices to consumers and reducing the incomes of those engaged in agricultural and industrial activities , has proved to be unnecessary .
It is clear today that commerce adds immense value , monitoring the tastes of consumers , letting them know about products and providing them with complementary support on the one hand , while expanding the sales opportunities of those engaged in production on the other .
The Commission 's report also eloquently emphasizes the social role of commerce , saying that it is the means by which people meet , communicate , make contact and integrate , and represents , for many , the only regular source of contact and conversation with other people and the outside world .
The wealth of opportunities and support that commerce alone can provide is impossible to express in a few words .
Certain developments in the modern world , welcome no doubt , still give rise to apprehension - which is expressed - about the traditional role of commerce , notably as regards certain aspects of its social function .
Modern distance selling systems , mail order services , or even large supermarkets , making small local shops lose their relevance ,
It would be a pointless battle to try to prevent these developments , and they do offer great advantages to consumers . Besides , it seems clear to us that small scale commerce will continue to have a role , because proximity and personal service make it irreplaceable .
Recognizing its importance - including political importance , in the best sense of the word - traders and authorities need to join forces to smooth away its limitations and realise its potential .
The traders can develop an even more personal approach to the interests of their customers or , for example , explore wider forms of association , allowing them to buy in on better terms .
The authorities can reduce bureaucratic burdens - in my country , for instance - as well as providing facilities for fulfilling fiscal obligations , credit support , etcetera .
It is especially important to improve the town planning framework as regards suitable location , and restructure support - for example under programmes like the Urban programme , extending urban resources to all , not just the biggest .
In the tourist areas commerce will still be a particular important factor for attracting people who appreciate its presence , for the benefit of all .
The large traders also have great responsibilities to promote quality products linked to the crafts and other specialities of the region , and thus become valuable promoters of its culture , which will be spread to their countries of origin by tourists returning with their purchases .
The report also gives due importance to the unique capacity of commerce to promote border areas .
This is a capacity which has special importance for Portugal , as the border areas - in the interior , with Spain , are the most backward areas and , symptomatically , only have more favourable indicators in the towns on the traditional main connections with Spain .
Under the circumstances , instead of continuing to concentrate on only a limited number of crossing points , it is important to multiply and improve the links between the countries as much as possible , and the benefits will far outstrip the cost of the investment .
This is an advantage which will increase greatly when the Euro comes into circulation and eliminates the costs and limitations currently involved in changing money .
Mr President , when the European Union was founded it was probably inconceivable for anyone to think that we would come to such a debate .
It is only today , as we see the economic effects of the developments in our society in terms of distribution and consumption , that we recognize how important small businesses have been , particularly in the commercial sector .
We certainly need more study of this and of the effects of the growing concentration of large businesses .
As many speakers have said in this debate , small businesses in the commercial sector play a role which is greater than their role in economic terms .
They play a role which is important socially and environmentally .
They represent an opportunity for many people to go into business on their own and to develop entrepreneurial skills which would not otherwise be there .
I should like to quote as an example the town in which I live .
It is a small town in the southwest of England , called Langport .
It is 17 miles from the nearest large town and 12 miles from a town that can even vaguely be described as large .
We have a number of shops .
We are fortunate .
We have three newsagents , five hairdressers and two butchers .
And yet there are proposals to open a supermarket in our town .
Some of the traders favour it .
They say that their businesses are dying anyway .
Others say that the introduction of a supermarket , not limited - as has been the trend in Britain until now - to selling food , but selling many kinds of things , would kill all other trade in the town .
We will conduct an economic impact assessment and a transport impact assessment before this goes ahead .
Yet this is an important example , because it is happening all over Britain and sooner or later it will happen all over the Union .
I welcome the Garosci report .
It is a very important contribution to this debate .
I hope that the Commission will follow the recommendations in this paper and bring forward a White Paper within two years , recognizing the importance of small business and recognizing that it needs our assistance .
Mr President , the Commission 's Green Paper on commerce gives a good analysis of the situation in which European commerce finds itself at the moment . I have criticisms on two points .
Firstly , the Commission assumes right away that national legislation forms the greatest obstruction to cross-border trade .
It is true that the internal market does not function perfectly .
But uniform or harmonized legislation will not remove the cause .
It would indicate more of a sense of reality if we respected the often deeply-rooted cultural traditions .
I do not think that the diversity in market structures and the variety in the regions could be exchanged for a boring , one-dimensional mono-culture .
The second comment I would make is that the Commission wants things to go well in commerce .
I do too .
But is more trade better ?
It is striking that nicer shops are mentioned and are one of the instruments for increasing turnover .
It seems that the motto of Descartes : " I think , therefore I am ' has been transformed into " I spend , therefore I am . '
When buying and selling lead the way as policy objectives , you encourage consumerism and materialism .
The interests of the environment are then pushed into the background .
Of course I support the Commission in its efforts to achieve more environmentally-friendly products and packaging .
But environmental interests also demand that we encourage the consumer to recycle and repair goods .
Finally , I am of the opinion that for a balanced judgement about commerce additional statistical information must be available on the environmental pollution that this sector causes .
I should be pleased to hear from the Commissioner whether he will be including these ideas in the future White Paper .
Mr President , this report and debate are very important , because trade is important to European economic and employment policy , not because of its size -and the impressive figures prove that .
Commerce also a cultural and socio-political dimension in a local area .
The small shop on the corner or in a village is part of European quality of life .
It is often the centre of local life and also has great importance for tourism .
Neighbourhood shops which are forced to disappear from town centres , just like village shops which have to close , create gaps that have the greatest possible socio-political consequences .
The recreation of a better balance between small and large shops must be , therefore , an important purpose of Member States and also the Commission
The shopping experience must not be allowed to disappear from villages by the closing of the last shop .
Everything possible must be done , therefore , to persuade Member States to use the structural funds and suitable common initiatives for the maintenance of retail outlets in rural and urban areas .
In order to understand the importance of trade for European development one must look upon it as a network . , a sort of link between agriculture , commerce , industry and tourism .
I am sorry but those in the public gallery have not yet been informed that they are not allowed to make any comments .
They may applaud or not applaud an intervention , but without extraneous comments .
I would be very grateful if it did not happen again .
Mr President , commerce is a sector with many SMEs that do not always get the attention they deserve and the sector is almost the largest employer and makes an important contribution to the economic and social well-being of many Europeans .
The Green Paper , Mr Commissioner , has therefore not come too soon and especially not as there is now quite a lot of movement in this sector .
There is increasing competition as a result of the operation of the internal market which has resulted in an enormous trend towards concentration .
There are also considerable urban and rural shifts in the retail trade .
It is moving out of the centre to the edge of town and away from rural areas .
Furthermore , there is the imminent introduction of the euro and the advent of the information society .
Despite the internal market , we should not forget that a large part of the retail trade limits its activity to the local market and has to survive there by means of cooperation .
As European employers we must regulate in a European way those areas that need European rules , but we must also leave room for the locally-orientated entrepreneurs who are active in the regions that differ from each other in their structural , cultural and demographic characteristics and therefore cannot all tolerate a centralized approach .
We must ensure that there is free movement , free establishment , harmonized technical and fiscal rules and not forget rules on competition that do not ignore the specific nature of the SME but leave things such as the establishment of commercial areas , opening times and so on to the Member States themselves .
A second matter concerns urban and rural shifts .
In rural areas there is an exodus from the local shop and the arrival of shopping centres on the edge of towns and ugly rows of shops along major roads which has led to the decline of town centres .
The Commission rightly states that commerce can be an efficient means against the marginalization of certain groups of the population and that an integrated policy is necessary with regard to the towns .
In Flanders , the authorities have made funds available for commercial centres in the town centres .
The European Commission should encourage such initiatives by at the very least organizing exchanges of best practice and especially by not blindly deregulating in matters of town and country planning and the establishment of businesses .
Mr President , the fact that in its Green Paper the Commission gives a lot of space to the role of the retail trade on the introduction of the Euro is a good thing .
The rapporteur and other colleagues have explained why .
But adequate account must be taken of the concern of this sector , among other things , with regard to prices and determining the beginning and end dates of the transitional period .
The Commission should also not forget the increased price transparency through the use of the euro , that will make the call for the harmonization of VAT rates even louder , Mrs Peijs referred to this in more detail .
Furthermore , there is the information society which will thoroughly shake up commerce and the relationship with both the consumer and the banks will change .
Electronic trade , new translation techniques , colleagues has it occurred to you , will only be able to be successful if there is confidence in these new things and if they can be used in an affordable way and so there is still work to be done .
Finally , I should like to say a word about the Committee on Commerce and Distribution .
This Committee must of course remain representative for the heterogeneous sector that it represents .
Furthermore , consideration must be given to not only the entrepreneurs themselves but also their representative organizations to let them play a full part in the work , and especially for the SME world , Mr Commissioner , the need is a real one and I should like to hear your particular opinion on this matter .
Mr President , I am curious to know the reaction of other parties to the Green Paper .
In any case , I hope that the Commission will take account of the Parliament 's resolution .
I nevertheless congratulate the rapporteur on drawing it up and I await concrete proposals from the Commission that attest to a mature policy for the commercial sector .
Mr President , it is a pleasure to rise to a full public gallery .
I only regret that the benches of the House are not as full as the public gallery .
If , at the end of my speech , the public gallery want to applaud or even give me a standing ovation , I shall be more than pleased .
Although I do not usually do so , may I say I would be very glad indeed if you received this ovation at the end of the meeting .
As to your other remark that there are not many Members in the House , you know very well that colleagues have been working , just as you and I have been , since 8.00 a.m. today .
I really cannot oblige them to remain in the Chamber until now .
Mr President , I understand .
They are about to miss a great speech , but there we are .
The subject of the report this evening by our colleague , Mr Garosci , which is an excellent report , is a matter of profound importance because commerce , retail and wholesale distribution and retail services to the public in general are great creators of jobs , as has been pointed out by a number of other speakers in the debate so far .
I would like to concentrate attention on paragraphs 10 and 11 of Mr Garosci 's report .
Paragraph 10 states that the distributive trades , small and medium-sized enterprises , suffer disproportionately from over-regulation as a result both of European Community directives and of national regulations .
I would like to expand a little bit on that point .
Large companies can afford to employ all the experts that modern legislation requires : health and safety officers , fire officers , welfare officers - all those posts which large companies create to give employment to highly paid executives .
Smaller firms , on the other hand , particularly small retail firms , cannot afford such specialists .
The job is done by the boss and either the boss 's wife or husband .
We cannot go on adding burdens of this kind on the small enterprises which are the great creators of jobs .
In my country the situation is even worse .
We get European Community directives , of which I can give one example , the famous ' six-pack ' of health and safety directives which we passed in 1992 .
Those six directives specifically excluded the self-employed .
Many small retailers are self-employed .
But those six directives , when they became law in the United Kingdom , were extended to apply to the self-employed .
Not only were they extended to apply to the self-employed , they had added into them penalties , imprisonment , fines and other condemnations which would have made life difficult for these people .
All this was blamed on Brussels , on those wicked people in the European Commission , or in the European Parliament .
Again in my country - I am sorry to refer specifically to British experience - I regret to say that all too often Brussels , the European Commission , the European Community , being used as a scapegoat or , indeed , as a fig-leaf .
I can quote an example of a public house in my constituency which served lunches .
The publican - the manager of the public house - was told by his local environmental health officer that he could no longer serve underdone beef .
In parenthesis I would add that this was long before the BSE crisis occurred .
He was told that he could no longer serve underdone beef because Brussels had forbidden the serving of underdone beef .
In another restaurant in London , of a rather higher status , I was told recently that crêpes suzettes could no longer be served because Brussels had decreed that flames were dangerous and therefore crêpes suzettes were no longer on the menu .
The Commissioner and you , Mr President , are laughing . I can assure you that people seeking crêpes suzettes or the people who used to earn their living making them in the United Kingdom are now out of a job and that Brussels is being blamed .
One of the important things which I would hope that the Commission will take away from our debate this evening is the way in which national administrations - I have talked about the British experience but , from comparing notes with other colleagues I understand it is just as bad in other countries - use Brussels and the European Commission as an excuse .
If we can encourage the Commissioner to highlight this and to protest when he sees national governments act in this way , he will certainly have our wholehearted support and mine in particular .
The Commissioner , who has been listening patiently , may now reply .
Mr President , I would like to thank you for showing special forbearance as regards time this evening and for allowing a substantial debate to be held with substantial contributions from all those who spoke .
The world of commerce will be very grateful to you .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is indeed a great pleasure for me to be here with you today to inform you of the sequel to the promotion of those issues that are examined in the Green Paper on commerce .
I have to tell you that the positive reactions from the public dialogue exceeded our expectations .
And I will not hide from you the fact that I was especially pleased that Parliament decided on its own initiative to submit a report on the subject of the Green Paper .
This shows that Parliament makes as much of this crucial sector of the economy as I do .
At this point allow me to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Garosci , for this wonderful report which he is presenting to us , and for the detailed analysis of the Green Paper that he makes in the report .
The basic aim of the Green Paper is to provoke a wider dialogue on the future of the sector in Europe .
The contribution of Parliament to this dialogue was and is of special significance , not only in addressing and understanding the problems , but also in shaping the basic policies concerning trade at a European level .
Your opinion is indeed especially important for us , not only because , in principle , it adopts the approach of the European Commission , but mainly because it sets out new ideas and new issues for the development of the sector .
During the consultation process we received more than 1 , 000 written replies from national governments , from European bodies , from national professional bodies , from consultants or from individual companies .
I would like to tell you that this enormous contribution with more than 1 , 000 comments and recommendations is exactly what we were seeking . Our wish was to create a large debate , an open debate at a European level capable of revealing the importance of the sector in question .
I agree with the comment that was expressed that the Green Paper does not give an exhaustive description of the situation and of the prospects for commerce .
Nor do we doubt the usefulness of a detailed analysis at an intrasector level .
Our basic objective , however , was to give a brief presentation of the problems that preoccupy the whole of the commercial sector and , in this way , to play our part in facing the challenges that affect its future .
It is also important to point out the lack of statistical data for commerce and the desire of professional bodies to improve these data seemed to be very strong .
We must emphasize the fact that there has been noticeable progress since the publication of the Green Paper .
In October 1996 the Council adopted a regulation for the organization of businesses , in which commerce is also included .
Moreover , Eurostat and my services on the European Commission , together with the Economic and Social Committee , will be organising a seminar on statistics in the sector before the end of the current year .
Granted that commercial activity is linked to a series of more general economic matters , the issues that are contained in the answers are often of a horizontal nature , such as , for example , the need for the harmonization of taxation , VAT regulations and , of course , compliance with the most general rules of competition .
These are matters to which we must give considerable care and attention throughout the coming months .
The trend towards commercial consolidation also causes particular anxiety because of the consequences that this has in the distortion of competition , and these consequences have , quite rightly , been described in the opinions that you have put forward . But very many speakers have spoken of the dangers facing many small shops and of their survival .
More specifically , emphasis has been given to the need to study measures to encourage independent traders to come together , especially in the context of the creation of partnerships or associations .
It must also be said that in many countries , in many Member States of the European Union , this idea of consolidation of businesses within associations or partnerships has proved to be particularly successful , more so indeed when this idea has been reinforced by state authorities , by national legislation and by the governments of the Member States .
The creation of more jobs is always one of the top , I would say the top priority of the Commission and of the European Parliament .
The advice of commerce in this regard is of particular importance since there is great diversity in its structure and operation and it offers employment to many working people , from the unskilled labourer to the highly specialized worker .
In the opinions that you have put forward you have also quite rightly stressed the importance of organization .
It is a crucially important issue for the future of commerce in this rapidly changing technological , social and legislative environment .
The Commission fully sympathizes with the need for the simplification of administration and the improvement of the business environment .
Our recent decision to create a special task force after the Amsterdam Council , a decision which the European Commission put into effect only yesterday with the presentation of the composition of the task force , has exactly this purpose in mind .
Its findings will be borne in mind in the action programme for commerce .
We estimate that this task force , which will aim at shaping a better and more favourable business environment , will be in a position to present a preliminary report at the special Council summit on employment in Amsterdam .
In any event it will conclude its work and will present a complete report at the meeting of the European Council in Cardiff at the end of the British Presidency .
Electronic trade was also one of the basic challenges of the Green Paper .
I believe that its development will be a real help to many retailers in internationalising their activities .
It may also be a vital tool for shops in remote regions .
The introduction of a common currency , the Euro , seems to be the overriding concern of commercial companies and , I would say , with justification .
The majority are against the obligatory legislative regulation concerning the double recording of prices . There is also a preference for a shorter period for the parallel circulation of the national and the common currency .
But correct information needs to be given . There needs to be appropriate organization concerning the introduction of the Euro .
We need to improve communication between consumers and commerce .
On this point the Commission , working together with Parliament , has set up a round table on the Euro with the participation of all interested parties .
And , furthermore , to ensure that the decisions concerning the Euro that affect commerce are taken with the greatest possible consensus among fair-minded people on the finding of joint solutions , I have set in motion meetings between commerce and consumers with the agreement of my colleagues , Mr De Silguy and Mrs Bonino .
Another important issue concerns the survival of small shops , in particular those shops in the sparsely populated island and mountain regions , and also in the centres of towns and cities , where small shops play a vital social , economic and cultural role , a fact that many of you have pointed out today during our debate .
The solution to this problem can not be the protection of small shops from all forms of competition .
However , we need to strengthen their capacity to face just these new challenges .
And this means improved organization , better information , finding ways of correctly positioning small shops in the marketplace .
The pilot programme that you all know about , Emborio 2000 , will be oriented in just this direction .
We will also be organizing a conference on commerce in rural areas during the first few months of 1998 and this conference will take place with the cooperation of the Committee on Regional Policy .
I would also like to emphasize that our policies must contribute to the preservation and improvement of the quality of life in rural and urban areas and in the centres of towns and cities , bearing in mind the particular characteristics of the weaker members of society , especially , I would say , the elderly and people with special needs .
We are now at the stage at which we draw our conclusions and your report is indeed an important contribution in this process .
I would therefore like to once again thank the parliamentary committees that have expressed their opinions in this regard for the contribution they have made and , of course , to thank once again the rapporteur , Mr Garosci .
The guidelines and objectives for our future actions will be set out soon in a communication of the European Commission and will be submitted to the Council , to Parliament and to the other relevant bodies .
I hope that by the end of this year we will be in a position to present a specific programme of action with specific actions that are needed immediately by commerce .
At the same time , however , we will seriously consider your suggestion about the drafting of a White Paper .
And I hope that by the end of the term in office of this European Commission , that is within the next one and a half to two years , we will be in a position to present a White Paper on commerce with the basic legal guidelines that are needed to strengthen commerce , and to shape a better environment within which commerce may play its many-faceted role .
Of course I acknowledge that when the services of the European Commission hear this , they will feel that this constitutes a large work load which has fallen on their shoulders .
And I can see that my director , Mr McKenzie , is already feeling the burden of responsibility for the work that he is about to undertake .
However , I know that all of us who have responsibility for this huge undertaking - the creation of jobs - and for the creation of better conditions for the development of commerce and of economic activities within the European Union , that is to say , the Council , the European Parliament and the European Commission , will agree that , in order to be equal to this great challenge , in order to be able to face up to and to formulate a White Paper on commerce , we need the support of the Directorate General XXIII in this regard .
We do indeed need more human resources and more specialist skill in this regard .
And for this reason I would like to thank Parliament once again for the great support it is giving Directorate General XXIII .
I hope , however , that we will go beyond just words and that we will continue to take concrete decisions on the strengthening of the administrative function of Directorate General XXIII and that this will translate into both human resources and financial resources .
Then our conclusions will lead to proposals for a long term programme of action within the framework of an integrated approach to the policy on commerce .
And I would like to assure you that we will continue our efforts towards the provision of a framework within which commerce will be able to make progress and to participate in pushing forward development and in creating new jobs .
To end , I would simply like you to allow me to mention the last comment by Mr Cassidy .
It is true that the European Commission and the institutional bodies of the European Union are often in the gun sights of governments .
Indeed , they are often used as an alibi for policies that are carried out at a national level or for the weaknesses of policy within the Member States .
I would like to say , however , that we have learnt to live under these conditions and I believe that we will continue to live , so long as we always know that the contribution of each of us is positive at whichever level it is made .
We know that Brussels is to blame for everything and that national governments are responsible for the good things , that Brussels and the institutional bodies of the European Union are responsible for the bad things , but it is mainly the European Commission that is responsible .
We will nevertheless continue our efforts with regard to the strengthening of European unity and we will continue to contribute to better and more productive work , to a more productive promotion of our policies both at European and at national level .
This is , moreover , the role of the European Commission : to serve Member States and to serve the common interest of the citizens of Europe .
Mr Commissioner , I see that , like Mr Cassidy , when face to face with the large number of European citizens in the galleries , you were inspired , and you were quite exhaustive in your responses to the comments of Members .
Mr President , as we are not up against the clock tonight , I would just like to take a few seconds , although it is not usual , to thank the Members who have spoken in this debate , those from the crossparty group on commerce and distribution , those from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , Commissioner Papoutsis for his commitment which is no overnight affair , and not just for commerce but for the whole sector of small and medium-sized firms , and the entire DG XXIII , in particular the commerce and distribution unit .
And thanks to their work , we confidently await a fine White Paper on commerce by the end of 1998 .
Thank you , Mr President for kindly letting me speak .
I naturally agree with our colleague Mr Garosci 's words of thanks and I think that the words of the Commissioner have really put some heart into the commercial sector .
But I should still like a reply to a specific question that I raised , and that was with regard to the composition of the Committee for Commerce and Distribution .
At the moment this committee is made up entirely of entrepreneurs .
In his intervention , which left nothing unexplained , Mr Cassidy outlined what the difference is between small companies and large companies .
Large companies are themselves experts or have experts in every field in house and if they do not then they can afford to call on the best experts outside .
With small companies , the situation is not the same .
If now in the Committee for Commerce and Distribution the entrepreneurs wish to be present themselves and speak for themselves , that means that the small and medium-sized enterprises can articulate their interests in a far less expert way than is the case for the large entrepreneurs .
Therefore in that sector the demand is for representation via professionals and that means experts and so my request that account be taken of this and that consideration be given to reconstituting the Committee for Commerce and Distribution .
I should like to know the Commissioner 's view on that point .
If he is not able to give it now , then I should also be pleased to receive a written reply , but I should nevertheless like to know what he thinks about it .
) Mr President , you have given me the opportunity to come back to the podium and give a clear answer to Mrs Thyssen , whom I would like to take this opportunity to thank for her special contribution in promoting the issues on commerce .
Addressing myself to you , Mrs Thyssen , I would like to tell you that the European Commission fully sympathizes with your views and indeed we are turning our attention even more to small businesses and to how they can take part in all the decision-making processes .
If you are referring to the composition of the Committee on Commerce and Distribution , I would like to tell you that in this case the participation of professional bodies is not envisaged .
What the European Commission , however , is looking to elaborate is a framework within which the representatives of small businesses will be able to express their opinions through the many processes that we are evolving , either in the Member States or at a European level .
In any event , however , you are completely right , it is very difficult , very small businesses do not have the experts , they do not have the possibility to turn to experts to gain access to what we call European involvement in the developments that are taking shape at a European level , nor even to the programmes that we ourselves are developing .
For this reason , therefore , we are endeavouring , by means of all the networks of information that we have either at a European level or at the level of the Member States , to diffuse the information that is required , and at the same time to ask for their views and opinions in a reciprocal relationship , which we have trying to develop over the last three years .
I have to tell you that so far results have been especially positive and whenever we have had the opportunity to talk with representatives of small businesses , either from national bodies or from European bodies , they have defended their demands and their positions in a very successful way , and in many cases have made the representatives of larger business more sensitive to their difficulties .
As far as the Committee on Commerce and Distribution is concerned , however , I would like to remind you that this is made up of representatives of Chambers of Commerce that have been recommended in the European Commission by the national Chambers of Commerce , or of representatives of the trade associations of the Member States .
And in this regard we must hold to certain principles , we must maintain certain frames of reference so that we may have credibility in the eyes of the Member States .
If the European Commission took it upon itself to select representatives of professional bodies from one Member State or another , then the European Commission and its decision , any decision , would be open to very strong criticism , intense criticism , both from Parliament and from the Member States .
In any event , however , I would like to finish by saying to you and by assuring you that our resolution is steadfast to strengthen very small businesses in any way we can , either through long term programmes for small and medium sized companies , or through special initiatives and special programmes that we are developing in concert with the Member States .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 10.30 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr Posselt has the floor .
Mr President , on page 15 of the German version it says that in yesterday 's Question Time I asked a question on the addition of certain categories of nature to nature protection .
My question was , however , on the eastward enlargement , the Czech Republic and the introduction of certain legal and human rights categories into the process of eastwards enlargement .
That is a pretty big difference .
I just wanted to draw attention to it .
Thank you , Mr Posselt .
We will make the appropriate correction .
Mr President , I should like to ask you whether it is correct that the Bureau has taken a decision to turn us into administrative offices instead of representatives of the people and henceforth to keep records of our mileage , train tickets , visits to the various facilities and the trips that we make .
In short , we are supposed to submit our whole body and soul to the administration .
Would you just bear in mind , Mr President , that we are here to represent our constituents and not to operate as administrative offices or keepers of long lists of our movements for the benefit of the administration .
May I point out to you that it is up to our constituents to judge us and not the body of members .
Mr President , we are tending increasingly to become an appendix to the administration , and no longer representatives of the people .
I really must ask you to look into it , as it is quite clear that the administration wants to take over everything , and make us into an executive .
I recently heard that someone in the administration had said that the Members were a necessary evil .
We have no wish to be a necessary evil !
Thank you very much , Mr Habsburg .
I do not know if anybody said that , and I am not going to comment . What is clear in any case , however , is that the Bureau 's decision does not mean that the administration wants to control anything .
The Bureau 's decision simply involves supplying evidence of travel . This is not the first time we have had to supply proof of travel , as honourable Members are all aware .
Evidence is provided for all travel apart from the normal weekly journey , and nobody has ever considered that a threat to honourable Members ' dignity , or an attempt by the administration to exercise control .
This is simply an agreement , which was not made today .
It was adopted in Luxembourg during the June meeting , and the Bureau has simply adopted the necessary measures to implement the Luxembourg agreement .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Yesterday in Oslo the international community approved an agreement to prohibit manufacture and storage of and trade in anti-personnel mines .
Every year weapons of this type kill or maim more than 25 , 000 people , mostly civilians .
There are still more than a hundred million mines distributed throughout 70 countries .
On several different occasions our Parliament has passed resolutions in support of the result achieved yesterday in Oslo .
I should like to thank the Member States of our Union for the efforts they have made to achieve this result .
I should also like to acknowledge the United States ' " constructive abstention ' , in the hope that they may be able to revise their stance .
This result will not compensate for the suffering which these weapons have already caused .
We will have to continue to support the process of deactivating the mines .
But every time the international community achieves this sort of agreement , the world is a slightly better place . Europe contributes to this process , and I am sure that is a source of satisfaction to us all .
Extradition between Member States
The next item is the report ( A4-265 / 97 ) by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the Convention drawn up on the basis of Article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union relating to extradition between the Member States of the European Union ( C4-0640 / 96 ) .
The rapporteur , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , has the floor .
Mr President , we have come a long way since 1957 when it was stated that one of the aims of European integration , then just beginning , was ever closer union between the people of Europe .
Today our treaties aim to achieve an area of freedom , security and justice .
And we have come a long way , it is true .
But our free area relates to the freedom of movement of goods , money and services . There is still very little free movement of people .
In this free area , Mr President , there is more freedom for criminals than there are guarantees that crime will be tracked down .
As for the other two objectives - security and justice - we need to stress that there are still obstacles in the way of true cooperation on the issue of crime prevention .
Mr President , the people of Europe are hampered by many frustrations in these matters .
Their frustration is great and so is their hope that the European Union - the European institutions - will do something about this .
Remember the recent demonstrations in Belgium provoked by the horrendous crimes which had been committed there .
What were the people of Europe demanding ?
For extradition to be made easier ; for ways to be found to enable criminals to be handed over directly to the appropriate jurisdiction , within the European Union .
The same is true of the demonstrations held in Spain after the murder of a town councillor in Ermua by the terrorist group ETA .
Mr President , I have said there are many frustrations , and that is the most important thing to stress about this subject .
Nevertheless , we must welcome this agreement as one step towards achieving that area of freedom , security and justice - a step which does not go far enough and still leaves much to be desired , but which is at least one more step in the right direction .
We are not happy with the agreement , Mr President , firstly because it keeps us within the realm of international public law .
It is a multilateral agreement and , although it is the result of action by the Council , it does not represent an action on the part of the European Union as such . Rather , the situation is still one in which each Member State acts as an individual entity and speaks for itself .
Thus we are still a long way from that single internal area of freedom , security and justice .
We are also dissatisfied that the European Parliament was not consulted during the preparation of this agreement .
We might almost say that we are getting used to that . However , this Parliament will never become resigned to the Council failing to respect the treaty rules and listen to our opinion , as laid down by the current treaty .
We hope that from now on , with the new provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam making consultation with Parliament obligatory , the Council will respond by mending its ways and consulting Parliament about all aspects of this matter , which is of such great interest to the European people represented by this House , Mr President .
Parliament was not consulted .
Furthermore , this is an international convention .
Then why have we said that this is a step forward ?
Because it simplifies the extradition conditions as compared with the 1957 convention , which was established under the auspices of the Council of Europe , rather than between the Member States of the European Union .
Because of the extent of political integration which has been achieved and the degree of mutual trust between the existing legal systems , people are demanding that a solution should be found within the European Union , rather than in external fora such as the Council of Europe .
Among the most outstanding achievements of this new agreement , Mr President , we should mention that the reasons for extradition have been extended , with the required sentence being reduced from one year to six months . Also , it establishes that prison is no longer the only place where somebody can be detained .
Financial offences have been included , for it is important that Europe should have more appropriate ways to combat financial fraud .
It has been established that extradition of nationals must be granted .
The requirement for specificity has been partially removed ; that is , it is now possible to pursue a criminal for crimes other than those for which extradition was sought , as long as those crimes do not entail a prison sentence .
And most important of all at the moment is the removal of the impediment on political crime , contained in article 5 .
That is , extradition can no longer be denied on the grounds of political crime .
Also important is the removal , at least partially , of the requirement for double incrimination in crimes related to terrorism .
Nevertheless , there are also many criticisms of this agreement , which need to be discussed by this House .
Firstly , there are very few proposals to improve the handling of the extradition procedure .
Those procedures need to be made easier , through simplification , and further measures .
The second thing is that a maximum time limit for these procedures is not set , as was done in the 1995 agreement on voluntary extradition ( which furthermore was on a European Union basis ) .
Also , we must point out that the convention allows almost all the advances we have mentioned to be qualified , which goes against the very essence of the constitutive treaties of the European Union , which the preamble to the convention acknowledges .
If there is mutual trust between the legal systems and in the Member States ' laws , then even the possibility that such reservations could exist is incomprehensible .
Mr President , there are two alternatives . Either we are a group of states mutually acknowledged to have equivalent systems to guarantee civil liberties , or else the European Union ceases to have any meaning .
The European Union will be an internal market , a union for customs purposes , but never a true union of free citizens defending the same interests .
Finally , Mr President , the greatest criticism which we in this House must level at this convention is that it does not give the Court of Justice in Luxembourg any powers at all , not even the slightest , rudimentary powers granted by other agreements such as the Europol agreement .
We are told that this question will be examined in a year 's time , but that is not enough and we must condemn it .
So , how do the pros and cons balance out ? Well , on balance , despite everything , we have to support this convention and ask for it to be ratified as soon as possible .
We have to ask that those Member States who have established reservations do not make use of them , or ratify them in a limited fashion . We also have to ask the Council to look at the possibility of bringing this agreement into force before all the Member States have ratified it , if some are particularly slow to do so , applying the same philosophy as already established in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Mr President , my group is going to ask for a vote in favour of this report , with the single condition that paragraph 13 should not be approved , asking the Member States ' Parliaments not to ratify the agreement until powers are granted to the Court of Justice in Luxembourg .
I have said that we do not agree , that we want the Court of Justice in Luxembourg to have those powers . But I have also said that Europe is being built bit by bit , one step at a time , and that this is a step which we must take , in order to build on it and continue to move forward so that , not using the instruments of international public law , but using true Community , European Union , instruments , we can turn that Treaty of Amsterdam declaration into reality , to create that true area of freedom , security and justice , which our citizens demand of us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Institutional Affairs is unanimous in presenting three essentially points to the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
I am pleased to say that two of them have been taken into consideration .
The rapporteur has now distanced herself very vehemently from one of them , much to my regret .
The two points concern the powers of the European Court of Justice .
Firstly , an appeal to national parliaments to make their ratification dependent upon powers for the Court of Justice , and secondly , an urgent appeal to the Council not to leave examination of the powers of the Court of Justice for a year , but to do so immediately .
A third point concerns a defect which was not mentioned in Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi 's report on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , namely the absence of the minimum constitutional requirements for the operation of such extradition requests .
It may not be known to some , but it is an incredible fact , that the most primitive legal guarantees of civil rights provided in every criminal code - the right to a lawyer , a right to instruction on the law , trial dates - are not provided in these national extradition procedures . That means that citizens can be held for months without a trial date , and without an investigation of arrest , and there have been no attempts by the Council to reach an agreement .
I have the utmost regret that the rapporteur has distanced herself from this .
This Parliament has always been an advocate for two objectives : the intensification of cooperation in Europe , and the creation of a European democracy with basic and civil rights .
The way in which Parliament conducts itself in a disagreement is important , and such a disagreement between intensified cooperation - which we welcome - and civil rights is the case here .
The rapporteur has simply pointed out that a number of obstacles have been removed here .
That is one view of things , and obviously we welcome it when obstacles in the way of the extradition process between EU states are removed .
But it is important to keep a close watch lest these obstacles represent constitutional safeguards for the citizen . This not a matter of a few administrative obstacles .
It concerns , for example , the prohibition of extradition if the crime is not punishable in one 's own country , prohibition of extradition of one 's own citizens , or a prohibition of extradition to third countries , without reference to the first country .
All these so-called obstacles represent substantial civil rights .
I think it is right to question these obstacles as part of an intensification of European cooperation , but - and this ' but ' is absolute - uniquely where legal safeguards and legal competency are being created at a European level .
We are facing a conflict which is very , very important .
I think that if we do not stop centralization in some areas , particularly concerning internal security , and demolishing national civil rights and democratic standards in the process , without recreating them simultaneously at European level , then we cause a deep conflict in this issue of European integration .
I appeal to you , therefore , to support this resolution - which is also supported in the main by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs - for minimum guarantees in extradition procedures .
My parliamentary group will not vote for this report , for the reasons given .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unlike the Green Group , we shall vote for the report by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , even though we share some of the reservations expressed by Mr Voggenhuber on behalf of his group .
I shall start , as so often with reports of this type , with a critique of the Council procedural methods , which have once again been completely symptomatic .
When we argue - there is a reference to this in the Palacio Vallelersundi report - that in the European Union there must in the long term be common constitutional development , parallel to economic and financial development , but at the start of this debate we once again discover that basic rules are ignored every time , then this procedural error by the Council shows how undemocratic the Council is , particularly concerning the third pillar of Maastricht . An example of basic rules being ignored is that the European Parliament is only consulted within the consultative procedure when matters are already on the move .
That may change with the Amsterdam Treaty , which lays down the requirement to consult the European Parliament .
As well as this undemocratic procedure , powers for the Court of Justice are also missing , as Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi has already mentioned .
This is not for the first time either .
We complain about it over and over again .
The mere fact that the European Court of Justice is not granted powers is itself a missing legal safeguard for the citizens concerned .
Not to incorporate legal guarantees still existing in national legislation , when elements of national legislation concerning internal security have been delegated to the European Union , only reinforces the permanent , unexpressed mistrust which is felt about the procedures of the European Union .
In my view these points have all been rightly made .
There are , however , some improvements which we , despite criticism , must also praise .
During the debate in our committee we came to a point , however , where we had to make our positions plain .
This concerned the question of political crime .
Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi touched on it , and I shall not repeat it here , because it occupied our committee for weeks .
I want to say quite clearly on behalf of my group that if we are a Community of democratic constitutional states , and if each Member State only acknowledges in another that the constitution it practises and uses accords with basic democratic principles , then there can be no protection against political crimes within the European Union .
One of the most important contributions to this debate is that the Palacio Vallelersundi report makes that clear and records it .
Not only the rapporteur , but all who worked on the report , deserve our thanks for that .
Despite all doubts which we still have , we have arrived at the conclusion that we shall vote for the report , and that is a compliment to Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi for her hard work and also her readiness to accept our criticisms .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , not long ago a Portuguese citizen was sentenced in Germany to life imprisonment for murder .
Unfortunately he was able to escape from prison and make his way back to Portugal .
The request from the Federal Republic of Germany for extradition of the legally sentenced murderer to Germany , so that he could serve the remainder of his sentence , was dismissed by the other Member State , Portugal , on the grounds that there was no life sentence in Portugal and therefore the extradition request could not be granted .
This case precisely illustrates the problem we face here .
Contrary to what the speaker from the Greens has said , this is not about destroying a constitutional state , but just the opposite : it is about building one in Europe for the first time !
It is no evidence of constitutional statehood , if murder is punished in Europe entirely differently or not at all .
We are seeing here once more that we have a large economic area , but a corresponding constitutional area does not follow .
Economically we can undoubtedly trade across frontiers - unfortunately , criminals , even organized crime , can do so as well - but the law has not finalized these cross-border arrangements to any satisfactory extent .
This convention is a very cautious and , many here will feel , unsatisfactory step in this direction , which is intended to ensure that criminals within the Union can still be called to account if they avail themselves of the benefits otherwise offered by the Union , for instance , freedom of movement .
That is only fair .
If I were to criticise this convention , it would be not only on the grounds Mrs PalacioVallelersundi very precisely clarified and which Mr Schulz also mentioned , namely , the unsatisfactory involvement of the European Parliament , but also because movement towards a common area has been inadequate , the convention is full of dubious points , and another Member State , Greece , reserves the right not to extradite anyone accused of having fought for peace .
I can hardly believe that there is so different an understanding of the word peace anywhere in the Union that crimes can hide behind it .
This all shows that we have not advanced very far .
Nevertheless , this is a step in the right direction and it is necessary for this convention to be ratified quickly , so that it can come into effect .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi on her excellent report .
Speaking on behalf of my group , I join her in welcoming the substantial progress contained in this convention .
In a common borderless market , improving legal cooperation in penal law is essential to step up the fight against organized crime and terrorism .
A Member State must not be allowed to act as a refuge for a criminal who can then avoid prosecution and sanctions brought by another Member State .
While the basic aim of the convention meets our expectations by revoking the principle of double jeopardy , by rejecting the deeming of criminal acts as political crimes , by including tax misdemeanours , and by accepting the extradition of its own nationals , I , like Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , can only regret the reservations expressed by certain states .
These might strip the convention of its substance and more especially could suggest a lack of mutual trust between states .
It is quite true that I do not completely share her analysis from a legal point of view , in particular when it comes to the conditions for consulting Parliament , as laid down in article 4.6. paragraph 2 , although I fully concur with her on the need for such consultation .
In any case , the new article k.11 , paragraph 1 of the Treaty of Amsterdam will relegate this semantic dispute to the archives .
I fervently hope that Member States ratify this convention as quickly as possible and that they seize the opportunity given to them to enforce it once ratified .
Of course , the thorny issue of the role of the Court of Justice still remains .
After the agreement signed during the Treaty of Amsterdam , the Council should be able to settle this issue quickly by drawing on the Amsterdam compromise , but the urgency of enforcing this convention for the Union must not be undermined on any grounds , not even by invoking the role of the Court of Justice .
The approval of paragraph 13 of the report , originating from the adoption of Mrs Roth 's amendment , will be the cornerstone of my group 's support for this report .
Mr President , I feel honoured by the presence of Commissioner Fischler , who knows a lot about agriculture .
But I do discreetly wonder where Commissioner Gradin is today .
I believe she was here this week .
Maybe she is still coming .
Mr President , the new extradition convention is an improvement .
The extradition of criminals within the European Union takes too long , there is too much red tape and the procedure will now be quicker when this convention comes into force .
The fact that one 's own nationals , that is to say , Dutchmen by the Dutch government and Belgians by the Belgian government , will be able to be extradited is in a certain sense also an important step forward .
The fact that terrorists will be extradited more easily , or rather with less difficulty , is a good thing and all in all this is a step on the way to the European legal area on which we are all working , at least the majority of this House .
The weakness of the convention has already been set out by the rapporteur , whom I wish to compliment on her work .
I am in agreement .
However , I also wish it to be said on behalf of the liberal group that the fact that the Court of Justice has no authority in this very area where we are dealing with criminal law and that type of case , is a serious shortcoming .
The Treaty of Amsterdam did do something about this , but it should still be improved afterwards .
Mr President , the European Parliament , it has already been said here several times , was not consulted .
In the draft resolution it states that we regret this fact .
I must say that we shall vote for it , but I consider it to be expressed rather weakly .
It is really not reasonable that we were not consulted .
The conclusion of the Group of the Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party is that , having weighed everything up , we shall vote for the draft resolution .
Mr President , the extradition convention between Member States of the European Union , with which we are concerned today , can represent a step forward in achieving that European legal and judicial area which , with the necessary transparency and democratic guarantees , should complete and extend the building of economic Europe , as has already been said here .
Nevertheless , a few comments are needed in reference to both the content and the adoption procedure .
Above all , we need to show our strong disapproval that the Council did not respect the stipulations of article VI of the European Union Treaty , and adopted the convention without informing the European Parliament or consulting it beforehand .
As concerns its content , we sympathize with the objective of improving judicial cooperation in the area of extradition .
But the fact that the Member States are permitted to express reservations about almost all the convention 's innovations will mean that its worth will depend on whether the states formulate such reservations or not .
As regards extradition procedures to deal with terrorism we , like the speaker , regret that lack of clarity in the wording of the agreement , and lack of trust between Member States could mean that collaborating with or belonging to a terrorist group may not be covered by extradition . This would make no sense at all , in an area of freedom and democracy where there is no room for political crime .
In any case , it must be stressed that extradition must always be a matter for the legal and not the executive institutions . Handing over the responsibility for such decisions to governments would violate the individual 's legal rights .
Finally , it is important to work towards an automatic extradition procedure within the framework of an area of freedom , security and law , in order to achieve a European legal and judicial continuum , which continues to respect basic rights and democratic control , and maintains the legal nature of the proceedings , without damaging people 's rights to defence .
Mr President , I think it really is a perverse world we have to deal with here .
I do not refer to the excellent report by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , but to the convention that is the object of the report .
There is no basic charter of rights , no common justice policy , no Europeanization of the internal policies of the Member States of the European Union , which might be the only imaginable constitutional basis for what is happening here .
Instead of at last taking the necessary steps , however , what does the Amsterdam Treaty do ?
It formulates in Article 3 a series of declarations of intention whose legal content is , to put it mildly , entirely unclear .
I admit that the convention we have before us creates some clarification , particularly that the very constitutional rights of the previous extradition agreement are to be discontinued .
This is a further example of how in many Member States the justified battle against organized crime is being so conducted that the basic rights of citizens are being limited .
The K3 convention goes a step further , however , in that it conducts this limitation of citizens ' legal rights by means of an international agreement .
That is a step that no parliament in the world which is committed to constitutional principles can permit .
For this reason the Committee on Institutional Affairs is absolutely right to demand that the parliaments of the Member States do not ratify such an agreement .
So what should the European Parliament do now ?
It should not continuously complain about how it was not consulted .
It has no need to be consulted if it has no opinion on civil rights !
Mr President , first of all we should congratulate the rapporteur for the quality of her report , although some comments are called for .
Clearly , legal cooperation within the Union is improving but we do not have a single legal jurisdiction yet .
We are moving in this direction but are only making slight progress for the moment .
The key aim is to ensure that crimes do not go unpunished while at the same time protecting citizens from arbitrary application of the law .
In this respect , the concern of all of us , the concern that we all have partly in mind is political crime , or rather what has been described as such .
In Europe today , under existing legislation and legal institutions , only assassins , extortionists , kidnappers or those who have committed premeditated murder are really prosecuted , but here political inspiration must not be taken into account .
These are delinquents and criminals who are prosecuted as such .
Let us bear this in mind to improve our judiciary . At all events , let us protect ourselves against crimes committed within the countries of the Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , the extradition convention between the Member States of the European Union before us , which was passed by the Council on 27 September last year , is essentially to be welcomed .
I think the previous speakers have made that clear .
Europe is experiencing ever closer union and increasing citizen mobility , but criminal mobility is also increasing , unfortunately .
The conditions of the previous extradition agreement have not , however , kept pace with these developments and are thus not efficient enough .
They must be improved .
We want a Europe where the citizens feel secure .
So we accept that the proposed extradition conditions are to be welcomed .
But like Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi - whom I congratulate on her wellresearched report - I too must protest most strongly about the behaviour of the Council .
The Council did not consider it necessary to involve Parliament at once and comprehensively in the preparation of the convention - as laid down in the treaty .
For this reason we must consider whether we want to continue to present our demands regarding third pillar agreements only in retrospect , or whether we should not debate how we as a Parliament should conduct ourselves with regard to the Council in order to utilize still better those few rights we still have .
On the content I would briefly like to say that the many reservations the Member States have expressed are particularly unsuitable for genuine construction of a Europe of mutual trust .
Here too I am of one mind with Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi and many other colleagues .
We also agree about the urgent need for a solution to the problem of the European Court of Justice 's powers under this convention , which must be tested now .
After all Union citizens must have the opportunity to turn to the European Court of Justice on legal matters with a European dimension .
Furthermore , it is important to me that the duration of the extradition procedure should be limited and a set deadline should be introduced .
A short duration is preferable for humanitarian reasons and because of the basic law of consideration for human rights .
A clear procedure gives the person concerned the necessary legal security .
Legal security is also the point when we talk about the relationships between extradition and asylum law in the European Union .
Not without reason the Council found it necessary to add a suitable explanation to the convention .
In the Amsterdam Treaty Member States are declared to be safe countries of origin .
It seems to me to be to the point that the joint statements about asylum law in the annex to the convention should now be amended to meet these new conditions .
I now come to my last point on content , which is equally important to me , and I thank you in advance for listening to me .
As the Council recognizes in the preamble , an agreement about extradition can only be applied between states that have committed themselves to the principles of democratic constitutional states and the European Convention on the Protection of Human Rights and Basic Freedoms .
I am quite sure that no state can be expected to make an extradition to another Member State which has either annulled parts of this convention for itself by using article 15 of the EMRR , or where human rights violations are known to occur in police custody or in prison .
I must unfortunately point this out , for many human rights organizations continue to draw attention to it and we regularly condemn it in our annual reports on violations of human rights within the Union .
Mr President , the issue that we are debating today is fundamental to all who realise that , in order to consolidate its position and to be able to fulfil its historic mission in the international arena , the European Union must be a place of freedom , security and justice .
The introduction of an effective convention on extradition will not only provide a solution for existing legal problems , it will contribute to effective procedural collaboration and lead finally to the integration of criminal law , which is one of the preconditions for real union with the obligatory , self-evident but unfortunately undebated move towards federalism .
Since , of course , if this federal structure existed , if internal borders had really been abolished , there would be no reason to regulate the extradition of illegal immigrants between Member States .
There would be an automatic mechanism for the handing over of illegal immigrants to the competent authority on the basis of jurisdictional rules and regulations .
Unfortunately , with the almost exclusive emphasis given to the economic aspects of our progress toward integration , these basic objectives of unification are considered to be remote and of secondary importance .
The detailed and dispassionate report by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi points out the efforts that must realistically be made in the mid-term .
It is necessary to stress the need not to underestimate the role of the European Parliament , which is a guarantor of liberties , of the European Court of Justice and finally of the Member States , which must not abuse the reservations contained in the convention nor refer its implementation to the Greek Calends , that is , postpone it indefinitely .
Mr President , I too would like to add my voice to the congratulations to Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , who has done excellent work . I also join in the chorus of vigorous protest against the fact that Parliament has been by-passed yet again , and as usual our position has been ignored and matters have gone ahead with no consideration of the opinions of the people 's elected representatives .
The extradition issue is especially interesting because it is at the centre of the whole question of the authority and sovereignty of Member States , and is thus part of the general ambiguity currently affecting the European institutions .
There is a clear and absolute need to make progress with cooperation on justice issues - we all agree about that - in a very delicate sector which represents the very core of the criminal law in Member States .
As organized crime gains ground , obviously now transcending national borders , cooperation in fighting it must become increasingly close .
But I also want to urge prudence about over-simplistic abolition of guarantee procedures on the grounds that they are muddled , given that we do not yet have a real and actual European legal area .
As everyone knows , I am in favour of the European legal area , but I also believe that , without a fundamental charter of individual rights , extradition is of course one of the guarantees for individuals .
Because of this I also believe that the central issue of the powers of the Court of Justice cannot be undervalued .
Without clarification of the powers of the Court of Justice it is very difficult at the moment to deny that there is a possibility of undermining guarantees of individual freedom .
Mr President , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left is not united on this question .
Several Members and myself are going to vote against this report .
We will do so primarily for two reasons : partly because we think that the report is far too weak with regard to legal certainty and rules concerning legal certainty on extradition , and partly because we believe that questions of criminal law are national questions and agreements about questions of criminal law should be intergovernmental . That is our view .
This report also supports the restrictions on the right of asylum which are proposed in the Amsterdam Treaty .
We are also opposed to that .
There was a case in Sweden a few years ago which attracted a lot of attention when France requested the extradition of an Algerian citizen to France .
The Swedish authorities refused to do so because it could not be proven that he had committed a crime .
It later transpired that he was innocent and had an alibi for this crime .
I believe that it is right that a country 's judicial authority should be able to decide for itself whether a person should be extradited in such a case .
Mr President , I think we are all aware that we are involved in a difficult and innovative operation , constructing a basic element of European citizenship represented by the legal and judiciary area .
My colleagues have already mentioned the essential reasons , which are obvious to all the citizens , 80 % of whom state security as their number one concern .
I think it should be recorded that the Council is being very active at the moment and a step forward has also been taken in the Treaty of Amsterdam , if you like .
But this activity , which involves not only this convention but others which we will be debating over the next few months , and that treaty , exist within the contradiction , already mentioned here , of progress towards cooperation , but slow , very slow , establishment of a guarantee system , especially the Court of Justice and the European Parliament .
Now I think the serious position to take on the issue is to judge each measure on its merits .
Well , in this case , I think it is important to approve Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi 's report - and I must say it is excellent , even at the legal level - but that does not mean we should not argue our position against the Council . First because it deals with improving the existing procedures of a historic institution , which has too often been used to escape justice .
Secondly , because experience tells us that the most recurrent cases are terrorism cases - at least in my country , but not just there - and I support Mr Pradier 's speech on that subject and on economic crime .
Too often those with plenty of money , and especially the perpetrators of economic crimes , very easily succeed in influencing the country of extradition .
Thirdly , because I too am intensely concerned about the guarantee issue and I think we should all be , because it affects everyone , I want to mention an innovation in the Treaty of Amsterdam : article F calls for the sanctions against Member States which violate human rights .
I believe we need to reconcile these points , and have the courage , not to stop an important train in its tracks , but to intervene to prevent a derailment .
Mr President , I sincerely believe that this extradition convention is a valid instrument to achieve something which this Parliament has long called for and sought to achieve ; to make an area of freedom - freedom of movement - in Europe compatible with the security and protection of its people .
It is very difficult for people who have suffered violence at the hands of terrorists or other criminals to understand how these offenders can be allowed to take advantage of loopholes and find refuge within the European Union simply because of suspicion between states which are theoretically moving towards a high degree of political union .
We are well aware of this in my country , which is why we have wanted this convention for a long time .
Therefore , I am pleased that it now exists , and I congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , on her report .
Now we just have to wait for the agreement to be ratified by the Member States , by means of that complex procedure for which the third pillar is designed , and hope that they obey it in letter and in spirit , and that it will improve the extradition procedure , which is what we all hope .
It only remains for me to say , as so many colleagues have done , that I hope in the future , as well as congratulating ourselves on the content and wording of one of this Parliament 's reports , we may also go away satisfied and congratulate ourselves that it is truly functional and useful .
Thank you very much , Mrs Terrón .
Commissioner Fischler has the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I too would like to congratulate Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi on her report , and thank her sincerely for her work on the committees .
The European extradition convention signed on 26 September 1996 contains a range of clearly defined basic articles , which include conspiracy to commit a crime , political crimes and the extradition of one 's own citizens .
From these articles it is clear that the Member States are determined to proceed jointly against organized crime and terrorism .
At the same time the convention expresses the confidence that all Member States honour and utilize human rights within their penal systems .
As you know , human rights are laid down in the Amsterdam Treaty in a form that can be recognized as expressing their quasi-constitutional status for the Union .
Although the extradition agreement allows of exemptions , the grounds for these are certainly not lack of mutual trust .
Rather , the relevant decisions recognize the sensitivity of certain questions concerning the constitutional laws of individual Member States and allow them time to adapt themselves to new conditions arising from the creation of a common area of freedom and law .
That notwithstanding , the Commission regrets as much as does Parliament that the views of Parliament were not obtained before the acceptance of this important instrument .
It would be nice if a Council representative were to express that regret here .
Views and intentions are formulated in the resolution on the agenda , for which I have great sympathy .
For example , I too would like only very limited use be made of the exemptions provided .
I would like to go into one particular point in more detail .
I fear that the call on individual state parliaments to ratify the convention only after the role of the European Court of Law has been clarified , could have very detrimental effects .
It would withhold from Member States a very useful additional means of combatting organized crime , without automatically demanding a rapid and satisfactory solution .
I also see in this respect a certain contradiction in points 7 and 13 of the resolution .
I wonder whether it would not be more sensible to examine the powers of the European Court of Justice at the time the Amsterdam Treaty comes into force , as it expressly includes the right of the Court of Justice to interpret instruments introduced within the new convention .
Perhaps this would be the appropriate time to examine whether the current instruments , which do not provide for powers for the Court of Justice , should not be included in the future regulations .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.00 noon .
Fourth annual report of the SME Observatory
The next item is the report ( A4-0245 / 97 ) by Mr Torres Couto , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the fourth annual report of the European Observatory for SMEs ( 1996 ) ( C4-0292 / 97 ) .
Mr Torres Couto , the rapporteur , now has the floor for five minutes .
Mr President , 16.5 million small and medium-sized enterprises with 110 million workers in the European Union : these figures highlight the economic and social importance of this segment of European business .
The fourth annual report of the European Observatory for SMEs provides an extensive and valuable overview of SMEs and the craft sector in all the Member States of the Union .
A major objective of the report , which has been produced by the European Network for SME Research , is to provide an information basis for decision-making in relation to the SMEs , including the craft sector .
As in the 1995 report , the main part of the 1996 report concerns the measuring of the effect of the completion of the internal market on small and medium-sized firms .
Given the importance of SMEs as backbone of the European economy , as rapporteur , I welcome the report and appreciate the work put into it .
The 1996 report includes two in-depth thematic studies on " women and SMEs ' and " cooperatives , mutuals and non-profit organizations ' .
In the European Union of the twelve , in 1993 , 20 to 30 % of all the enterprises were managed by women and 25 to 30 % of all new enterprises were started by women , with assisting spouses playing an important role .
At the present time it is estimated that 60 to 80 per cent of assisting spouses work in the small and medium-sized business sector .
Although these figures clearly demonstrate the importance of this subject , it has been largely neglected so far .
Businesswomen are frequently faced with great difficulties , for example , in terms of financing .
Women are discriminated against in access to credit .
Consequently urgent action is needed to remedy this situation .
For assisting spouses the main problems lie in the fields of social protection , legal status and matrimonial , tax and company law .
Adequate social security provisions must be introduced and the areas of law I have just mentioned need to be reformed .
As far as cooperatives , mutuals , associations and foundations are concerned , they account for at least 6.5 % of the number of private enterprises , and thus represent a factor in the European economy which is not negligible .
Unfortunately , little information exists .
The European Cooperatives Statute needs to be urgently approved because it can provide valuable assistance in resolving this situation .
The subject of transfer of enterprises , which is analysed in detail , merits special attention , taking into account the fact that 1.5 million small and medium-sized European firms risk closure and some 6.5 million jobs are in danger if the transfer issue continues to be neglected .

The observatory lists the four most important obstacles to transfer : the valuation of the enterprise , financing the takeover , legal disposals and emotional aspects .
In particular , the high level of inheritance and gift taxes is an important factor inhibiting business transfer in several European countries , so the possibility of reducing or eliminating these taxes should be taken into consideration .
While the fourth annual report provides a thorough analysis of the matter , as rapporteur , I feel the possibilities offered by the transfer of enterprises to their employees has not been sufficiently considered .
Other important aspects are financing and training , which are also dealt with in the fourth annual report .
As regards financing , the positive experience of financial insurance provided by the mutual guarantee schemes and loan guarantee schemes in the United States show that these instruments can and should be used on a larger scale in Europe , to tackle the grave financing problems facing small and medium-sized firms .
As far as training is concerned both initial training and continuous training need to be improved , one important step being the harmonization of apprenticeships within in the European Union .
The fiscal environment also plays an important role in the performance of small and medium-sized enterprises .
The current companies tax system in many Member States still holds back many small businesses with potential for growth by favouring the investment of profits outside rather than inside the company .
A reduction in companies tax on retained profits of small businesses is thus recommended as an effective measure for sustaining and increasing employment .
Mr President , the fourth report thus analyzes a large number of areas which are very important to the performance of SMEs .
And we need to remember that , without them , the economy and employment in Europe could be profoundly and severely disturbed .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Torres Couto on his text on the fourth annual report of the European Observatory for SMEs .
SMEs are all the more important after the Amsterdam Council and Gordon Brown 's jobs initiative emphasizing the primacy of SMEs was included in the final text .
Mr Torres Couto identifies certain problem areas such as the transfer of enterprises , where 1.5 million SMEs are at risk .
An earlier Commission communiqué told us that some 30 , 000 firms go under each year because of this problem , which translates into something like 300 , 000 jobs .
Often the problems are administrative or legal in nature on the death or retirement of an entrepreneur .
This problem will intensify as the single market itself intensifies .
A second problem area is financing SMEs .
The EU 's existence helps exchange of best practice .
Reference is made , in particular , to mutual guarantee schemes .
These are almost unknown in the UK , though prevalent on the Continent .
But I am happy to say that there is a launch this autumn , in London , under the auspices of the small businesses minister , Barbara Roche , of the first UK mutual guarantee schemes , piloted by my colleague , Mr Nigel Bottomley .
These schemes have a high degree of mutuality attached to them .
It is therefore disappointing , as is pointed out by the rapporteur , that the European cooperative statutes have not been established and has the multiannual programme , which was scheduled for 1994 / 1996 .
Another positive move supported by the rapporteur is the reduction of corporation tax on retained profits , thereby encouraging SMEs to invest in growth .
This is another short cut to fast and sustainable job creation .
In this respect I welcome the fact that the British Chancellor , Gordon Brown is slashing corporation tax for small businesses in the first Labour budget for two decades .
This is more than the decayed Tories did for small firms throughout the whole period of their sleazy tenancy .
The fourth Observatory Report produces a highly valuable and in-depth analysis of women and small businesses .
This , in my view , is the great pool of untapped talent .
I speak as a son and a brother of three women in my family who have successfully run or participated in the running of small businesses .
The truth of the matter , however , is that too many obstacles are put in the way of women taking the plunge into the pool of talent .
Recently in my Chester office I listened to a constituent of mine recall the sexism she had encountered in both the UK and Holland in trying to expand her business of producing effective literature for SMEs trading across borders .
A good business idea was being stymied for non-business reasons .
Europe is the poorer for it .
Another constituent woman entrepreneur warns me about the application of good and praiseworthy European legislation , e.g. the pregnant women workers ' directive .
My constituent runs a small business which happens to contain all women employees .
She fears that her small business could be imperilled by a series of pregnancies and the loss of key workers .
A large business would not suffer in the same disproportionate way under similar circumstances .
The solution is not to tamper in any way with the rights of workers in small businesses .
Indeed , I would argue that in these circumstances we need to differentially favour small businesses and their workers through the tax system , especially to avoid penalizing women workers .
Beyond the Torres Couto report , we need to become more active in promoting SMEs in their biggest arena , the single European market , a market too closely made and shaped by the image of big business .
I support the Torres Couto report .
It has many good things to say .
We need to look forward to helping small business to provide jobs for the future .
Mr President , the European Observatory for SMEs has the task of providing the European Commission and other institutions each year with fundamental qualitative and quantitative data on SMEs .
In the last four years it has managed to perform this task more than adequately .
The annual report of the Observatory has in the meantime become a recognized reference document in scientific and economic circles .
Furthermore , the participants in the Observatory have succeeded among themselves in forming a smoothly-functioning network of scientific institutions that possess special knowledge about SMEs .
For the SME world , that means added value that is not to be underestimated .
The report that we are discussing this morning was unanimously approved in the Committee on Economic Affairs and it goes without saying that we wall also support it in this House .
I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur on behalf of my group on his work .
In addition to the general part , the Observatory has also paid specific attention to cooperatives and to women .
These two groups are very prominent and are rightly given special attention .
The potential of each of them is often underestimated and therefore up to now they have received too little positive attention .
Let us hope that the information collected in the report will contribute to changing that situation .
In many Member States a lot of work still needs to be done to give female entrepreneurs more opportunities and certainly in order to let wives work with their husbands under a proper legal status .
The cooperatives must also have sufficient room to breathe .
In my view , certainly in the northern part of Europe , they still have an image that is too ideologically loaded .
That must go , as in traditional business they can also be an effective legal structure .
Moreover , I would ask the Commission when we can expect specific progress with regard to the European Cooperatives Statute and when and whether work is being undertaken on a European private limited liability company , because these things are also needed .
Mr President , the approach of the Observatory , with its dual structure , is greatly appreciated in our group .
I would argue that in the future the frequency of the publications should be maintained , particularly with regard to the general part with relevant figures and basic data .
But the studies that are included in the more specific part must also continue to be carried out on a regular basis .
They provide more in-depth information about a certain sector or a certain aspect of the SME and there is all the more need for them because the world of the SME is not homogeneous and from the scientific point of view is still virgin territory .
I also hope , and I will close here Mr President , that the Commission will continue to support this useful initiative and I would have liked to know from the Commission what the specific future plans for the Observatory are .
As far as we are concerned , we would request that it be continued .
Mr President , it is not very easy to make an appointment with my plumber .
He is a busy man , a very busy man , he has a family firm , he works hard and makes a good living .
But , he fails when it comes to his limited feeling of responsibility towards staff from outside his family business .
He has tried many times and he therefore now keeps things strictly within the family circle .
My chimney sweep - yes , they still exist - is a jolly whistling fifty year old entrepreneur , he enjoys his work and the human contacts and is absolutely not prepared to take on the administrative and social rigmarole involved in having any employees .
Plumbers and chimney sweeps are stable undertakings but they do not create more jobs .
I encountered the opposite entrepreneur 's view of those who do wish to expand during the European election campaign in 1994 , in the form of female entrepreneurs who were not able to expand because the bank considered them to be a financial risk .
The good thing about an annual report is that it can highlight a number of bottlenecks : the financial discrimination , a number of fiscal aspects and the legal status .
This is very worthwhile , because Europe must do things properly with regard to employment in this sector .
The important role of women here is again confirmed by the report .
For me that is not really surprising as women always have responsibility and want to and dare to take it .
More harmonization with regard to apprenticeships within the EU is not a bad thing , but I do not see it as an absolute necessity , any more than the multi-annual work programme in respect of cooperatives .
It seems a bit centralistic to me .
That does not remove the fact that the other recommendations by Mr Torres Couto for the improvement of small and medium-sized undertakings remain and deserve attention at the forthcoming summit on employment and the continuation of the Observatory is very important .
My group is voting in favour of this report .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to congratulate Mr Torres Couto on his report .
We can endorse all his conclusions .
In my speech , I should like to place the emphasis on three of them .
First of all , the status and social protection of assisting spouses .
I am pleased that the fourth annual report devotes a full study to women and small and medium-sized enterprises .
Just as on Tuesday with the vote on the annual report on equal opportunities , today with this report we are pressing for a reform of the legislation on marriage and taxation and the creation of adequate social security regulations in order to offer the assisting spouse better social protection .
It is gradually becoming time for the national governments to pay this subject the attention it deserves .
Secondly , the financing of the SMEs .
The Elise programme was a good project in terms of providing great leverage .
Now we know that the Austrian , Dutch and German governments are blocking a decision on this loan guarantee regulation .
They think that this regulation does not comply with the subsidiarity principle and that their own guarantee regulations are subject to illegal competition .
The rapporteur rightly states that we regret this blocking .
Ladies and gentlemen , with a view to the impending summit on employment , let us put our full weight behind other new programmes for the SMEs .
The European Commission will shortly come up with a new proposal : the joint European venture .
From the annual report of the Observatory , it appears that the Europeanization of the SME forms a problem .
That 's why the Union should be able to help SMEs financially by forming cross-border joint ventures .
This is a project that we as a Parliament must support .
Finally , and this has been stressed on many occasions in the House , I wish to argue in favour of European legal formalities that simplify cooperation between SMEs at European level .
An agreement on the European company statute is essential if we wish to see more SMEs reach their full potential in Europe .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , from all the evidence , attention is being paid to small and medium-sized enterprises .
The great question is whether this attention and interest is genuine or just circumstantial and instrumental to mitigate the real destruction working against a relatively balanced network of economic agents so that public opinion recognizes that some effort is being made to counteract a predatory dynamic .
The report by Mr Torres Couto , whom I congratulate , is positive in its approach , and I want to mention the way it highlights cooperatives and emphasizes the role of women in the survival and revitalization of SMEs .
However , the report skirts around certain fundamental issues like financing , access to credit and the difficulties and discrimination suffered by SMEs in this area , covered by point 15 .
It is true that it is not a report dealing with all the problems of SMEs , only with the fourth annual report of the European Observatory , but I think it could have gone much further , even given its modest objective , and dealt in greater depth with the financing question .
Especially as , ostensibly , SMEs and their financing by the EIB is supposed to be one of the new issues being prepared for the extraordinary summit in Luxembourg , with the clear intention of talking about something apparently new .
Which is very different from doing something new !
Finally , returning to the attention SMEs deserve , the Industry Round Table where the great directors of vast businesses and multinational groups get together , published a study last July on the establishment of concrete partnerships between large and small companies , setting out five rules of good conduct . This is just like a fox which has already got into the chicken coop getting a good conduct certificate based on rules it has made up itself !
I would like to thank the rapporteur and the speakers and identify with what they have said about the importance of this area .
Here we have the potential for job creation .
We know that the disgrace of the EU are the job queues where millions have no hope .
I would like to stress the importance of the very small enterprises of under 10 , which is what I am used to in my type of area - the Highlands and Islands of Scotland .
Let us beg our governments to stop blocking ELISE .
That was a practical measure that enabled very small enterprises to get access to finance .
What we need here are practical measures instead of lip service , for people to be able to start enterprises .
It is wonderful that so many women want to do that in the area of very small firms .
I agree with what Mr Lyndon Harrison also said about the need for differential tax arrangements .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate our colleague Mr Torres Couto on his report .
He calls for attention to be paid to problems faced by SMEs .
The first problem is the lack of management capacity .
A practical example that aims to make up for this gap is the Live Wire Project that has been set up by the Rotterdam Chamber of Commerce specially for people starting up in business , in which banks , lawyers and business experts provide a wide range of training and advice .
Another problem is the transfer of businesses .
The closing down of a business causes the undesirable destruction of capital , knowledge and jobs .
Only the taxman does well out of it .
Member States can promote the transfer of undertakings - and thereby safeguard jobs - by adapting their tax legislation .
Finally , I have a question for the Commissioner : is it possible for the Observatory to deal in a future annual report with the subject of the environment ?
At the informal Environment Council in Amsterdam on 18 April last , it was concluded that the SME , apart from being a driving force behind jobs , is also an important cause of environmental pollution .
I am curious to know the answer .
Mr President , the fourth annual report of the European Observatory for small and mediumsized enterprises is an important subject of debate , providing a snapshot of the position in crafts and small and medium-sized firms and appropriate measures for effective development which can contribute to the creation of jobs .
It certainly has not come too soon and seems to constitute a step forward on some very important issues , for example , social security and the legal position of spouses who own the same company .
We also agree with the rapporteur in identifying the high rates of inheritance and gift tax applied in the majority of Member States as a brake on property transfer , and deprecating the inadequate consideration of the possibility of transferring property to employees .
We also congratulate the rapporteur on his remarks about reducing taxes on capital reinvested , a principle the Alleanza Nazionale sought to promote in government , and we are also convinced that reducing the burden of tax and encouraging partnership between SMEs and large-scale industry would surely have beneficial effects on both the level of employment and the creation of new jobs .
Mr President , Mrs Thyssen has already illustrated the reasons why the Group of the European People 's Party fully supports Mr Torres Couto 's report and she has also stressed some important issues contained in the annual report of the European Observatory for small and medium-sized enterprises .
I think the importance of small and medium-sized and craft businesses in the European economy and in European society is now unanimously recognized so it is unnecessary to expand further on that issue .
I shall confine myself to discussing a few points that I consider important .
The first is that what small and medium-sized and craft enterprises primarily need is not so much incentives of the traditional kind , as a favourable context for their establishment and development .
And I refer in particular to the urgent need - frequently confirmed in this House - for intervention on work-related bureaucracy , regulation and taxation , which represent a brake which threatens to suffocate much of the potential of this sector .
To go further , I believe , as also emerged in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , that a great deal of thought should be given to the subject of training and , in particular , encouraging link-ups and cooperation between the various management colleges in the Member States in terms of the initiatives they are pursuing .
Finally , we would like to support what other Members have already said .
The subject of small and medium-sized and craft enterprises should be the focus of the Employment Summit on 21 and 22 November .
Only small and medium-sized firms can realistically make a contribution to improving employment levels in Europe and it would make a mockery of the summit to concentrate on other sectors and overlook this one .

Mr President , Mr Torres Couto has made a good analysis of the problems and challenges for small and medium-size companies in Europe , and I would like to thank him . As is evident from the report , the role of these firms as employers is vitally important , and continues to grow .
The question is how we can improve working conditions for small and medium-size businesses .
The report sets forth the social and economic problems connected with changes in generation with these kinds of business .
An overblown and unnecessary taxation rate often endangers sustained business and can even end it .
Nothing is easier than killing off a small business , and nothing is harder than creating new jobs .
The unemployment figures for Europe show this plainly .
The report emphasises quite rightly the importance of and opportunities for co-operatives and calls for European regulation on co-operatives .
This is certainly in order .
Co-operatives are perfectly suited to particularly those regions lacking capital .
For example , in Finland many major companies have their origins in co-operative movements .
The EU backs new enterprise in many ways .
The most important tool is structural funding .
This gives support mainly to training , and research and product development .
Unfortunately , sluggish procedures and bureaucracy often prevent small and medium-sized businesses from taking advantage of the support on offer .
The hardest question for small and medium-sized business is lack of money .
Business urgently needs money both for investment and working capital .
Many countries have introduced the system of interest subsidies to support business .
The interest subsidy system is also common , for example , as a means of aiding agricultural firms .
That is why it is worth considering whether the system could be developed to cover small and medium-sized business also .
Torres Couto 's report identifies particularly well the hindrances to small and medium-sized businesses , and makes recommendations on how they can be got rid of .
The results will depend very much on how much Member States sit up and take notice .

Mr President , the fourth annual report and the report by Mr Torres Couto provide a good information base and numerous pointers for the necessary political decisions and measures .
The fact that female business people , in the financial services for example , often encounter difficulties is a great handicap for the operation of a business , especially for the whole small business structure .
The problems of assisting spouses for social security , legal security , tax law and company law need urgent solution .
Small businesses are often family firms .
Legislators should have regard for their continuance and their important role in job security .
This particularly applies to the inheritance of businesses where death duties and gift tax can endanger the competitiveness of the whole European economy .
I think point 18 of the report is particularly important , where it indicates reduction of corporation tax on undistributed profits as an instrument for increased employment .
Capital accumulation and innovation could be greatly increased by this measure .
The state could motivate the entrepreneur to internal investment oriented towards growth and innovation , and thus improve Europe as an economic centre .
Mr President , speaking as a blacksmith who himself comes from a family business I particularly welcome this report .
It shows that new public management is operating here and that with objective processes like benchmarking and best practice opportunities are being sought to improve the situation in many small European family businesses .
There is a trend towards the strengthening of many small businesses in Europe .
When one sees that in 1992 there was an average of seven employees per business , and in 1995 it was six , then one can understand that the small firms are actually the main pillar of the economy and also offer employment security : they do not work a hire and fire policy during economic swings , but prefer one of partnership because they are all known to one another .
It is important , therefore , that training and career improvement are supported , and it is quite impossible to understand how , when that is being discussed , Leonardo funds should be considered for cuts , to give just one example .
Quite the contrary , I shall demand at the Employment Summit in Luxembourg a marked increase in Leonardo funding , because this is exactly what gives currently unemployed young people the means of getting jobs .
I also demand that exporting partnerships should be supported , and finally that cooperation with industry should be improved , as industrial export is the basis for many small family businesses worldwide .
Age transition is also a gigantic problem .
One third of entrepreneurs in these small firms is over 50 , which corresponds to about 6.3 million work places in Europe .
I support the ending of inheritance and gift taxes in particular , when a business is handed on within the family . Also of course , that undistributed profits in the business should not be taxed .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , small businesses play a vital role in the creation of prosperity in Europe .
It is only now that their full role is beginning to be recognized .
However , it is not support in the form of more measures and programmes which is needed , but rather the removal of obstacles .
The report and Mr Torres Couto 's excellent speech highlight , among other things , the brake which high taxes on enterprise represent , not least for transfers .
It is also apparent that it is the smallest companies which are hit hardest and are hindered by excessive regulation .
We need a change in attitudes .
More enterprise and initiative would give Europe the adaptability and variety we need to be able to benefit from the global economy .
It is the small businessmen , and not more politicians in employment meetings , who are the heroes the EU needs to get to grips with unemployment .
And so I would like to say to Mr Harrison , who was unfortunately forced to rush away from the debate , with all due respect to Gordon Brown and all his initiatives , it was under a Tory government that the UK was the only country in the EU able to show a real upturn in enterprise and new jobs .
I think that deserves both our attention and reflection .
Let us therefore create the conditions and demolish the obstacles for the EU to be able to become an enterprise union for freedom , prosperity and belief in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes the contribution by Mr Torres Couto to the Fourth Annual Report of the European Observer Network for Small and Medium-sized Businesses .
As with former reports , this one offers a good overview of the current situation of and outlook for small and medium-sized businesses , and examines their performance on the internal market .
The report comes to the conclusion that completion of the internal market has so far had positive results on economic growth in Europe , whereby there has been strong growth in output in particular , and considerable increase in productivity .
The report also emphasises that those businesses which have most profited from the internal market are mainly small and medium-sized ones , and this type of concern demonstrates the greatest potential for jobs dependent on growth .
The Commission takes the view that the report by Mr Torres Couto raises numerous important questions , only three of which I should like to mention here .
Firstly , the importance of women to small and medium-sized businesses , and the need for measures to encourage female entrepreneurs and assisting spouses .
At the summits in Essen and Madrid the important role played by women in the development of small and medium-sized businesses , the creation of new jobs and the competitiveness of the European economy were confirmed .
The success of these hung to a large extent on whether or not women were receiving optimal encouragement .
The third multi-year programme for small and medium-sixed enterprises in 1997-2000 provides concrete political measures for the equality of female entrepreneurs and joint entrepreneurs .
Secondly , the contribution of social economy businesses - cooperatives , mutual societies , associations and foundations - to growth and employment .
For the first time the Observatory 's network of small and medium-sized businesses has given this group priority consideration , because they contribute 5 % to employment and constitute 6 % of private businesses .
The increasingly important role of the social economy in the European Union is clear from the most recent Commission communication , which aims at making the role of associations and foundations in Europe better known .
The results of a detailed examination by the Commission are contained in this document , which is intended to make the sector better known .
In addition , the document proposes a range of measures that could be implemented at Member State level .
And thirdly , the importance of encouraging entrepreneurial spirit as an important element for the existence and growth of small and medium-sized businesses .
The Commission realises that the construction of a dynamic business culture is of very special importance to the creation of jobs and strengthening of competitiveness in Europe .
Concerning the question raised here on the future of reporting , may I point out that the next Observatory report is due at the end of this year and that invitations for the 1998 / 99 report will also fall due this year
Concerning the main theme for the next report - this time it was the role of women in small and medium-sized businesses - it is correct that it is to be the environment .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , at 12.00 noon .
Beef and veal
The next item is the report ( A4-0260 / 97 ) by Mrs Hardstaff , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on measures to promote and market quality beef and veal and on publicity measures on the labelling of beef and veal and repealing Regulation ( EEC ) No 2067 / 92 ( COM ( 97 ) 0070 - C4-0193 / 97-97 / 0058 ( CNS ) ) .
Mrs Hardstaff , the rapporteur , now has the floor for five minutes .
Mr President , I think at least one representative from each political group should speak after we have heard the Commissioner , and I would ask you to check whether there is time to comply with this request .



The Agenda sets out the reports indicated to be debated from 10.00 a.m. to 12.00 noon and from 6.00 p.m. to 8.00 p.m. , with voting at 12.00 noon .

The rapporteur , Mrs Hardstaff , has the floor .
Mr President , the background to this report , recommending a marketing and promotion campaign for European beef and veal , is of course the steep decline in the consumption of beef and veal since BSE emerged over 10 years ago .
This decline became catastrophic for Europe 's beef farmers and all involved in the beef industry following the March 1996 announcement that a link between BSE in cattle and CJD in human beings could not be ruled out .
This arose , as tragically , a small number of younger people had contracted CJD - normally a disease of old age .
Many measures have been taken , both in the UK and at EU level to address this problem , not least the continuing export ban on British beef , hopefully soon to be relaxed as a result of the many measures taken and much stricter enforcement of feeding and hygiene regulations .
Parliament agreed some months ago on measures for the identification of herds and a meat-labelling scheme , drawing on the information on the cattle database now being established , where it does not already exist .
In addition , the new British Government has called on all EU Members to implement the regulations now in force in the UK for the removal of specified bovine offals .
Nevertheless , the beef market remains very depressed and large sums of public money from the agriculture budget are being spent on taking good-quality beef and veal into intervention storage .
If more beef and veal is consumed within the EU and more exported to third countries , a great deal of public money can be saved in the long term and the European beef market will again be able to achieve some kind of equilibrium between supply and demand .
This is why the Commission brought forward proposals for a marketing campaign and requested speedy consultation with the European Parliament , so that they can be implemented as soon as possible .
In my report I suggest that the definition of quality beef should be widened from its previous , very restricted definition of a limited number of cuts and carcase types .
Quality should include all beef carcase types , including cheaper cuts , providing that they can fulfil the criteria of food safety using the labelling system to which I have already referred .
I also propose that national organizations with expertise and knowledge of local market conditions should be used to carry out the promotion .
This was widened in the Committee on Agriculture to include equivalent regional organizations also .
Amendments from the Committee on the Environment strengthened the consumer aspects of this campaign , stressing that good consumer information should be at its core .
I should like to thank colleagues from both committees for their helpful amendments .
If we are to persuade Europe 's consumers to eat more beef and veal and to sell more beef outside the EU , we must ensure that sales are increased , not because of clever marketing , but because purchasers have wellfounded confidence in the quality of the product .
They must be reassured that all the necessary measures really are in place to ensure that they are buying good wholesome food .
The proposed labelling and European logo for quality beef must be a cast-iron guarantee that this is the case and that lessons really have been learned from the recent crisis .
This is something on which this House can unite today in passing on its opinion to the Commission and to the Council .
Mr President , on this occasion the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has recommended that the legal basis of article 43 alone should be contested , and that there should be a proposal that the legal basis of draft b ) of the first paragraph of article 129a should be added to the basis of article 43 , on an equal footing .
The reason is that draft b ) of the first paragraph of article 129a establishes the measures - the concrete actions - designed for the protection of consumers to which the rapporteur has referred .
It is absolutely true , Mr President , that the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and this House are both aware that traditionally the appropriate legal basis for any regulation or action in the agriculture area is article 43 , to the exclusion of all others .
And that the jurisprudence of the Court has regularly established that the reason for this is not just that article 43 represents a lex specialis as regards any other legal basis which could be employed , but also because in article 43 - with recourse only to article 43 , also in agreement with the Court 's jurisprudence - all the other legal interests are taken into account , such as the protection of health or consumers .
There was a well known sentence about the conditions concerning egg-laying hens , in 1988 .
That is one of the key questions .
Nevertheless , Mr President , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights thinks that , for the second time , the traditional approach to this legal basis should be changed .
This opinion was arrived at singlemindedly , taking into account the events of the bovine spongiform encephalopathy crisis and the measures taken since it started , and the report which this House approved .
It was clearly established in that report that it was possible to have recourse to article 100a , especially in matters of harmonization and that , above all , there should be consultation , participation and fuller democratic control on the part of this Assembly .
I should remind you that that criterion has been respected by the Commission , represented at the time by its President , Mr Santer , and subsequently in concrete actions such as the two rulings recently sent to this House .
In this case , Mr President , once again we call not for article 100a , because this is not a question of harmonization , but for article 129A .
The reason is simply that since this crisis started , there has been a re-shuffle in the hierarchy of legal interests which require protection .
Now it is not agriculture and agricultural interests which should have priority .
Currently , until consumers ' confidence is re-established , the interest which deserves priority is consumer protection .
Therefore , by strictly applying the criteria established by the Court of Justice in its interpretation of the appropriate legal bases , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights believes that it should be clearly established that those are the prevailing interests , with the addition of the legal basis . I hope that Parliament agrees with us , as we believe we have the support of the Commission .
Mr President , there is one thing I cannot understand .
The chairman requested a detailed discussion and then we learn that Commissioner Fischler will no longer be present this evening after 6.00 p.m.
I really do not know what this alteration to the agenda is about .
We will be talking to the birds , our arguments will not heard and we shall receive no replies .
For this reason I really must ask for a little more flexibility , because I have the following questions : is the Commission really prepared to undertake a tightening of the registration code regulations ; and are there any new proposals , Mr Commissioner , over and above what was agreed in Council ?
The discussion about whether we should rearrange the agenda will last longer than if we extend it .
I will only accept points of order .
I am not going to deal with the question , because this is not the time for questions .
I have already said that the Agenda specifies that the debate starts at 10.00 a.m.and continues this evening , and that there will be voting at 12.00 noon , as has already been approved by this House .
Therefore , the debate will be adjourned at noon , as is traditional .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , Union for Europe , I quote the first paragraph of Rule 130 : " A debate may be closed before the list of speakers has been exhausted on a proposal from the President or at the request of a political group - my group is requesting it - or at least twenty-nine Members ' . I do not think such an important regulation can be put back to tomorrow morning , when there is only one report on the agenda with the likelihood that there will be very few of us here to vote indeed .
We are discussing legislation which will determine the fate of breeders , traders and consumers of meat , and which is a response to the widespread anxiety caused by BSE .
So I think Members who have prepared speeches should regard them as explanations of vote and the vote should be taken immediately after Commissioner Fischler has spoken .
You have moved application of Rule 130 ( 1 ) .
I shall call one speaker in favour of the motion and one against . Then we shall move to the vote , as planned .
Mr President .
I should like to express my opposition to this proposal .
We really cannot adjourn the debate in Parliament just because there are organizational problems , or because of the Commissioner 's personal engagements , which he may not be able to put off .
This is an important discussion .
In the Committee on Agriculture there was considerable amendment to the Commission 's proposal .
That simply must be discussed .
We must also discuss if we should perhaps refer it back to the Committee , because the labelling directive , to which this proposal refers , still needs revision .
All this must be discussed here and amongst the Members .
It is impossible just to vote on it following the Commissioner 's speech or statement .
I am emphatically against it and I ask my colleagues to reject this motion .
Thank you , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
Does anybody wish to speak in favour of Mr Santini 's motion ?
Mrs Poisson has the floor to support Mr Santini 's motion .
Yes , I support Mr Santini 's motion because even beyond the debate , as important as it is , I believe that the situation facing livestock farmers and consumers following the BSE crisis largely justifies the ending of the debate and a vote on the report today , Mr President .
Mrs Hardstaff has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I just wish to point out , as rapporteur , that it is quite normal in this House to discuss issues on a Thursday evening and vote on them on a Friday morning , and I do not see why an exception should be made for my report .
Thank you , Mrs Hardstaff .
The request to close the debate will now be put to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the request )
The debate continues then .
Mr Fischler now has the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all may I point out - although I do not wish to prolong this formal debate on procedure - that I did ask for this report to be debated first just because of its very importance .
To start with let me thank most sincerely all those who contributed to the report , particularly the Committee on Agriculture and the rapporteur , Mrs Hardstaff , but also all other committees for their positive input and for the detail and goodwill applied to dealing with the proposal .
This proposal meets two different aims .
Firstly , it serves to inform the consumer about the guarantees that the new identification regulations for beef , introduced in Regulation 820 / 97 , have to offer .
Secondly , marketing and advertising campaigns carried out by the trade and its associations for the development of consumption and the marketing of beef , not just in the Community , but also in third countries , ought to be co-financed by the Community . This would allow the beef sector , in crisis because of the sharp drop in consumption , to recover .
Heaven forbid that it should be sunk here !
The most important amendment is Amendment No1 , which concerns the legal basis of the proposal .
In view of Parliament 's arguments and the assurance given by President Santer , the Commission can declare itself partly in agreement with Amendment No1 , and recognize article 129a as the legal basis in addition to article 43 .



As far as Amendments Nos 7 and 15 on the definition of beef quality , the object of these marketing programmes , are concerned , these definitions have already been incorporated into a Commission regulation .
These amendments are , therefore , obsolete .
All forms of carcass are , as recommended by the author , authorized for support .
Because the new identification regulation is a Community regulation , I am quite sure that the information and advertising measures for the regulation must be exceptionally financed entirely by the Community .
As a result I am able also to vote for Amendments Nos 4 and 12 .
One of the most important objectives of this whole proposal is to provide the consumer with a guaranteed ability to trace back the origins of the products .
Concerning the aid to direct marketing , this direct marketing must obviously conform to the community quality and traceability measures or regulations , and above all the veterinary regulations as well .
For that reason the amendment you have so carefully worked out can be only partially taken into consideration if its wording is altered accordingly .
In addition , Amendment No 13 in its current form cannot be accepted , because of the danger that traceability would not then be possible .
Amendments Nos 6 , 10 , 16 and the second sentence of No 17 on support for seals or marks of quality also cannot be accepted .
The proposal itself already contains rules for their use under conditions laid down by the Community .
In the view of the Commission support for such quality seals or marks should remain with the trade and / or trade associations making the request .
Internal state authorities can also regulate this to whatever extent they think necessary .
On Amendments Nos 5 , 8 , 17 , third sentence , and 19 concerning the participation of national offices and the provision of technical aid , it must be stressed that it is the responsibility of the relevant internal national authorities to monitor every campaign .
The trade and its associations must submit their applications to the competent internal state authority .
This initiative rests on the subsidiarity principle .
We for our part should make the necessary flexibility available . If the internal state authorities feel it is necessary , they can prescribe consultation with particular offices .
The aforementioned amendments thus make no sense , because they breach this basic principle .
Finally , Amendment No 2 is superfluous in the Commission 's view , and Amendments Nos 13 , 14 and 17 , first sentence , are partly unclear or particularly incompatible with the aim of the proposal .
For this reason the Commission cannot agree to them .
Amendment No 18 concerns amendments that were not accepted , and so it must also be rejected .
The Commission is prepared , however , to accept Amendment No 11 .
Amendment No 20 , which concerns a Commission report on the execution of this requirement , can also be accepted .
It will be useful in the preparation and improvement of future campaigns .
In closing may I point out that because of the acceptance of Amendment No 1 , Article 129 will also be used from now on , without involving codecision procedure .
Mr President , Mr Fischler has explained to us on behalf of the Commission which amendments can be accepted and which cannot .
It has rejected Amendment No 18 , which was concerned with financing and the percentage rate of financing .
That may be due to the fact that you required a clarification on direct marketing ...
This is a continuation of the debate , not a point of order .
We will now move to the vote .
The debate will continue at 6.00 p.m.
Mr President , we have here a particular situation that you have not appreciated , whereby we have interrupted a speech , but Mr Fischler is unable to be present this evening .
It is a matter of whether we must refer the report back to the Committee , and so we need clarification from Mr Fischler as long as he is present .
That is the particular situation .
That is why I am bringing up this one question again , so that we can have clarity for tonight 's debate that we shall be unable to obtain tonight .
So I ask you Mr President , to allow this .
You did not realise what was taking place just now , because you have only just taken over the Chair .
As a result I ask once more if the financing mentioned in Amendments Nos 18 and 22 , namely the acceptance of 100 % of the costs incurred by the industry for informing about the introduction of labels , will be reduced .
This is a one-off cost , to be financed 100 % .
It would be scandalous !
If you do not permit a reduction we will refer this back to Committee , I am fairly sure about that !
This was an important point in the Committee on Agriculture !
I have pointed out that , in view of the facts and the experience we have had with earlier actions in this context , we are prepared to finance this activity 100 % within the internal market .
It is not the first time this has happened , by the way .
A similar regulation exists for protected designations of origin .
But that has nothing to do with direct marketing .
If there were to be a similar alteration with respect to direct marketing , I said , then direct marketing could be partially included .
It is important , and a prerequisite , however , that traceability is ensured and that only such direct marketers are involved as can produce clear proof that they include all veterinary regulations 100 % .
Mr President , would you please note that I am now here , that I signed in this morning and that in the meantime I have been in my office , that I picked up some letters there and that I have now come here by bicycle , for which no facilities have been provided by the Bureau .
Thank you , and welcome to the House !
Mr President , I am very sorry .
After what has been said by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , I wish to inform you that our group is also planning to put forward a proposal for the withdrawal of the regulation that we have been debating .
Our position , and we will recommend this to our colleagues , will depend on the reply the Commissioner refuses to give us .
I asked him if there is any factually correct information on whether at this moment it is possible to change the labelling system . Details were given yesterday to the Committee on Inquiry into BSE .
I also asked him whether he will take the necessary measures to correct this situation . If he does not , the whole system will collapse and we will request a referral back .
Will the Commissioner give us an answer or not ?
Mr President , on a point of order .
I apologize to the House but I gave notice of this point of order to the President 's Office this morning .
I have only just had a chance to look at the text of the resolution on alleged human rights abuses in Ethiopia .
Preamble D refers to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in its fifty-third session and what it is alleged to have expressed .
When I checked with the United Nations ' sources , I did not find that had been covered in the fifty-third session .
I therefore ask the presidency to contact the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva before the urgency debates start this afternoon , because this House would be ill-advised to start a debate on the basis of information which cannot be shown to be factually correct .
I appeal to the presidency to contact the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva and see if the allegations in preamble D. , as to what was decided in its fifty-third session , have any basis of accuracy .
Mr Tomlinson , thank you for the notice of the question .
In fact the President 's Office has already investigated this and agrees with your interpretation .
An announcement will be made at 3 o 'clock .
I have now sat in this Parliament for two years .
In the parliamentary publications and in other publications it looks as if I drift back and forth between the Christian Democrats , the Conservatives , the Greens and the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
I would hereby like to tell everyone that I have no intention whatsoever of leaving the group in which I sit .
I have sat in this group for two years - Nordic Green Left , which is part of the Confederal Group of the European United Left .
I hope that I will no longer have to see myself waltz around in the internal press and various parliamentary publications like an unparalleled drifter .
I can understand that causes you some disquiet and we will ensure it is corrected .
Welcome
I now have pleasure in welcoming to the diplomatic gallery a delegation of six members from the Icelandic Parliament , the Althing .
The delegation is visiting Strasbourg to meet its counterparts in the European Parliament on the occasion of the 9th European Parliament / Iceland Interparliamentary meeting .
It has held meetings yesterday and today .
Among the topics discussed were the perspectives for European Monetary Union , the future perspectives and consequences of differentiated participation in the Schengen Agreement and also perspectives on the common foreign and security policy of the European Union and the future development of the European Economic Area Agreement .
I hope the delegation have enjoyed their stay in Strasbourg and I welcome them to the public gallery .
Votes
Mr President , Mr Fitzsimons is absent for reasons of ill- health and has asked me to speak on his behalf .
I would like to add a few words to the final sentence of Amendment No 13 .
The final sentence reads : ' on the basis of the methods established by the intergovernmental group on the shift in climate ' and we would like to add : ' .. these methods must comply with the most recent standards adopted under the United Nations Convention on climatic changes ' .
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , Mr Liese has referred to a Spanish text , but the Spanish text in front of me finishes with the sentence : " and guarantee maintenance of European and ACP banana production ' .
It finishes there , with nothing else .
Therefore , I do not know whether it is possible to make that correction now .
Mr Medina Ortega is correct in saying that these three words were also missing from the Spanish at the time of distribution , but we in our group signed the original and submitted it , and the three words were there .
I shall therefore read out the Spanish text of the last two lines .
' ... y asegure el mantenimiento de las producciones europeas y ACP de plátanos y las producciones fair-trade de plátanos ' .
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
( Parliament rejected the amendment )
Mr President , I am beginning to get irritated .
We submitted the amendment correctly .
I would ask the staff to check that .
Those three words were In the Spanish original .
What is now happening is not right !
If there is a technical error within the services , then that is human error . But we have to vote for what the group tabled , and I ask once again for that to be done .
We will check to see where the error developed if there was an error .
We vote on the amendments as published .
It is too late to tell me when we are in the midst of a voting session .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , as we tabled this resolution to the committee oral question , we want to make it clear in the title that it is the G7 proposal for the Khmelnitsky 2 and Rovno 4 nuclear power reactors in Ukraine .
Of course the Green Group is not proposing to complete these reactors : we are against the completion of all nuclear reactors ; we want all nuclear reactors in Ukraine and elsewhere closed down .
The G7 criteria for doing so is leastcost and safety conscious and it has now been proven by official studies that this is not the least-cost or the safest option .
I want the title to make it clear that it is the G7 proposal for the completion of the Khmelnitsky 2 and Rovno 4 nuclear reactors in Ukraine .
( Parliament agreed to the oral amendment )
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution ) Joint motion for a resolution on the closure of Chernobyl nuclear power plant by 2000 and completion of Khmelnitsky and Rovno 4 nuclear reactors in Ukraine
I should like to introduce the oral amendment , after which we will vote again , even though we actually know better .
Yesterday we had a vague discussion with the Commission on the subject .
But we continue to support this , even if it all blows up in our faces one day .
I should at least like to introduce the amendment to our joint resolution .
I move that we vote separately on Amendments Nos 3 and 4 , so that it is at least demonstrated that part of this House has kept a clear head and does not want to continue completion of scrap value reactors and permit the continued operation of another of the same , with the result that we shall have no money with which to pay for the frightful consequences .
We shall be unable in any case to pay for the human consequences ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( Parliament adopted the joint resolution )
I would just like to say that this is going a little too quickly , at least for me and those of us who speak Swedish .
There is really no point at all in trying to raise one 's hand .
I would therefore very much like to ask the President to slow down the tempo and think of us and the interpreters .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , in the text of the report reference is made to the draft Treaty of Amsterdam , which was subsequently amended at the final signing .
Therefore , when article 236 is mentioned , we are really referring to the only relevant article of the protocol .
These are technical matters which the linguistic lawyers themselves will be able to attend to .
We will make sure it corresponds with the correct articles in the draft treaty .
Paragraph 8 :
Mr President , the Socialist Group 's amendment is an addition to the original text and for the vote I would suggest to the Socialist Group that it should be considered as 8 a ) , and be slightly modified as follows : " Considers that the harmonization of the relevant legislation at European level would be the best way to eradicate the reservations ' - it is not the only way to eradicate them , but it is the best way .
In that case , my opinion as rapporteur is that it should be voted for - putting the amendment to the vote as 8 a ) , as I said , and with that wording .
Mr President , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi has generally proved to be very unbending , but this time she is being rather more flexible .
We agree .
Mr President . If Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi 's happiness depends on this , then we agree , to make her happy today .
It is nice to have a happy House on a Thursday at 1.00 p.m.
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , under Rule 22 , with your permission , I would like to go and have lunch in the Members ' Bar .
After lunch I will give you the receipt so that you can control it .
I look forward to seeing what you had .
The Council 's opinion on this question is very remarkable and also alarming .
I therefore fully support Mrs Flemming 's report .
It is of great importance that environmental organisations are given the opportunity to participate in this environmental work which is so important to us .
The Council should be aware of this and not obstruct it by allocating a smaller sum of money than the European Parliament is recommending .
Since the EU in so many ways , directly or indirectly , supports those who work to promote views about the environmental work other than those developed by the environmental movement , I consider it necessary for the EU to give its support to the environmental organizations .
It is also good that the programme is being expanded to include countries in central and eastern Europe too .
Finally , I consider Amendment No 6 proposed by the Group of the European People 's Party impossible to support .
Setting up such a criterion is totally untenable .
You have to be aware that laws and regulations in the EU 's Member States differ with regard to what is or is not considered to be a crime .
The result is that this proposal for a criterion cannot be fair .
The undersigned voted against Mrs Flemming 's amendment no .
6 which contained a proposal to exclude grants to , amongst others , organisations which have been found guilty of a crime by a court on the territory of the European Community during the past two years .
I had two main reasons for voting against : Firstly , it is up to the Commission as the executive organ to adopt supplementary rules for the prioritising of applications .
Secondly , the provision would not have distinguished the type of crime it referred to . Sadly , we have experience of organisations which were peacefully exercising their freedom of speech being convicted by courts .
I assume , however , that Parliament will vigilantly keep track of which organisations are given grants and ensure that there is no question of organisations like the Animal Liberation Front being able to make use of grants at the European level . Particularly considering recent events in Finland , where minks were released from cages at great risk to birdlife and with large financial losses as a result , since the unknown perpetrators mentioned ALF .
Fitzsimmons report ( A4-253 / 97 )
Consideration by the European Union and Parliament of CO2 and greenhouse gas emissions is not something new ; the proposed amendment inspired by the Council proposes to strengthen monitoring .
We really have no alternative but to subscribe to this .
I would like to pay tribute to the work of our colleague and I subscribe to the amendments that he proposes to add to the initial text of the Commission .
I also want to stress that while it is laudable to pay special attention to monitoring techniques , to continue towards greater accountability and to ensure comparability between the different Member States , we cannot overlook the essentials , namely to substantially reduce emissions of CO2 ( and other greenhouse gases ) as well as other pollutants .
The situation last summer in our large towns and cities showed just how urgent this need has become .
Political will must be matched by resources .
Without doubt we will have to consider restrictive and repressive measures in this sensitive and complex environmental matter .
Speeches alone will not suffice .
As politicians we must be able to guarantee for present and future generations an improvement in their living conditions without destroying economic growth and jobs , and we must equally stop hiding behind claims that we nothing can be done .
As everybody knows , carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) is the commonest greenhouse gas and contributes 65 % of global warming .
Therefore it is essential to measure accurately and regularly how well the Community is complying with its obligations for CO2 reduction .
That will require the Member States to provide information each year about the cumulative emissions of each greenhouse gas , and will also guarantee comparability and transparency .
All of this entails adequate monitoring of Member States ' national programmes , and submission of the findings to Parliament and the Commission .
The Commission 's new proposal is a step in this direction , and will therefore have my vote .
I voted yes to the proposal , but I think that the report neglects an important area .
The EU must plan in an entirely different way for monitoring and control systems for the environment in the countries which are applying for membership .
This should have been included in the monitoring mechanisms for the 21st Century , particularly as there are often major problems in these countries .
As demanded in my own report on this instrument in 1993 , we really must ensure that those Member States which fail to provide data are singled out .
There continues to be a lack of political will to take action in this area on the part of some Member States .
We have found in other areas where the Commission is supposed to supply annual reports to Parliament that these reports can be held up by the Commission if all the Member States have not supplied data .
We have had enough of this and want annual reports even if there are gaps , so that we can get a clear picture of what is happening and where the problems lie .
Although this may at first glance seem to be simply a technical measure , the smooth operation of monitoring measures and exchange of information on greenhouse gas emissions is an essential tool in our battle against global warming , and I urge the Commission and the Council to agree to the improvements in this proposal which Parliament has carried in its votes today .
WTO panel on bananas
Mr President , the World Trade Organisation is about to declare the Community system of banana import licences incompatible with the rules of free trade , at least as they interpret them .
However this system , which gives preference to bananas from overseas , the less favoured African countries , the Caribbean and the Pacific which we intend to support , appears vital to the economic survival of these regions .
The European Parliament therefore finds itself once again facing the disastrous consequences of the Uruguay Round agreement which it approved , all too lightly , without first checking that the agreement took into account social , health , cultural or environmental distortions in international trade .
I do not mention these facts merely to rake up the past again and again , but to emphasize that there are both good and bad advisers in Europe .
Perhaps we should re-read the proceedings of the GATT talks to see who the bad advisers were and to draw conclusions from that .
In an attempt to protect overseas markets , despite the condemnations of the WTO , the Amsterdam project provided article 227 ( 299 in the new numbering system ) aimed at granting special subsidies to regions ultraperipheral to the Union .
This would have succeeded in replacing a system of import licences which kept the production of overseas countries alive with a system of state subsidies which kept the people of these regions on aid .
Of the two options , I believe that the most liberal is not the one we think .
Moreover , it cannot be ruled out that the WTO will one day tackle the system provided under article 227 .
There is nothing to suggest it will not .
We therefore believe , Mr President , that the only solution is to resume international trade negotiations to gain recognition once and for all for social , health , cultural and environmental concerns and we regret that in its agricultural Agenda 2000 project the Commission only seems to be guided , yet again , by the concern to align its prices to world prices .
Mr President , with my colleagues of the Europe of Nations group I voted in support of the common resolution on the position of the WTO panel concerning the banana industry ; this resolution was adopted by 286 votes in favour , 124 against with 14 abstentions .
The adoption of this resolution give grounds for satisfaction and hope .
Satisfaction since some three years ago we were the only group here that condemned the flaws in the Marrakesh and GATT agreements .
When we expressed our views virtually the only group to support us was the Greens .
At the ACP conference in Libreville and later in Dakar , together with my colleague , Dominique Souchet , I raised the problem of compatibility of the system of generalized preferences with the GATT agreement .
We received formal assurances from the Commission that there was no incompatibility .
What is happening today shows that we were right .
Hope lies in the fact that our colleagues , who in this particular matter are aware of the problems with the GATT and WTO , see the difficulties in far more general terms , in the way we have always condemned , as did our late president Jimmy Goldsmith .
We believe that the WTO 's attempts to maintain free trade in the area of the banana trade should be supported rather than opposed .
Free trade is an important instrument for ensuring that , in the long term , all the banana producing countries concerned will be able to function as equals in the global market .
We also believe that the type of intervention taking place in the banana market obstructs the rights of consumers to choose products on the basis of price and quality , as well as on the basis of environmental considerations and a sense of social and international responsibility .
In addition , interventions in free trade and supply controls on the European market obstruct a necessary adaptation of food production to market conditions and to necessary demands to settle the global food situation .
We believe that the issue of the banana trade is being handled on the basis of all the important aspects involved in this issue , including , amongst others , environmental aspects , social conditions for plantation workers , the economic situation of small growers and taking into consideration the difficulties which exist for the one-sided trade dependency of several countries .
These are aspects which cannot be dealt with through obstacles to the free trade in bananas or through supply intervention on the European market for bananas .
Each difficulty connected with the production and trading of bananas must be dealt with through measures specially designed for each difficulty of that kind .
I voted no to this resolution because I think there were only imperialist arguments on the part of the EU not to follow the WTO 's decision on this issue .
In my opinion there are no reasons , whether ecological or economic , why the EU should have such a narrow view regarding the import of bananas as to mean that , in principal , it only approves imports from ACP countries .
There are other countries , apart from ACP countries , which are dependent on exports of bananas .
We could therefore just as well buy from these countries as from ACP countries .
I do , however , agree with the criticism that the WTO is only considering free trade and is forgetting other important values .
There are other values which must be taken into consideration before the WTO makes decisions , including the environmental effects .
But as I said , on this issue I think that the WTO has made the right decision .
Our group signed the draft joint resolution on the OCM for the banana industry .
It is surprising that both the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the European People 's Party refused to sign that draft joint resolution , even though the PSE rallied to it in extremis .
This reflects the lack of enthusiasm shown by the two political groups that numerically dominate this Parliament and that share the same free trade , globalist and federalist philosophy when the aim is to defend the interests of European banana producers , especially those in our overseas French departments and the interests of banana production in the ACP countries .
We all know that the shaping of Europe rests on the principles of Community preference ( Treaty of Rome ) and on the preservation of the economic interests of the ACP countries with whom the EU Member States have committed under an agreement of original , specific and close co-operation ( Lomé Agreements ) .
Why then , on behalf of the GATT and the WTO , must we sacrifice the interests of our producers and those of the countries with whom we have been tied under international accords for so many years ?
In my contribution during the debate and in my explanation on the Helms-Burton law I asked whether the WTO was not acting as the secular arm of the United States , pointing out the extent to which it effectively defended US interests during trade globalisation .
Beyond this , it is also regrettable that the Commission , especially Sir Leon Brittan , wishes to settle the difference of opinion that arose following the Helms-Burton law separately , without even thinking of negotiating the closure of the WTO panel against European and ACP bananas .
Since the Treaty of Rome , access for bananas into the Community market has always enjoyed special provisions given the particularity of this tropical product which is grown at the extreme periphery of the European Union ( overseas departments , Madeira , the Canaries , Crete ) and in the former overseas territories that later became the ACP states and with whom we are contractually bound under the terms of the Lomé Convention .
Community and ACP bananas only represent 30 % of our consumption and cannot compete with bananas from the dollar zone which are produced in Latin America by American multinationals .
Some speakers have suggested that the European Union should allocate financial aid in order to diversify crops .
However , in the tropical countries where cyclones are frequent , the diversification of banana crops is very hard to achieve .
It is important to protect the economy and stability of producers in overseas countries , where wages and social charges match those in the European Union .
A good trade-off was found with the European common orgnization of the banana market ; this system enabled banana producers , including those in the dollar zone , to benefit from access to the European market through import licences .
It is necessary to maintain these trade-offs at all costs .
That is why I voted in support of the joint resolution .
Nuclear power plants in Ukraine
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Green Party voted against the joint resolution because we have not progressed a single step with this resolution as far as the decisive subject is concerned , namely the phased ending of nuclear energy .
The European Parliament could not even bring itself to support the closure of Chernobyl and not completing reactors R4 and K2 .
Not only have the most serious doubts on safety been ignored , but also the fact that energy from nuclear sources is quite unnecessary in the Ukraine , and that these reactors represent an economic risk .
We also regret that part of Parliament has still not understood the stupidity of the least cost argument , with regard to the risk of accidents with uninsurable costs , with regard to the unresolved risks involved in disposal of nuclear waste , and with regard to the unsolved problems of safety in routine operation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the political ultimatum of the Ukrainian Government - and this is what it seems to be about - not to shut down Chernobyl if international funding for R4 and K2 is not forthcoming , must not be allowed to succeed .
On the contrary , falling energy demand and the potential for enormous savings will permit Ukraine to close down all nuclear power stations , and we regret that the European Parliament has not promoted this environmental measure , which is so important for Europe .
Mr President , yesterday 's debate merely skirted around the issue .
The Commission 's answers were woolly and completely unsatisfactory .
I should just like to draw attention to one point : we have been spending Phare and Tacis funds for years .
Now we have before us a study about how much improvement there has been in safety , and the study comes to the staggering conclusion that there has been absolutely no improvement in safety .
The Commission has also contracted a study and up to now it has refused to put this at Parliament 's disposal .
This study comes to the same conclusion .
We are once again about to agree the completion of two scrap reactors that are quite incapable of completion because the technology is not compatible , and still , after almost eleven years , this scrap reactor in Chernobyl is running .
I say that we should at long last complete the sealed sacophagus and make money available for that .
But it is scandalous how health , even that of future generations , is placed at risk .
I have voted against it , because this was not a clear statement and it was not representative of Parliament 's purpose .
Umberto Scapagnini 's question on the closure of Chernobyl and the completion of the Khmelnitsky 2 et Rovno 4 reactors deserves our full attention .
I support this without any hesitation .
All these issues are giving considerable cause for concern .
There is really no time to lose .
Without pre-empting the response of the Commission , it is essential that the loans for both these reactors be granted .
I trust that safety criteria in the design and construction of the Khmelnitsky 2 et Rovno 4 reactors will be strictly adhered to .
I believe that the necessary inspections will be conducted .
More generally , Mr Scapagnini 's question concerns the application of the Euratom Treaty and the undertakings given in the European Energy Charter .
These treaties bind the states that ratify them and it is important that industrial companies enact them , particularly in the nuclear industry .
The concern of people on environmental issues is being expressed with greater urgency - and rightly so .
In the nuclear energy field we should exercise greater transparency , which is still not always the case today .
For the time being nuclear power is a necessary source of energy but not at any cost and under any conditions .
Moreover , the future also requires that we think about alternative solutions to try and safeguard our already damaged environment and our safety from all aspects .
Today , Thursday , the Austrian Members of the Group of the European People 's Party rejected the joint resolution by five groups - including the PPE and the PSE - concerning the financing and completion of the Ukrainian nuclear reactors Khmelnitsky2 and Rovno4 .
The Austrian Members ' explanation of vote is that they are obviously in favour of parliamentary support for the development of a comprehensive energy strategy , as contained in the resolution .
We are also in favour of the Commission making its position and future policy on nuclear safety clear , and of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development declaring its position .
But in this resolution it is not even clear that the proposers are against the construction of new nuclear power stations .
Nor can the amendments from individual groups be agreed , especially not that of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , which , whilst it was very praiseworthy in supporting efforts to develop a unified energy strategy , on the other hand quite clearly declared that the G7 states and Ukraine must maintain the December 1995 agreement promising the completion of both nuclear power stations .
Austria has also declared to the President of the EBRD that it was ready to finance and support the modification of calorific power stations in the Ukraine , but at the same time it declared its strict opposition to the completion or further construction of nuclear power stations .
It is well known that the juxtaposition of old Russian and new Western technologies would produce a hermaphrodite system , which would be a major safety risk for the future .
This has been proven beyond reasonable doubt by foreign and Austrian studies .
Nuclear power is not safe .
Unfortunately , there have been many accidents , including Chernobyl .
In spite of this , the work on closing the remaining reactors in Chernobyl is progressing very slowly .
In my opinion , it is remarkable that the accidents , and the terrible effects these accidents have had , are not enough for people to bring about a closure of nuclear power .
Instead , to a large extent the Commission is encouraging the building of new reactors , Khmelnitsky 2 and Rovno 4 , in Ukraine .
That is something I cannot accept .
No EU funds should go towards the construction of new reactors .
The money should instead go to aid for developing renewable energy sources , so that the eastern European countries can have a functioning energy structure based on energy sources which are part of an ecologically sustainable society .
Nuclear power is a non-renewable energy source which should therefore be phased out of the energy system as soon as possible .
My homeland has finally taken the first step towards phasing out nuclear power by deciding to close the Barsebäck power station starting next year .
Against this background , I have today voted no to the European Parliament 's resolution on this issue .
The Danish Social Democrats are voting yes to the resolution on the closure of the nuclear power station at Chernobyl .
It is irresponsible to continue producing energy with reactors of the same type that was the cause of the major accident in 1985 .
But we would like to draw attention to the fact that the problem of the poor safety of nuclear power stations is far from being solved by closing the power station at Chernobyl .
There are , amongst other things , major safety problems at the large Ignalina nuclear power station in Lithuania .
The European Union has a duty to offer the Lithuanian people a helping hand in the same way as we are doing in connection with Chernobyl .
Illegal imports of CFCs
Mr President , we are alarmed at the discovery of illegal imports into the European Union of chlorofluorocarbons or CFCs , a product deemed to be largely responsible for the hole in the ozone layer and production of which has been banned within the European Union since 1995 .
We are especially worried in that recently discovered illegal imports from China concerned huge quantities - 1 , 000 tonnes in one case , 150 in another - which are clearly only the visible tip of an enormous iceberg .
However , the debate that has been conducted hitherto in this chamber does not raise all the issues , in our view .
It has mainly been said that the European Union should not just ban production , but also the import and sale of CFCs within Member States .
This is obviously sensible .
The current situation is inconsistent and the Europe of Nations group is also urging the governments of Member States assembled within the Council to take steps to impose a total ban on imports .
We also hope that the Montreal Protocol on the protection of the ozone layer will be tightened up to quickly ban the production of CFCs in all countries .
However , a crucial question that has received very little attention is how will these bans be monitored ?
While the anti-fraud unit of the Commission - the UCLAF - has had the merit of discovering several fraudulent operations , this is clearly not the full extent of fraud .
According to the independent environment investigation agency , Europe is at the heart of the worldwide illegal trade in CFCs .
But why Europe ?
Because in this sector as in many others , the huge mess created by the abolition of internal border checks facilitates all kinds of illegal trading .
Imports may enter a country by exploiting a weak link in the chain and then circulate freely anywhere !
This is the key problem we face currently face in the illegal trafficking of CFCs and I take this opportunity to point out that the ozone layer is also damaged by methyl bromide , a pesticide widely used in agriculture .
To remedy the situation we must promote agriculture that is far more environmentally friendly , but this is another issue that I hope we will have the opportunity to discuss during the Agenda 2000 project .
Helms-Burton Act
We voted in favour of the joint resolution on the Helms-Burton Act which has the merit of clearly and firmly stating the unacceptable face of extra-territorial legislation .
The pyrrhic victory gained by the Commission must not suggest that Europeans complacently accept practices and principles that are so radically opposed to international law .
So why did the Commission refrain from asking the WTO to arbitrate in this dispute ?
Did it fear that the WTO would not give the United States the same treatment as it did the European Community in regard to hormoneinjected meat , and the developing countries in regard to bananas ?
Was this an implicit acknowledgement that since the WTO in reality acts as the secular arm of the United States , which imposes its own concept and vision of globalism , it is preferable to negotiate and empirically accept a few concessions by refraining from invoking the exercise of the law ?
However , if we decide to negotiate because we deem that it is the best way to defend European interests , we must negotiate well .
Why then was no attempt made to obtain the withdrawal of the American claim against hormoneinjected meat and bananas in return for the withdrawal of the claim of the European Union against the HelmsBurton Act ?
Situation in Algeria
We voted in favour of the resolution on Algeria presented after a compromise between several political groups in Parliament .
However , we believe that the resolution could be clearer in a sharp criticism of both the Islamic fundamentalist terrorist groups ' dreadful outrages and lack of respect for human dignity and the Algerian government 's crimes against democracy and human rights .
The statement should also point out one of the important reasons for the economic and social crisis in Algeria , i.e. the large debt which the International Monetary Fund , amongst others , is demanding that the country should repay .
The Group Union for Europe regrets the fact that it was unable to join in the vote on the common resolution on the situation in Algeria .
Indeed , while it is urgent to condemn and deplore the unspeakable massacres perpetrated against the Algerian people by groups of terrorists , it should also be mentioned that this country has recently held democratic elections which have enabled all sections of Algerian society to be represented in the country 's parliament and government .
Our assembly has always had relations with the representatives of the Algerian people through its interparliamentary delegation .
There is therefore no need to form an ad hoc delegation as the common draft resolution proposes , and we feel it is essential to draw on existing parliamentary structures on both sides , possibly enlarging them to include a few members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
For this reason we will be abstaining .
I believe that this Parliament has rarely made such an exhibition of itself or shown itself to be so completely powerless as yesterday during the debate on the situation in Algeria .
The meeting between Algerian and European Parliaments that was so heatedly argued for by almost all the speakers will of course not solve anything at all and was merely non-committal " show politics ' which sensible people can only treat with contempt .
Nobody could accuse me of having the slightest sympathy for the murderers who are carrying out the Islamic reign of terror in Algeria .
We can , of course , ask ourselves what the difference is between a possible ISF regime in Algeria , on the one hand , and the Islamic terror regimes supported so keenly by the West in countries such as Saudi Arabia or Kuwait , on the other hand .
However , I still remember that the misery begun in January 1992 , when the first democratic elections in Algeria - still in the name of democracy - were prevented by a military coup .
I also remember that the Socialist NLF dictatorship in Algeria after decolonization was literally swamped by French and European support and by expressions of praise from the so-called intelligentsia in Europe .
It is these socialists who have changed Algeria in less than thirty years from a relatively rich and prosperous country into a backward developing country with great poverty , where millions of people see the only way out through Islamic fundamentalism .
As things are at the moment , I do not believe that Europe has a big part to play in that country .
As European politicians , we have no lessons to teach the Algerians .
We must , on the contrary , ensure that the Islamic advance does not strike our own continent .
I wish my fellow Members of Parliament were as motivated about that as they are about possible trips to Algeria .
Moorhouse report ( A4-259 / 97 )
Faced with the problems raised by the creation of balanced economic relations between the European Union and Japan , it was desirable to evaluate these ties .
Regarding the current state of these relations , I share the opinion of the committee 's rapporteur .
Having said that , while I approve the moves which ultimately should strengthen and balance our trade relations with Japan , I am worried about one of the points that affect deregulation .
I fear that the latter is decidedly against our Community interests .
I refer to the textile industry in which firms must apply existing legislation - often ignored by the competition that is slow to enforce it .
The automotive sector would probably be one of the first to suffer the effects of deregulation applied rigorously by the European Union .
The automotive industry - one of Europe 's industrial mainstays - will have to undergo restructuring in the next ten years .
We should be mindful of the consequences that may prove disastrous for jobs in this sector , indeed for its very future .
I approve this communication but I will remain vigilant over the enactment of this new approach towards Japan by opposing any hasty move , any unbridled liberalism and above all any step taken to impose rules and constraints upon us which will be ignored by the competition .
We have abstained from voting on the report on ' Europe and Japan : the next steps ' by Mr Moorhouse .
We are in favour of developing and improving relations between the EU and Japan .
However , we believe that the report only concentrates on economics and trade without showing any interest at all in important areas such as culture and the environment .
As far as the trade issues are concerned , we are critical of many of Japan 's technical trade barriers , but we can sympathise with the existence of state monopolies .
We do not share the report 's positive view of Japan 's participation in UN forces , but instead share the critical view of the Japanese peace movement .
For these reasons we have chosen to abstain .
A rapprochement between the EU and Japan is positive .
Human rights , international peace , relations with China , Russia and Korea , questions of nuclear weapons , the environment , trade , deregulation and the WTO are important areas of cooperation .
I have also voted yes to the report in the hope that the endless talk of competition between the EU , the USA and Japan can be toned down in favour of cooperation and dialogue .
Garosci report ( A4-254 / 97 )
I have supported Mr Garosci 's report today as I share his welcome for the Commission 's long overdue recognition of the importance of commerce .
Twenty-two million people across the EU work in commerce as part of the wider tertiary sector which is outperforming other parts of the European economy .
This sector is not just about economics but about communities .
Mr Garosci is right to ask for the burden of unnecessary regulations to be lifted from small retailers especially .
Small neighbourhood shops are part of the communities they serve .
We have all seen too many areas where the closed shop fronts are a sign of a run-down neighbourhood .
Looking to the future , it is also important to consider the unfairness of Internet-style selling not being subject to VAT whilst traditional shops are .
The Commission should take up the idea of looking for an international answer to this question .
However , the technology of electronic payment systems could also allow us to reduce the opportunity for criminals to steal from vulnerable small shops , reducing the amount of cash held there .
I hope that the potentially useful ideas in the Green Paper and this report now lead to practical policies to help our local shops enjoy a successful future .
After two years of work , the Commission is now submitting its Green Paper on commerce to us .
It examines the structure and development of the commerce and distribution sector , the second largest economic activity in the Union , employing 22 million people - 16 per cent of the total labour force - in about 4.5 million firms .
So this is a key sector , both for the economy and for employment .

I congratulate Mr Garosci on his exhaustive analysis of the current situation in this sector and the challenges it faces , and it is a pity that the statistics he had available , provided by the Commission , are no longer current .
Competition in the commerce sector has grown with the growth in trade and the enlargement of the market , reflecting the need to adapt to the changes that are taking place and to respond to the evolution of consumer needs and desires .
So it is essential to train staff , provide vocational courses for young people and develop a specialized labour force adapted to the way new technologies are modernizing the sector .
Vocational training also allows even small and medium-sized firms and micro-businesses to keep up with the growth process in the sector , driving forward the creation of SMEs linked together in cross-border commerce , in line with the principle of economic and social cohesion which the Commission must support with concrete measures through the structural funds and innovative projects .
And the role of the Member States must not be forgotten , especially as regards the regulation of access to credit .
To make business conditions more flexible for firms , a simplification of Community legislation , taking account of the situation in individual states , is desirable , and is particularly important to this sector .
Finally , I would mention that the sector needs to be paid special attention with a view to the introduction of the Euro and the impact , not just economic , that this will have on the market .
Palacio Vallelersundi report ( A4-265 / 97 ) - Situation in Algeria
Mr President , the convention on extradition between Member States of the European Union which reconciles the general definitions and principles of this procedure in the various countries was concluded within a short time frame according to a purely inter-governmental method .
This therefore refutes the claim that is widespread in this chamber that only the community method works .
In reality , when a given need , such as in the area of security , is strongly felt by members , the intergovernmental method works very well .
True , it does not work when the need is not felt or when one of the parties makes exorbitant or over-constraining claims on other partners , but must we bemoan this fact ?
No , of course , not !
On the contrary , the intergovernment approach in this case serves to regulate the exorbitant claims that cannot be adequately countered by the community method .
Caution is essential in the issues we are discussing here since they directly impact the exercise of public liberties and this is why - quite rightly - the intergovernmental method has been chosen for this agreement .
How can we improve this procedure while respecting its form ?
It would be worthwhile to begin by securing consensus between the partners whereby the agreement can be enacted between the signatories without waiting for all the different ratifications .
Secondly , I believe that we should seek a procedure to ensure more effective monitoring of the agreement by national parliaments , as already proposed by the Europe of Nations Group .
On the other hand , we feel it unnecessary and even totally counter-productive to provide for the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice or the systematic involvement of the European Parliament .
These institutions , with their exaggerated claims and obsession of always requests texts that follow their own subjective aims , would arouse negative reactions that we must avoid at all costs on subjects as sensitive as these .
Mr President , I voted for Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi 's resolution , but in the recorded vote I voted against paragraph 11 of the resolution on the reservations entered to this convention by Greece and Portugal , for different reasons .
I voted against because the reference to Portugal is factually wrong .
The Portuguese reservation is not based on the same grounds as the Greek reservation .
Under its constitution , Portugal does not allow extradition when the country seeking it applies the death penalty or whole life imprisonment .
And this is what is involved .
The recent constitutional review carried out in Portugal maintains this prohibition , rightly in my opinion .
I do not think we could approve the wording of paragraph 11 here , especially as it is factually wrong in its reference to Portugal .
The protocol of the Amsterdam Treaty on this matter of extradition seems to me to resolve the matter satisfactorily in the context of progressive construction of an area of freedom and justice .
That is the reason for my declaration of vote .
We have chosen to abstain from voting on this report .
This question is complicated and must be considered carefully .
Of course society should have powerful tools to bring about freedom , security and justice , as the report states .
However , that cannot be allowed to happen at the price of jeopardising the legal rights of individual citizens .
We are sceptical about several points in this report :
Point C of the draft report talks of introducing an automatic extradition procedure in the long term .
We consider it far too hasty to declare oneself in favour of this purely in principal.-We are also very sceptical about giving the European Court of Justice jurisdiction to interpret and decide on the extradition of citizens above the national courts.We have the greatest faith that the justice ministers of the Member States will together arrive at a solution on how intergovernmental police co-operation can be organised effectively in the battle against crime .
However desirable closer cooperation in the area of the criminal law may be , having in mind the Europe-wide increase in organized crime , it must not be overlooked that the Agreement discards very significant basic principles of extradition law . Some of these latter also have the effect of reducing the protection provided by one 's own citizenship .
The reservations voiced by Member States , repeatedly regretted in the report before us , are from that point of view perfectly understandable .
Criminal law is - viewed historically - a basic characteristic of the sovereignty of a state . This is why , at this stage of development , one must obviously acknowledge - as Amsterdam has shown - that neither a further unification of the criminal law nor the progressive relinquishment of sovereign authority has the support of citizens .
Apart from that , the convention is conspicuous for the absence of discussion on procedural problems and the guarantee of constitutional minimum standards .
For these reasons we are unable to support the resolution .
Firstly , in the short term the report 's proposal means reduced legal certainty because of a lack of clarity about the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice .
In the longer term it means increased supranationalism .
The report also supports the restrictions on the right of asylum found in the Amsterdam Treaty , which we find unacceptable .
We have therefore voted no to the report .
The vote against paragraph 11 of the Palacio Vallelersundi report is based on respect for the " constitutional identity ' of Member States , a principle for which there is a special proviso both in the Treaty on European Union and long before that in Community law and precedent .
Moreover , it is through this identity that the Member States contribute to a common legal culture .
Portugal was the first country to abolish the death penalty and whole life imprisonment .
In the case of the abolition of the death penalty , this is already a common feature of European identity itself , in that it is no longer applied in any country of the Union .
The text of paragraph 11 is also outdated in relation to Portugal since , in the case of whole life imprisonment or sentences of indeterminate length , the recent constitutional review allows extradition subject to the existence of reciprocal mechanisms guaranteeing that such sentences will not be effectively applied or carried out .
So defending our " constitutional identity ' does not imply any lack of confidence in the legal mechanisms of the other Member States . We have full confidence in them and seek to collaborate increasingly closely with them in the fight against crime and terrorism .
We hope we will receive the same confidence in return , as we are not and we never will be a refuge or sanctuary for criminals , but , on the contrary , a particularly safe and peaceful country , as millions of our fellow European citizens in the other Member States can already testify .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.20 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Mr President , under Rule 22 of the Rules of Procedure , I draw your attention to the fact that you want us , as Members , to give you an exact account of what we do , at what time .
We started this meeting three minutes late .
Secondly , after the House broke up at 1.00 p.m. , I went to the Members ' restaurant where I spoke with other colleagues about the business of the House .
I have the bill from the restaurant which I will give to administration .
I went to the intergroup on tourism affairs where I spent half an hour .
Alas , I must tell you that I have no ticket for the toilets , where I also went quickly in between .
Next time I will see to it that you get an account of that as well so that under Rule 22 of the Rules of Procedure the Bureau has a full account of my activities in this House as a Member .
I do not think that I have to render account to the members of the Bureau , but rather to my electorate .
Thank you very much , Mr Wijsenbeek .
We would all like to have it in duplicate , and we look forward to receiving these regular reports , but perhaps you could submit a written report rather than using Parliamentary time to deliver a verbal report each time .
Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Shortly before lunch Mr Tomlinson raised a question about the resolution on Ethiopia .
Parliament 's services have now looked into the matter and ascertained that Mr Tomlinson , as usual , is right .
Point D has been corrected accordingly , so I hope Mr Tomlinson is satisfied with that .
I thank the presidency and its services for checking this so quickly .
But it is a matter for substantial concern that preamble D actually says that the United Nations Commission on Human Rights , in its 53rd session expressed its condemnation .
That is what this text says .
There was no such condemnation .
Therefore I believe all the ensuing comments , which are highly prejudicial , should be deleted from the text - all of them .
It then goes on to talk about continuing violation of human rights in Ethiopia .
If there was no decision , everything else is supposition .
This is no way for a Parliament that is supposed to be serious to conduct its foreign policy and relations with other countries in other parts of the world .
Either the United Nations Commission on Human Rights , in its 53rd session did express condemnation , or it did not .
I hope that rather than change a word , we should delete the whole of preamble D because it is tendentious nonsense which holds this Parliament up to ridicule with the rest of the world .
Mr Tomlinson , it appears to me that there are two problems here .
One is that there was an actual error .
That has now been corrected .
Then you say , and I understand well what you are saying , that the following two sentences are also tendentious .
If people agree with you , and there are perhaps many Members who do , the conclusion is that they must vote against .
I do not think that I can sit here as President and let the whole point be deleted . So I hope you will accept that it remains , and perhaps I should read it out as it now reads :
Amend Recital D as follows : ' D. Noting that the United Nations Commission on Human Rights , in its 53rd session , discussed the violation of human rights in Ethiopia , including extrajudicial , summary or arbitrary executions , deaths in custody , torture , rape , arbitrary and politically motivated arrests and detentions and the oppression by the authorities of ethnic and religious minorities ' .
This was discussed .
This is what it says .
If you do not like this , then you should vote against it .
It would be helpful if you added at the end of the sentence that it discussed them without coming to a conclusion .
I wonder whether as President I am authorized to do that .
The solution is to vote against it if you do not like it or you could put this as an oral amendment if everybody accepts that but I am afraid some will object to it .
I , as President , cannot do that so it will go forward as it stands .
You have corrected the factual error ; the political error can be corrected by voting it down .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , yet another resolution on Cyprus .
One more resolution full of nice words of support for Cyprus and full of advice to Turkey and to Mr Denktash .
What is the result ?
Absolutely nothing .
Neither Mr Denktash nor Turkey , and I regret to have to say this , neither the Council nor the Commission attach any significance to the resolutions of the European Parliament .
And if that was not enough we also have paragraph 5 , which refers to the S300s .
Ladies and gentlemen , are you not aware that in occupied Cyprus there has been a Turkish army of occupation for twenty three years ?
Are you not aware that there are 40 , 000 Turkish soldiers in Cyprus ?
Are you not aware that there are heavy weapons ?
Are you not aware that there are tanks and aeroplanes ?
In the name of what legal authority of the European Union do you reject the right of the government of Cyprus to organize its own defence ?
Since you know very well , ladies and gentlemen , that the S300s are weapons of defence and not weapons of aggression , unless we are expecting that one fine morning Mr Denktash will occupy the rest of Cyprus and we will continue to put forward resolutions while the whole of Cyprus falls to the army of occupation .
Unless , ladies and gentlemen , and I regret to say this but it is the hard truth , we are annoyed that the S300s are purchased from Russia and not from the European Union , that is to say , from France , from Germany or from the United Kingdom , or even from America .
It seems that when a missile bears a stamp saying ' made in the United States ' or ' made in Europe ' it is a good missile , since this is the impression that you give me , and I regret that in this resolution , which will have no significance whatsoever , there is this paragraph .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are trying to cover up a reprehensible fact .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
We entered the summer break in the hope that the talks under the auspices of the United Nations between Glafcos Clerides and Raouf Denktash would be successful .
Once again these hopes were destroyed - hopes that the 23-year-old partition of Cyprus , and the Turkish occupation since 1974 of 37 % of Cypriot territory , might be ended in favour of a solution that would make possible the peaceful co-existence of Greek and Turkish Cypriots .
These hopes were once more destroyed by the inflexible attitude of Raouf Denktash .
It is quite unacceptable for Denktash to call for a cessation of the membership talks between the Union and Cyprus .
It is equally unacceptable for the Turkish Government and the illegal regime in the occupied part of Cyprus to threaten annexation by Turkey of the occupied part , if membership of the EU by Cyprus should take place .
We reject with disgust and outrage the declaration by Denktash that membership could result in a war in Cyprus .
When will it be realised that it is high time for the use of reason and most certainly not of weapons ?
The European Union 's resolutions are clear .
Membership talks with Cyprus begin six months after the government conference : at the beginning of next year , therefore .
As has been reiterated in Agenda 2000 , talks can be held only with the one constitutionally recognized authority , the Government of the Republic of Cyprus .
I would comment here , that European Ministers should not touch that point either , in private remarks made in public .
Membership should be to the benefit of all Cypriots , however .
That is our declared will .
For that reason ways must be found to include the Turkish Cypriot community in negotiations .
For despite the current failure of the talks , and despite the escalation of words , I hope for a rapid victory for good sense in the interests of all Cypriots .
In Agenda 2000 the Union declares its determination to play a positive role in reaching a solution .
It would be a useful contribution to make it emphatically clear to Turkey yet again that improved relations also depend on a solution in Cyprus .
We know that Turkey possesses the key to this .
Mr President , even if it is a compromise , this resolution on Cyprus is worthwhile since on the one hand it condemns the blocking of negotiations , attributable to the Turkish Cypriots , and the new attempts at intimidation by Turkey , and , on the other hand , it reiterates Europe 's desire to undertake from the start of 1998 negotiations on membership with the single recognized government , that of the Republic of Cyprus .
Beyond that , it has to be said that Cyprus currently meets almost all the terms of membership needed to join the European Union .
The negotiations , once initiated , should not drag on eternally pending a possible agreement , which would be tantamount to yielding to Turkish blackmail .
I therefore appeal to the Commission so ensure that the negotiations with Cyprus are conducted with all desirable resolve and speed so that Cyprus becomes the sixteenth state of the European Union as soon as possible , even without the final agreement of Mr Denktash and with Turkey .
Mr President , without a shadow of a doubt there has recently been movement on the Cypriot question and I think that the main reason for this movement is the application of Cyprus to join the European Union .
Many hopes had indeed been invested in the talks that took place in the United States and in Switzerland between President Clerides and the leader of the Turkish Cypriots , Mr Denktash , but it must be said that those hopes have been vindicated in only a very small part .
But there has been real progress on humanitarian issues and now there is the prospect of the beginning of talks on security on the island , and it is the wish of all of us , I imagine , in this room to see the complete demilitarisation of Cyprus .
These positive developments , however , do not change the picture that emerged during the negotiations .
What is this picture ?
The picture that emerged is that the Greek Cypriots agreed with the ideas of the United Nations , there was 90 % agreement , they accepted them fully and I think that nobody can claim that the United Nations is an organ of the Greek Cypriots .
On the other hand the Turkish Cypriots and Mr Denktash showed complete intransigence and at the same time there were threats of the annexation of the northern section of Cyprus by Turkey , and also threats of war if the accession of Cyprus to the European Union went ahead .
In any case , the accession of Cyprus is a decision that has been taken . Negotiations begin in April and we all hope that the Turkish Cypriots will be an organic part of the state that will , at some point , become a member of the European Union .
For this to happen , pressure must be exerted on Turkey to find a solution and to encourage all those forces in Turkey who want this to happen and who believe in a solution to the Cypriot question and in the accession of Cyprus to the European Union .
Because there are forces in Turkey who realise that the European Union is a guarantor of the human rights of all the people of Cyprus , and that the Turkish Cypriots will be the first to benefit financially from accession . They realise that Turkey , through the Turkish Cypriots , will have an , albeit indirect , part to play in the European Union , and , last but not least , that it will improve its image , free from charges of intransigence and aggression .
Let us therefore encourage the progressive forces of Turkey .
Mr President , as has been mentioned , this is the nth resolution on Cyprus .
I would say this resolution makes sense if the Commissioner can reassure us during this debate on what is being asked .
That is , if he can reassure us that initiatives will immediately be taken to try to review the Turkish Cypriot community 's boycott of the negotiations .
Furthermore , it is important for the Commissioner to reassure us that the Commission intends to keep faith with its own declarations : in particular I believe the Commission should immediately confirm that the current difficulties are due solely and exclusively to the fact that Turkey remains a country in military occupation of another country .
It is also crucial to confirm that , in the face of the boycott , the European Union will continue the negotiations with the only internationally recognized authority , that is , the government of Cyprus .
Finally , I think it would be helpful if I responded to something Mrs Roth said in her speech .
The position taken by an Italian minister was a personal position , and the Italian government has confirmed that it is entirely in line with the position of the European Union .
I just wanted to make that clear on behalf of my country .
Mr President .
I think we should really make an effort here to discriminate between the current moment and the general development .
At the current time it is clear that we must express ourselves unambiguously against the way Raouf Denktash 's attitude sabotaged the peace talks , which had begun optimistically .
Whilst obeying international law , however , we must not fail to remember that the Cypriot conflict is somewhat more complex , that there are two sides , and that it is of vital important for peace that Cypriots make peace amongst themselves , distancing themselves from false friends on both sides of the sea .
That is the key to the problem , and one may get a little applause here for attacks on Turkey , where one can find much to criticise .
Raouf Denktash has made impossible demands , yet there can be no peace in Cyprus without an agreement with the Turkish Cypriot side as well , and for this one must seek new ways .
This is not an argument for departure from any sort of resolution , but a plea for fantasy , imagination and initiative .
Mr President , Denktash has in fact slammed the door on the negotiations which initially seemed to have been opened with such imagination by the United Nations .
He set unacceptable prior conditions and the reaction of the Turkish Cypriots and Turkey was as expected .
However , every effort must still be made to find a solution to the dispute and to make clear that Cypriot entry to the European Union cannot be blocked by the fact that peace has not yet been achieved on the island .
The reaction of the Union was the right one .
The Commission gave the right signal .
The accession negotiations with Cyprus must begin in 1998 - at the beginning of the year - and the Union must consequently stick to its position : the illegal occupation regime in northern Cyprus cannot be recognized and as such cannot take part in negotiations .
The negotiations on the Cypriot dispute must be carried out independently of the accession talks .
We must build on the successes such as the progress made in the humanitarian field .
The announcement that security problems will also be discussed soon is an encouraging sign .
The over-supply of arms makes the dispute on the island all the more explosive .
Perhaps agreements on the limitation of weapon imports would be a good first step .
Mr President , recent developments bear witness to the fact that , unfortunately , we are now facing the worst situation regarding the Cypriot problem since 1974 .
There is a serious danger that the island will finally be partitioned .
Responsibility for this lies in the policy that is being conducted in the region by the United States and NATO .
The move for the accession of Cyprus into the European Union , while seen by many as the catalyst for the solution of the Cyprus question , is already being transformed into an instrument of pressure and blackmail against the legally elected government of the Republic of Cyprus , and allows Turkey , with the indulgence not only of the European Union but also of the governments of certain Member States , to undermine any prospect whatsoever for a just and honourable solution to the Cypriot problem .
The only contribution of the present resolution is that it acts to remind us of the problem and of the responsibilities that exist .
For this reason I also endorse the resolution .
Mr President , now that the question of Cyprus is again on the agenda , I must just remind you that in December 1995 , this Parliament , with a very large majority and without setting conditions , approved a customs union with Turkey and in addition billions in financing from the European Union to Turkey .
We nevertheless already knew then , in December 1995 , that since 1974 Turkey has militarily occupied part of Cyprus and furthermore is actually carrying out a policy of cultural genocide there .
We also knew at that time that the entry of Cyprus into the European Union would become particularly problematic owing to this Turkish occupation .
It seems to me in all honesty a bit ridiculous , now , in this resolution , to point out in a friendly way to the Turkish government , the fact that , and I quote , constructive relations between Turkey and the European Union depend partly upon the policy concerning Cyprus .
The Turkish policy with regard to Cyprus is after all well known and one can perhaps reproach the Turkish government for it but we can certainly not blame the Turkish government for not speaking in clear terms about it .
Not then , in December 1995 , and not now .
The difference is that in December 1995 , we could have thrashed things out around the table and now , all we can do is make a protest on paper .
This will of course not stop me from approving the paper protest because it may after all still make a small contribution to letting Turkey , our neighbour country and NATO partner , know that the best possible neighbours can only remain so if first of all the Turkish occupation troops leave Cyprus and certainly if the Turkish threat of war , because that is what it is , ceases .
Mr President , the solution to the Cypriot crisis lies in the rediscovery of a Cypriot identity based on values of tolerance and mutual respect , putting aside ethnic hatred and divisions based on retrospective nationalist appeals .
If the Greek Cypriots felt more Cypriot than Greek and the same was true of the Turkish Cypriots , and both Greece and Turkey collaborated in the birth of a new nation which was neither pro-Greek nor pro-Turkish , perhaps this situation could be brought to an end .
Europe could send a peace contingent to guarantee the birth of a federal state which would respect cultural and religious autonomy , where the different identities could be reconstructed .
That is the Alleanza Nazionale proposal .
To achieve this , it is obvious that the European Union must put the maximum political , commercial and economic pressure on Turkey to withdraw its troops from the island , just as the Greek Cypriot community must mute its desire for revenge .
Otherwise it would be better to close the chapter on Cypriot membership of the Union and regard Cyprus as just like all the other crisis areas we assiduously and hopelessly concern ourselves with .
Mr President , the Commission welcomes the motions for resolutions regarding the political situation following the UN sponsored talks on Cyprus in Troutbeck and Montreux .
The Commission fully supports the efforts under the auspices of the UN to work towards a political settlement and regrets that at the talks in August in Montreux there was no progress .
However , let me make it quite clear that accession negotiations with Cyprus will start six months after the conclusion of the IGC in conformity with the Council decision of 6 March 1995 .
The Commission shares the view expressed by the UN Secretary-General that the decision to open negotiations should be seen as a positive development which could promote the search for a political settlement .
Together with the Council , the Commission looks to the leaders of the two communities to resume their direct negotiations and urges that they , and all parties concerned , should in the meantime work and act constructively and in good faith to promote the success of those negotiations .
In this context , the Commission welcomes the recent announcement of a forthcoming meeting between President Clerides and Mr Denktash to discuss security matters and the decision to continue direct contacts on humanitarian issues .
As requested by the Council , the Commission will continue to inform the Turkish Cypriot community about the advantages of accession to the European Union .
Thank you very much , Mr Pinheiro .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place this afternoon at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following six motions for resolutions :
B4-0762 / 97 by Mr Dell 'Alba and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina ; -B4-0765 / 97 by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina ; -B4-0774 / 97 by Mr Swoboda and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina ; -B4-0782 / 97 by Mr Cars and Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina ; -B4-0789 / 97 by Mr Oostlander and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina ; -B4-0791 / 97 by Mrs Pack and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on Sandzak , former Yugoslavia .
Mr President , the Group of the European Radical Alliance to which I belong will probably vote in support of the resolution .
However , we cannot overlook a certain number of contradictions related to this resolution .
The first is that in the preambles , the European institutions express their full support for the return of a multi-ethnic , multi-cultural and multi-confessional society .
Moreover , paragraph 6 in particular mentions that we should approve the attitudes currently observed with respect to a person who today holds an official post in the Republika Srpska and who for a long time , according to his own statements , worked closely with Karadzic and Mladic .
The fact that we must continue being favourably disposed towards this person because he now apparently defends the legitimate state is worrying or at least puzzling .
I believe that the crucial point in this text is the one that defends the permanent presence of the SFOR , which in our view is probably the only way to avoid a replica of the programmed massacre of the kind we have seen ordered by the persons already named .
As a member of the delegation which observed the elections in Bosnia , I have to say immediately that we must recognize with satisfaction the fact that the elections took place without incident and in a satisfactory manner from the formal point of view .
This is a step forward both for the implementation of the Dayton agreements , and for going further than the Dayton agreements .
But having said that , I think it is also important to say that good formal results are not enough .
The situation needs to move forward and this will only happen if we are successful , starting from the results of the elections , in energizing the interactive relations which need to exist between the various parts of Bosnia-Herzegovina .
In particular , the result already risks being compromised by the way voters were registered .
Hence , with the sole and important exception of the city of Tuzla , the result threatens to allow room only for the extremist nationalist parties .
This situation is a consequence of the way the elections were put in place .
I hope that we , as a Parliament , as the European Union , will be able to take forward initiatives on the basis of this result , which is important but not sufficient , so that peace can be brought to this area .
Mr President .
Firstly may I express the consternation and sorrow of our Party that so many very distinguished people have been killed in the tragic helicopter crash in Bosnia , including Mr Carlos Westendorp 's deputy , Mr Wagner , whom I met only a few weeks ago in Sarajevo , and who had achieved a very high reputation in a very short time .
He had also expressed considerable criticism - perhaps I can quote this as his legacy here - about some things that had prevented Europe speaking with a stronger voice , from playing a stronger role in Bosnia .
I would ask the Commissioner most sincerely to do all in his power to see that we do not merely give a lot of money - there is something to be said about that , as well - but really make a more powerful impression in Bosnia for the implementation of our concepts in general .
Today we are discussing Bosnia not just because there were elections a short time ago , but because , I think , we want to make an unequivocal statement of our view that we cannot and will not allow the peace process to be destroyed .
This is not a matter of angels , not a case of only good on one side and evil on the other , but it is a case of those who are ready to see the Dayton Process through to a good conclusion - regardless of where they may stand on it individually - needing our complete support .
Those who cannot refrain from continuing to disrupt this peace process must count on us taking definite measures against them , and I entirely share the view of Carlos Westendorp and the senior Delegate , that we must proceed against them with all severity and must not be afraid of doing so .
It must not be possible following the end of the war for people still to exist - unfortunately on all sides , but certainly mainly on one side or the other - who hinder the return of refugees , or the operation of this whole programme in which a multi-ethnic Bosnia is being created .
I should also like to say , Mr Commissioner , that there are cases where even the USA , the Commission or representatives of the Commission hinder the return of refugees to their homelands , and no new groups find entrance , because certain groups of citizens do not wish that to happen .
I believe one must take a firm stand against that .
The last point in the resolution is that we , the European countries , should make a lot of money available .
This money is not always used efficiently .
The money is also not sufficiently used , or used too late , because there are too few people to administer it as long as experts are at hand .
I would ask you , Mr Commissioner , to ensure that the money we make available can be more efficiently used , so that we do everything possible towards the restoration and securing of peace in Bosnia .
Mr President , the day before Karl Habsburg and I arrived as election observers in Bugojno in Bosnia , there was an explosion which destroyed a house .
Did it have anything to do with the election ?
The explanation was simpler than that .
Across the road from the house there was a car park .
Its Muslim owner could no longer make use of it because it ended up on the ' wrong side ' after the war .
He had therefore sold it to the Croat house-owner .
That was not good .
The car park could now be regarded as a Croat area .
Hence the explosion .
From car and helicopter we gained a frightening picture of the destruction in Bosnia .
With systematic precision , tens of thousands of houses have been destroyed , most with the help of ordinary civilian tools .
Those who lived in them were of the ' wrong kind ' .
The people in Bosnia belong to the same ethnic group and speak the same language , but history has created a mistrust which ruthless nationalist leaders have been able to exploit for their own ends .
I admit that I was ashamed of being a human being when I saw in Bosnia how vicious we can be towards our neighbours and work colleagues .
It is in this Bosnia that local elections have now been held for the first time .
A requirement for free elections is that the citizens find out what the parties stand for .
The voters in Bosnia never got that chance . But with international effort , it was possible to carry out the election itself in an acceptable way .
One outcome of the election is that it has strengthened the Bosnians ' democratic awareness .
They had experience of elections in which the results were decided in advance in the President 's Office .
Now they know that it can be different , that every vote is important .
The election has also given Bosnia local leaders with authority to act and think in a new way as a result of the voters ' trust .
One may perhaps dare to imagine a light at the end of the tunnel , but the journey there will not be smooth .
Mr President , I should firstly like to join with those people who expressed their sympathy to the next of kin of those who recently lost their lives in the tragic helicopter accident .
I also wish to express my appreciation of the fact that Mr Swoboda now says from his group on this occasion once again how important it is to take very harsh action against those who carry out the evil deeds , from whichever side , in BosniaHerzegovina .
This attitude is shared pretty well throughout the Parliament .
I believe that to be an extemely important point , particularly with regard to the future .
We have now had a successful election process .
I am not going into that in depth now , but I do believe it is very important in particular that it has appeared that Serbs have withdrawn from the influence of their bosses and have gone to vote outside the Serb Republic in the places where they come from .
I think that is an important achievement .
In this way , the possibility is also created that criminals who are in power in various places may be cast out of their seats .
That is naturally very important with regard to the necessary return of refugees and the subsequent building up of the economy .
Because before that the return of the refugees will be essential .
I really wish to urge the Commission to provide assistance more forcefully and on a local basis to provide assistance to all communities that really want to get involved in completing the Dayton process .
I believe it is important to react immediately , in order to provide the conditional assistance quickly and effectively to those people , towns and regions that really want to work together towards the goals of Dayton .
I hope that it won 't all founder in procedures , as did , for example , our pledge to repair a parliament building in Sarajevo , which has sort of become a monument to the impotence of the European Union .
I wish to insist upon the possibility that the mandate of SFOR be strengthened because of course the return of refugees and the guarantee of the results of these elections cannot be achieved without some force .
And I also commend , in that regard , the harsher position that SFOR in particular has already taken in respect of the protection of the media and of the radio and television stations in that area of the Serb Republic .
I would therefore ask the Commission in which way it is adapting its strategy to this successful result in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
I should like to follow what my colleague Oostlander has said , and to thank Mr Swoboda for mentioning the accident which has occurred .
These were all people who , on behalf of the international community , wanted to help people down there to regain freedom and peace , to make co-operation possible .
The fact that life has to be sacrificed for this is very sad .
I hope the citizens of Bosnia-Herzegovina appreciate that there are people who risk their lives to help them organise the future .
Now to return to the election which we observed .
I think we should note that this step towards elections was a very important one towards making this country achieve of peace .
Without communal elections there can be no multi-ethnic cooperation in this country .
Without the achievement of these communal elections this cannot happen .
I should like to remind you that - as my colleague Oostlander has already said - the people in this election voted where they wanted , because they came from there .
They did not , therefore , vote for the places to which they had been expelled , but for their places of origin .
I think that is an important sign for us , so that we , the international community , should now try to use the results of these communal elections with the local authorities in order that these people really can return . This should not be in order for us to produce a community without a population , but that the government elected there , the council , should once more have the citizens whom it represents .
I think this is an important step towards the implementation of Daytona .
We must obviously take other steps together with the Commission .
Commissioner van den Broek has promised me this .
We must be flexible in laying down conditions for aid .
If a community behaves in such a way that it really implements the results of this election , and in the speediest possible manner , the we must give it the means towards to reconstruction .
And so that it can be an example and noted by neighbouring communities : if one behaves properly , if one really obeys the agreement , then one will be rewarded .
That is the only way for us to establish peace and ensure that multi-ethnic cooperation is once again possible .
Mr President .
I should like to stress one point , which has , thank goodness , been included in the resolution . This concerns the problems of Sandjak in Novi Pazar , about which we have previously spoken hardly at all , but which present a very serious human rights problem .
As you know , the Sandjak of Novi Pazar has about 500 , 000 Muslims who live between Montenegro and Serbia and who were , even in the past , subject to the most serious oppression .
Once again there has been deceit , and in the elections the freely elected community council was dissolved , to be replaced by other individuals loyal to Serbia . This is proof that Serbia , and perhaps Montenegro also , - although one must not take the independence of Montenegro too seriously - is simply not prepared to play the game according to the rules we laid down at Daytona .
I request that everything should be extended to include the Sandjak of Novi Pazar and the rights of that population .
Mr President , as we are aware , the European Union was represented by a committee of observers with unfortunately only five members , expertly presided over by Mrs Pack .
As in the previous year , I had the opportunity , together with my colleagues , to see the situation at close hand , and indeed in the extremely sensitive region of Britzko .
It is clear that in these elections displaced persons expressed their desire to return to their homes , but it is also clear that the implementation of the result of the elections will be beset by many difficulties .
It is encouraging that in a town like Tuzla the prudent and moderate mayor has been re-elected , but this is not sufficient .
The ambassador , Mr Frowick , rushed to celebrate before the ballot boxes had been well and truly closed .
There were problems , however .
Regarding Britzka especially , everybody agreed that equivocation and confusion reigned for which the organisers were chiefly responsible .
What must happen ?
Of course every attempt to rebuild local multiethnic societies must be supported .
Wherever it happens , the more it happens the better , without , however , actions that may lead to more violence .
The European Union has spent enormous sums of money intermittently here without having played any substantial political role .
The Croat entity is the most developed , the Muslim entity attempts to follow and also accepts enormous sums of money from the Organization of Muslim Countries ( an American Officer there told us ) while the Serbian entity is in a very difficult position .
Of course the mega question of war crimes still hasn 't been resolved .
Such crimes , however , were committed on all sides and , in any case , those who pay are just ordinary people and the weakest among them at that .
Bosnia needs every support and help it can get , at all levels and throughout the whole of the region .
The international armed force , SFOR , also needs to be maintained there , and , and we in this House must emphasise this in particular , the units of unarmed ECMM must also be maintained there , that is to say , of those who have offered so much under the flag of the European Union .
And when we talk of aid , we are not talking of philanthropy . We are talking of the need of the European Union never to see such conflagrations at its door again .
Madam President , let me start by saying that the Commission is deeply shocked and saddened by the helicopter accident yesterday in which 10 foreign officials working in Bosnia for peace died and , among them , our very much appreciated Deputy High Representative , Dr Wagner .
The Commission of course welcomes the successful holding of municipal elections in Bosnia-Herzegovina on 13 and 14 September .
The high turnout underlines the fact that these elections mark an important step towards democracy .
But let us not fool ourselves .
The next vital step will be the enabling the officials elected to take office .
The Commission calls on the parties to enable this to happen smoothly and rapidly .
The elections mark a step on the road towards implementing the Dayton agreement , which remains the national communities ' and the Commission 's firm objective .
As you may recall , at the ministerial meeting in Sintra last May , we agreed on the need to support those parties who are themselves supporting Dayton and to do what we can to undermine those who are opposing it .
This explains why the Commission has so warmly welcomed Mrs Plavsic 's determination to lead the Republic of Srpska towards the implementation of Dayton and , at the same time , her intention to eliminate corruption in the Republic of Srpska government .
Unfortunately , the political confusion and the impossibility of being sure that assistance would not be exploited to the profit of Karadzic as well as some legal constraints on the memorandum of understanding governing the programme of assistance to Bosnia , meant that not all the resources at our disposal have been fully utilized .
I refer to the utilization of ECU 15 million but the non-utilization of ECU 35 million .
One of the Honourable Members asked the Commission what we intend to do about that .
We have agreed with the High Representative , Mr Westendorp , that we will work very closely , and as a matter of urgency , with the economic task force in order to identify the best projects that would help the people in Bosnia and help the Dayton process .
In that sense , support for free media and , just as importantly , support for municipalities that are working to put Dayton into practice - these are the main goals of the Commission following these recent elections in Bosnia .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
Madam President , I am pleased to introduce this motion .
The situation in Kenya has been going from bad to worse , it seems .
Not only is the situation bad in human rights terms , with regular violations of human rights , regular beatings by the police , detention without trial , but the situation socially is bad too .
The schools and hospitals in Kenya do not have the resources they need nor , in some cases , do the local authorities .
There seems to be discrimination against people according to the tribes they come from .
Indeed tribal relations are far from good .
The European Union is a major aid donor to Kenya .
We know that we can exercise pressure on the Kenyan Government in collaboration with others , pressure that can be effective .
We know this because recently the ruling party actually made some concessions to the opposition to help create free and fair elections .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for having met me and a colleague this morning to talk about this situation .
I would urge him to do all he can to carry out the demands of this motion and bring pressure to bear on the Kenyan Government with a view to free and fair elections and the development of a healthy democracy .
Madam President , we are now at a rather crucial stage in Kenya , with elections coming up very fast on the horizon .
We certainly welcome the concessions made by the government and the vote by the parliament on 11 September .
I have a question I hope the Commissioner can answer .
When exactly will these reforms take effect ?
Clearly , if we go on President Moi 's past record , he will delay their implementation until after the elections .
That would not be acceptable to us in Parliament or to the Commission .
Secondly , how far will the reforms go ?
In particular , the requirement to have a certain proportion of the votes in a number of regions seems to be the reason why there have been oppression , beatings and intimidation in the Mombasa region .
Will that also be part of the package ?
I should like to end with a quotation from a letter which I have received from the Presbyterian Church of East Africa .
It says , on behalf of the people : ' The people 's participation in the affairs of their country is an inalienable right which cannot be denied ' .
I would commend that to the House .
Let us do everything we can to support the Kenyan people in the exercise of their democratic rights .
Madam President , unfortunately we are again forced to concern ourselves with violence and human rights abuses in Kenya .
Last week 's serious disorder , which took many victims , was , I believe , a very clear demonstration of the way the regime is using all possible means to oppose the development of democracy in the country .
While the interpretation of any individual act of violence is never simple , what does seem certain is that a consistent proportion of the acts of violence are organized and carried out by government forces or forces under the orders of the regime .
On top of this there is fierce repression of representatives of the opposition forces and the widespread violation of human rights continues .
Even more dangerous is the outbreak of violence presented as ethnic and religious in origin when it is clearly politically motivated , violence which threatens to destabilize the country permanently .
There is still one element of hope .
The recent constitutional reforms approved by the Kenyan Parliament , if they are actually implemented , could begin - only begin - a spiral establishing democracy in the country .
The prospect of free elections and of putting an end to the extremely protracted authoritarian regime can begin to emerge .
But to do this it is necessary to continue down the road to reform and above all to build a political dialogue .
Now , more than ever , the international community can play a positive role to promote that prospect .
So we call on the Council and the Commission to monitor the situation in Kenya and , above all , using all the available instruments , to bring strong pressure to bear on the Kenyan authorities so that all provocation and violence ceases and does not impede the reform process .
Then it is necessary to guarantee the maximum possible assistance to the vast number of evacuees created by the violence of the past few months , and it needs to be remembered that there are hundreds of thousands of refugees from other countries in Kenya and that the stability of that country is fundamental for the whole region .
Madam President .
Kenya was not always the scene of disorder and brutality .
I was myself in Nairobi for the World Conference of Women in 1990 , when the city peacefully welcomed 13 , 000 women .
That is unthinkable today .
Everything has changed .
Today there is the rule of fear , terror and violence by the Police and by gangs .
Kenya 's tourism is under threat as an important source of foreign exchange , neighbouring countries fear that the crisis will cross their borders .
We appeal to the parties , whether they be in Government or Opposition , not to support any kind of violence , but to turn against any form of terrorism , to enable constitutional reform with the possibility for freedom of expression , and to prepare for free elections .
This concerns their own race , after all .
It concerns their own people and their own families .
Corruption must be combatted and I , too , should like to end with the proposal : the Commission and the Council should make much more use of their opportunity to use article 5 of the Lomé Convention in the ending of human rights abuses on behalf of the population .
Kenya will be another example of how seriously we take our own human rights clauses , which we insist on having in agreements , and how effectively we are able to enforce them .
Kenya is a great African country .
It has played an important role in the past , a peaceful role as well , and it could play this role again , if it should be successful in restoring public order , democracy and the rule of law .
I think we cannot do enough to try and influence these countries , because we have seen that we are in a position to do so .
We must support , therefore , all those who are prepared to restore peace and public order .
Madam President , once again we have to pass a resolution on Kenya - as we did last July - and we have to do so because the Nairobi military authorities continue to promote tension in that country .
In this way President Arap Moi is putting de facto obstacles in the way of a process of democratization which Kenya has yet to experience and which it badly needs .
I think the international community should put political and economic pressure on President Arap Moi .
In effect , I think the Commission should apply all the instruments provided for by article 5 of the Lomé Convention to stop the regime violating human rights and democratic freedoms .
Like other Members , I think the Commission should make a firm financial and practical commitment to assist the electoral process in every way , because the country needs democratic , transparent , multi-party elections .
Perhaps this aim , this stage of democracy , can draw the line under the dictatorial regime which , as the resolution states , has existed for far too long .
Madam President .
We discussed the situation in Kenya back in June and expressed our regret at how violent the situation there was .
This situation has not improved .
Fear , terror and violence rule the land , violence by the state forces .
We are currently concerned at the unrest and the wave of brutal oppression which exist , and which have already cost many people their lives .
We are concerned by the latest attacks by armed militia who have forced many thousands of people in Mombasa to leave their homes .
Kenya is , however , a signatory to the Lomé Convention .
Precisely because of this convention and its article 5 , we are obliged to assert ourselves on behalf of human rights in Kenya and to demand of the government or the president that the promised constitutional reform at last be implemented , and thus the basis for elections be prepared .
We support democratic conditions in Kenya .
That is also the demand of the local opposition , so that there may be an equal chance in the elections .
We , as the European Union and as signatories to the Lomé Convention , can implement this by means of political and economic pressure , and it is my view , Mr Pinheiro , that it should be included in the next Lomé meeting , which is imminent .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as happens unfortunately all too often in our assembly , the know-alls have again struck by tabling in response to the situation in Kenya a motion which is almost a word for word copy of a text drafted by the International Monetary Fund dated last July , despite the fact that it is very difficulty to understand who was responsible for the violence in Kenya .
As this is election year , the ill-informed media have hastily concluded that this was a revolt by the opposition that was quashed by the police forces .
This explains why the motion submitted to us mentions that civilians have fled acts of intimidation and brutality perpetrated by the security forces .
A telegram from the Agence France-Presse dated yesterday 17 September informs us that according to the leaders of the three opposition parties - Ford-Kenya , Ford-Asili and the democratic party - acts of violence are being committed by Islamic extremists in the region of Mombasa on the Indian Ocean and are spreading terror by burning homes and tourist centres because alcohol is consumed there .
I fail to see how the government of Mr Arap Moi could gain from wrecking the economy of his country , which mainly relies on tourism , only months from elections and only weeks from the start of the tourist season .
This is why the Group Union for Europe cannot vote in favour of a resolution which is clearly misguided and which proves , yet again , that instead off acting so self-importantly , some members of our assembly would be better advised to put aside their textbooks on ideology and carefully appraise the facts .
Gulf States
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the revolting news last week of the public executions of those who had been sentenced to death in the United Arab Emirates and the impending beheading of two British nurses found guilty of murder , bring back into the limelight in the most dramatic way the issue of capital punishment and the widespread abuse of basic human rights .
The increase in the imposition of the death penalty and the frequent public executions , as mentioned by Amnesty International and the Human Rights Agency , must concern us greatly and must make our Parliament , and other institutional bodies of the European Union , sensitive to the situation , so that it will engage in campaigns on a global scale for the abolition of the death penalty .
The European Parliament has both the authority and the power , and the necessary financial and human resources to achieve this .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is not a single scientifically reliable shred of evidence to support the fact that the death penalty acts as a deterrent . On the contrary it increases rather then reduces incidences of murder through a process of dehumanisation .
Today , unfortunately , the increased trend towards the restoration of the death penalty is all too obvious , and the reasons for this return to a mediaeval form of punishment are :
firstly , the inability of governments to control crime , which is on the increase because there is no investment in a long term anti-crime social policy with prevention as its aim.-secondly , the increase in the fear of becoming a victim .
We all fear falling victim to a criminal act .
This fear is systematically cultivated by the mass media and plays a part in the adoption of measures of containment and not of prevention.-thirdly , the pressure that is exerted on the one hand by those who mould public opinion and on the other hand by those strata of society of a low educational and socio-economic level who tend to think that the courts are lenient towards criminals.-fourthly , mass media images present the most rare and repugnant forms of crime inciting mass hysteria and arousing the desire of the public for more severe punishments and , indirectly , for the death penalty.Capital punishment has no place in democratic societies , noone has the absolute right of life and death over another human being .
On the contrary , capital punishment is the weapon preferred by totalitarian regimes , since it is the symbol of the deification of the state and of the humiliation of the individual in the face of state power .
And so capital punishment is most often used for the extermination of opponents of the state . The European Union must intensify its efforts against the concluding of economic and political agreements to ensure that provisions for the respect of human rights are not violated .
Mr President , more than 20 years ago , in 1975 , the Government of Bahrain dissolved the firstever elected Bahraini parliament which had existed for only two years .
Ever since , it has refused to restore it or call new elections .
Protests and campaigns opposed to arbitrary rule have been subject to draconic suppression under the 1974 State Security Law and other measures .
Very large numbers of people have been intimidated , arrested , convicted , imprisoned without trial or sent into compulsory exile .
There have , furthermore , been very serious complaints of violence , ill-treatment and torture .
It is , of course , true that some of the discontent generated in the tense atmosphere created has taken violent forms .
We in the European Parliament do not support in any way acts of terrorism , bombing or attempts by Islamic fundamentalists , for example , to limit the freedom of women .
Such acts however cannot be used to justify the refusal to provide any genuine democratic structures or the failure to guarantee human rights .
Many true democrats and peaceful campaigners have been punished and persecuted in a way that constitutes the most flagrant abuse of their human democratic rights .
Raids on meeting places , homes and other locations , the suspension of a professor from her job , dismissals of people for instigating a petition and the raid on 13 December on a women 's organization are all unacceptable .
The purpose of this resolution is not only to denounce the abuse of human and democratic rights but to appeal to the Bahraini authorities to restore democracy , call elections , release political prisoners and allow exiles to return .
I acknowledge receipt of representations from the Bahraini authorities against this resolution .
But I say to them , this is the only way for their country to end the tension and the possibility of an explosion in the long run .
We therefore call on the European Union Member States , the USA and others , to exert real pressure on Bahrain as indicated in this resolution to introduce genuine democratic change forthwith .
Madam President , the situation in Bahrain , about which Mr Newens spoke very eloquently , is visibly deteriorating .
The parliament has been dissolved for 22 years and human rights are being violated .
The recent demonstrations that call for the restoration of the constitutional order were aggressively suppressed on a grand scale .
Political prisoners are being tortured .
Reports by Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch speak volumes .
The Union must demonstrate its clear condemnation of this policy and it must also be clear that such a reaction to peaceful demonstrations is only pouring petrol on the flames .
And they have plenty of petrol there , from what I 've understood .
This must be made clear in the bilateral contacts between the Union and Bahrain .
Democratization is the only solution that can end the situation there .
Political prisoners must be released and political exiles must be able to return to Bahrain without risk .
The countries of the Union should finally refrain from supplying weapons to Bahrain and this approach must also be urged with partners in order to have as great an effect as possible .
Madam President .
I am truly sorry to have to contradict my good friends , the previous two speakers .
I have been to Bahrain on more than one occasion .
I know a bit about the history of Bahrain , back into the Forties .
It shows that these reports on Bahrain had nothing whatever to do with realities there .
We must not forget one thing : there is no doubt that certain excesses exist there , as in all Arab countries , which we cannot oppose sufficiently strongly .
On the other hand , however , Bahrain is under extreme threat from Iranian forces .
Shiite extremists , guided by the Iranian authorities , are responsible for the unrest one has seen in Bahrain generally .
Naturally they are anti-Government .
There is also a simple reason why they want to overthrow the Bahrain Government .
One merely needs to look at a map .
Bahrain has a , if not the , key position in the whole region .
If extremist forces were able to take Bahrain they would destabilize not just the region , but effectively create great violence .
I have to say that if we were successful in overthrowing the Government of Bahrain we would then really see what is meant by violence , oppression , repression and torture .
It is my view that one should certainly speak gently to the Bahrainis .
They are not our enemies .
But one should make quite clear to them that we would defend them against this threat from Iran , that we would support them , and that we would do everything possible to ensure that greater freedom is created in Bahrain , but that , in God 's name , internal order there should not now be destroyed .
For that reason we shall vote against this resolution .
Columbia
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this Parliament has often spoken about the situation in Colombia - about the violence , the terrorism and the attacks on human rights .
This debate today and the corresponding resolution are different because , finally , a glimmer of hope can be seen .
Violence has not solved a single problem in Colombia .
On the contrary , the situation has been getting worse throughout the last 30 years , reaching the limits of endurance .
The State has been replaced by violent organizations or drug mafias .
The country 's disruption has been caused by a violence which we wholly condemn .
That is why the proposal launched by the Samper Government to initiate talks between the conflicting parties should receive the support of all the Union 's institutions , which in their debates on many occasions have demonstrated enormous concern for the future of that country .
Furthermore , Colombian society is clearly demonstrating its commitment to peace through various types of initiatives , ranging from the mobilization of the population to education in tolerance , leaving aside the understandable fear of reprisals .
This is a new situation , which deserves careful thought from the guerrillas , the paramilitaries and all those who employ weapons instead of words .
The determination of Colombian society cannot be frustrated .
The Colombian Government has realized this , and is offering a chance for discussions which should lead to peace .
Finally , we ask several things : we ask the guerrillas to respond positively to this initiative ; we also ask for the paramilitary groups to be dismantled ; also , that a group of friendly countries should be formed to guarantee the process , as has been done on other recent occasions ; and we ask the Commission to offer their cooperation , with the full support of Parliament , to help with the success of this peaceful enterprise .
The unavoidable prerequisite for any peace process in Columbia is a basic improvement in the human rights situation in the country .
More than a million people are displaced in their own country , not just because they are caught between the fronts of the guerillas and the army , but because they have been sacrificed to the ever-worsening social conflict .
Large landowners like the regular army maintain paramilitary gangs that drive people away from fertile land .
You must all remember the exemplary case of Hacienda de la Cruz , as an example .
Human rights exponents are not safe in their homes even in Bogota , the capital , as we have recently seen from the murder of two members of CINEP .
It is possible , however , to see a glimmer of hope in this situation , as the Government has offered peace talks to the guerillas .
We are very ready to do everything in our power to support this process .
And that goes for both sides .
They must sit down at one table and at last negotiate , but it has got to be more than just a PR exercise to refresh the damaged image of this government .
We are very ready to help here .
Madam President , in support of this resolution , it is right that this European Parliament maintains its criticism of violence and human rights abuses on all sides in the Colombian conflict .
We condemn guerrilla violence and whilst welcoming the release of the kidnapped 70 young conscripts earlier this year against some expectations , we express concern at reports of widespread interference in the electoral process in the run-up to local elections due on 26 October .
Whilst welcoming peace proposals from the Colombian Government , we recognize the serious and outstanding questions of human rights abuse against state authorities , including the apparent sanctioning of paramilitary violence through Conviver .
Let us remember too that the vast majority of the civilian population are embroiled as innocent victims in the conflict , including nearly a million internally displaced people who , as my colleague says , have been driven from their homes through fear .
There can be no true peace without justice ; an end to widespread impunity in the country and social justice for peasants and indigenous communities are an absolute prerequisite for a lasting peace .
Finally , this Parliament passed a landmark resolution on human rights in Colombia last October .
Let us hear from you what practical actions you have taken and what you have achieved over the past twelve months to contribute towards the aims of that resolution .
Madam President , unfortunately in Colombia today violence is a law unto itself .
The proof of this is that more than 900 candidates for the forthcoming municipal elections in October have withdrawn their candidature . This is not surprising when you consider that more than 120 have been kidnapped and 22 murdered , and members of the Colombian Parliament have been advised to wear bullet-proof vests .
The economic situation is still deteriorating and relations with the United States are the worst they have been for several years .
What can the European Union do about this situation ?
Unfortunately , very little : we can support the Government and various sectors of civilian society in their efforts to achieve a rightful peace ; and we can support the efforts of the European Commission , and Commissioner Marín in particular , in that direction .
But let us not deceive ourselves . It will not be possible to achieve any solution unless the right conditions are created to permit a form of justice that is worthy of the name , in accordance with a system of law , and if absolutely nobody is above the law .
Madam President , the draft resolution welcomes the Colombian government 's peace initiative .
This initiative was announced on 28 August .
We should , however , note that on 4 September the army and paramilitary groups had already begun an offensive , including mass bombing of civilian targets .
This state of affairs has been documented by the indigenous people 's national organisation , amongst others , and also in newspapers like El País and La Nación .
It appears that in future Parliament and the Commission should be more on their guard against the double game the Colombian government is playing and its armed forces .
Chile
Madam President .
It is a long time since we spoke in this House about human rights violations in Chile .
Despite that there are still open wounds which have existed since the time of President Pinochet .
An amnesty law guaranteeing the military immunity from prosecution has so far prevented those guilty of the hideous crimes carried out by the military dictatorship in the country from being themselves brought before a court and sentenced .
The days of immunity from punishment , however , may now be over . For just this very reason our resolution today is so important .
An action brought in Spain by Spanish lawyers is about to lead to an investigation into crimes against humanity carried out by the dictatorship .
If this leads to the opening of a criminal case - as is foreseeable - Pinochet would even have to be extradited to Spain under an existing extradition treaty .
I think it is very important for other states to follow this example , so that these wounds can finally heal , because only one who also knows the facts can forgive .
Madam President , my first point is that this is a resolution designed to combat impunity directly .
It is not concerned with the past , but instead defends the present and the future , for impunity is the cause of continuing human rights abuses .
But , at the same time , this resolution shows the greatest respect for Chile 's democratic and civilian authorities .
Apart from the people of Chile , hardly any other institution has fought so much for the restoration of democracy in that country as has this Parliament . The resolution is completely consistent both with this Parliament 's policy , which has made constant efforts to defend human rights , and with international law , which demonstrates that crimes against humanity cannot be tolerated .
At the same time , we are in direct agreement with the rulings of the Chilean legal authorities , who say that the actions of the political police during the dictatorship were true crimes against humanity .
We are also in line with what has been expressed by the current Spanish Government in the Senado , which echoes popular feeling and fully supports a solution to this case .
This resolution is also similar to those passed by the Basque Parliament and the Valencian Community , and to the support currently being given by the United States authorities to the Spanish judge , opening the archives on cases which occurred during the dictatorship .
Therefore it makes reference to the opinions not only of Spain , but of many European people who want this impunity to be challenged .
This Parliament cannot ignore the outcry , and we cannot employ double standards .
That is why I am asking you to vote affirmatively , because it would be incomprehensible for this Parliament to fail to respond to this case .
Madam President , I believe the significance of this motion for a resolution has been explained extremely well by the proposer , our colleague Mr Pons Grau .
The position the European Parliament is voting on here today is the maintenance of constant and consistent action , well-grounded in law and justice , against impunity and neglect in relation to crimes systematically committed against human rights .
The Chilean case is a particularly serious one .
It is shocking that , just a few days ago , the dictator should have been able to glorify himself , in a military ceremony , offensive to the Chilean armed forces themselves , let alone offensive to the democratic authorities , as if the past had not been a past , as it was , of crimes against humanity .
The initiative of the Unión de Fiscales Progresistas , which was received by a Spanish court , should be given our political support .
That is what we can do ; that is what we ought to do , in the name of the European Community doctrine of defence of human rights and democracy .
And this is what we ask the Commission to do : support the action in Chile against impunity , which is helping consolidate democracy .
Madam President , General Pinochet will cease to be Chief Head of State of Chile in March 1998 .
We all hope that the transition to democracy will culminate at that precise moment .
Since we energetically condemn any human rights violation , our political Group has not the slightest doubts about the nature of the resolution presented by our colleagues .
However , we should like to emphasize that the Chilean Government , headed by President Frei , is making significant efforts towards the consolidation of democracy and the State of Law .
I should also like to remind the honourable Members that for more than ten years Chile has had a consensus Government made up of President Frei 's party , the Socialist Party and the Democracy Party .
Relations between the European Union and Chile are excellent at the moment , and a European Parliamentary delegation will soon be visiting Santiago .
I should like to conclude by asking you , on behalf of my group , for a separate vote on section 4 of the resolution .
Madam President , I am sorry to be out of tune with the chorus of the politically correct .
The reasons are simple : Chile is the only country in South America which has experienced democracy for 150 years .
Democratic elections brought President Allende to power .
His government was tragically troubled by the violent action of the MIR and its high-minded leader , but it is also politically incorrect to talk about him .
The persecutions and deaths that took place at that time opened the way to a violent and tragic military dictatorship , more criticized at world level than many others , equally or more violent , which exist and have existed in Africa and Asia .
The good democratic sense of the Chilean people forced the dictator to withdraw partially and allowed democracy to return .
I , who was born and lived under the Salazar dictatorship and who lived under and fought the communist dictatorship which followed it , have always approved of the democratic fate reserved for the soldiers guilty of unleashing blood and fire in Africa and East Timor , and the many who grew rich in the shade of the so-called " revolution of the nails ' .
So I appeal to this Parliament to have the good sense and the courage to see the beam in its own eye and not the mote in its neighbour 's , because the fact is that we are not even able to fight corruption and fraud within our own frontiers , far less give lessons to an already established democratic government .
Madam President .
The point about this resolution - as we understand it - is also to show that we as Europeans always have a particular responsibility for the punishment of those guilty of crimes under a dictatorship .
Transition from a dictatorship to a democracy is a development which many countries in Europe have made .
This has often not been easy , nor did it take place by simply altering the form of state government at a stroke .
This is not a matter of revenge , therefore , nor of proving that perhaps the new democracy in Chile is not sufficiently stable .
It is essential , however , to seek out and sentence those who were responsible for crimes during the dictatorship .
Transition from dictatorship to democracy is always a bit of family history as well .
My generation has experienced that here in Europe .
It concerns the fate of perpetrators and victims who were part of one 's own family and whom one has to acknowledge as part of our history .
Perhaps it is only the recognition of this development in one 's own family that has made our democracies in Europe so stable .
For this reason the prosecution those responsible is a basic requirement for the stability of a new democracy .
An amnesty or statute of limitations is not an expression of generosity , but in the end would cause a destabilisation of Chile 's democratic future .
This is not a matter of revenge , but of a process by which one proves that a democracy is strong enough to condemn , not those who simply carried out orders , but those who were specifically responsible for crimes .
Ethiopia
Madam President , my motion for a resolution today concerns the situation in Ethiopia which , despite its natural resources , is one of the poorest and least-developed countries in the world .
It is a very complex country with some 55 million people , including no fewer than 76 ethnic groups , speaking 286 languages .
Ethiopia , as we well know and first learned graphically ten years ago and more , has a long history of war , famine and drought .
The last elections in 1992 gave everyone hope that the situation would eventually improve .
Alas , only three years since the new constitution was drawn up guaranteeing basic human rights , and despite promises made by the Ethiopian authorities , there are still numerous reports of human rights abuses committed by the Ethiopian government forces , and no doubt others .
The authorities admit that some of these have occurred , but say that they are isolated incidents committed without their approval .
They maintain that such abuses are to be expected in a country which has been brutalized by 17 years of oppression and civil war .
The recent killing on 11 June 1997 of Mr Assefa Maru , of the Ethiopian Teachers ' Association , once again highlights the necessity for the Ethiopian authorities to respect the human rights of their citizens , whatever ethnic group they may belong to , and for the European Union to monitor closely the situation in Ethiopia .
I ask for the support of the House in the face of this grave violation of human rights .
Madam President , on a point of order .
I am surprised that just before this debate on Ethiopia began it was not made clear by Mr Moorhouse , or by anybody else , that the President of Parliament has insisted that the printed text be changed .
I made a complaint this morning that recital D. of the text is fundamentally inaccurate .
I asked the President to check with the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva as to whether in its fifty-third session it did in fact make the condemnation that Mr Moorhouse 's text purports .
The President checked with Geneva and he has insisted that the words ' expressed its condemnation of the continuing ' ( those six words ) be deleted and be replaced by the more accurate phrase ' discussed ' .
There was a discussion in Geneva : there was no expression of condemnation .
Before the debate proceeds , Madam President , it must be made absolutely clear to everybody in this House that we are debating a different text to that submitted by Mr Moorhouse , because the President has instructed the correction to be made because of the fundamental inaccuracy of that allegation in recital D.
Mr Tomlinson . I followed what you said when you spoke this morning .
Recital D is no longer contained in the text .
You can see that .
You now say that the choice of words " has condemned ' and in article 1 " condemned the murder ' , etcetera , does not fit the facts .
In the German text I would read this as follows : " condemns the murder of Assefa Marin ' is not necessarily meant in a legal sense , but it can be an expression of rejection .
I have been told that that has in the meantime been checked and that the facts are correct .
Madam President , according to my information there are different designations of the item in individual versions .
That which appears in the German version as recital C appears in an English version as recital D. That will be amended .
There are also some in this House who would like the recital to be omitted entirely .
I should like to call on my colleague Moorhouse to say if he could not omit completely recital C in the German version and recital D in the English version .
Madam President , on a point of order .
I am at a slight loss to understand why Mr Tomlinson is taking such a strong line .
To my knowledge it is the first time he has ever taken any part in any debate on human rights .
I can only presume that he has been suborned by the Ethiopian Ambassador to the European Union because , as we shall hear shortly , the Ambassador in Brussels has been extremely slow , to put it mildly - this will be confirmed shortly - in responding to accusations of the sort which we are making here in this resolution .
That is my first point .
I just do not understand why he should be in the pocket , so to speak , of the Ethiopian Ambassador and of the Ethiopian authorities who are very guilty indeed in the human rights field .
We are concerned here about human life and the fate of Mr Assefa Maru , who was murdered .
It is not the time , therefore , to be highly critical of the semantics of the resolution , which I am more than happy to amend to the extent that is thought necessary by the House .
Indeed , it has already been acknowledged by the presidency , and alterations have been made to the resolution which I hope will be acceptable .
Mr Moorhouse . Are you prepared to withdraw recital C ?
That was the compromise proposal .
Madam President , we have had informal discussions .
I am quite ready to do so since it would ease our situation as the matter has been highlighted so virulently by one of my colleagues .
Mr Tomlinson . If recital C has been withdrawn there is no further need to discuss it .
Recital C has just been withdrawn by Mr Moorhouse .
Madam President , Mr Moorhouse has made a statement which is about the most offensive statement that can ever be made about a fellow parliamentarian .
His exact words - and I must insist on defending myself against them - was first of all to say that I did not participate in these debates and then he went on to suggest that I was ' in the pocket of ' the Ambassador of a foreign country .
That is an offence to any parliamentarian ; it is totally inaccurate ; it is as inaccurate as Mr Moorhouse 's draft resolution .
Mr Moorhouse 's draft resolution - and I am merely asking to get a resolution that reflects the truth - states that the United Nations Commission ' expressed its condemnation ' .
It did no such thing !
That is an untruth , and you do not have to be in anybody 's pocket to speak the truth in a democratic parliament .
I hope Mr Moorhouse has something approaching the courage sufficient to stand up and withdraw that slur .
Mr Tomlinson . I think we are now clear about the text concerning the resolution .
As for you yourself , you feel insulted .
I think we can discuss that again at the end of the debate . We shall have three minutes for it .
Mr Maccartney has a point of order .
Madam President , I have two very short and relevant points to make .
Firstly , if there is genuine confusion about what is or is not before the House to vote on , we cannot possibly vote this afternoon ; and there is confusion .

Secondly , Mr Moorhouse should consider his position and withdraw the allegations right now , because those of us who share the concern feel equally attacked .
Mr Macartney , as regards the text , what we shall be voting on afterwards is completely clear .
We shall return to the other matter later .
Mr President , this is a topical and urgent debate .
An hour ago a bomb exploded in a tourist bus in Cairo : nine people were killed , including six German tourists .
I wish to express my sympathy .
On my fax machine I have received a cry for help from Guatemala .
Felipe de Jesurín and Immelda Lopez de Sandoval were pursued by cars and threatened with death .
Mr President , by speaking their names , I can possibly save their lives .
We were dealing with Ethiopia .
For two years , people have been knocking on my door about the violation of human rights .
I believed that the government after the dictatorship should be given space . Unfortunately that did not work .
On 11 July I wrote and asked for clarification about the murder of Assefa Maru and Wakotola .
The ambassador promised a reply .
I telephoned him recently .
He was arrogant and my request fell on deaf ears .
Mr President , if an ambassador is not even open-minded enough to listen to the real worries about imprisoned journalists and arbitrary executions , then we have at the very least the right to denounce that .
This is a sign to Ethiopia and my group supports that sign .
Madam President , of course terminology , concepts and accuracy of the texts we may adopt in this House are extremely important . But the actual content of the debate which has just taken place testifies to the importance of the European Union and notably this Parliament strongly urging the Ethiopian authorities to show full respect for freedom of the press , union independence , citizens ' right of association , irrespective of any action taken by other bodies .
It is also crucial to press the Ethiopian Government to release the political prisoners and prisoners of conscience and take steps to correct the procedures of an unjust legal system . I think this should be done irrespective of whether certain expressions exactly correspond to the absolute truth .
Inner Mongolia
Madam President , this resolution has been obtained through considerable effort and I would like to thank colleagues from the PPE , UPE and the liberal group for having supporting it .
The situation in Mongolia is unquestionably serious .
It is even more serious than in Tibet .
In 1947 Inner Mongolia was divided and separated from the rest of Mongolia following an agreement signed between China and Stalin . This is the backcloth to the situation .
Since 1947 China invaded and colonised Mongolia just as it did in Tibet .
Today , Inner Mongolia comprises 20 million Chinese whilst only 3.6 million Mongolians remain .
As usual , the Chinese have conducted a policy of sweeping colonialism ; they have destroyed cultural heritage , perpetrated massacres and arrested tens of thousands of people , including the president of the Democratic Front of Inner Mongolia , Mr Ada .
Consequently , I would like to invite my colleagues in the socialist group to wake up and not issue a hostile vote for the umpteenth time .
The west , and particularly the socialist party , aided and abetted " sovietism ' for seventy years .
I believe it is possible to avoid doing the same thing again after forty years of imperialism , communism and the totalitarianism in China .
It is time they woke up and demonstrated a firm stance .
The eagerly awaited and very promising outcome of the Beijing congress demonstrates that we are moving towards a large Singapore and not towards democratization , that we are not moving towards the fifth modernization of Wei Jingsheng , towards democracy .
It is therefore time to wake up , to take a firm position , to no longer delude ourselves and work towards democracy for the world 's largest country .
Madam President , human rights are indivisible and wherever they are violated we in this group , like many others in the House , will always condemn them .
But just as we declined yesterday to talk again about Turkey , so we shall not always be able to give our approval to this resolution . Because , if you demand in recital G an open and continuous dialogue with China about this question , then it makes no sense to pass a resolution against China at every sitting of this House .
In the same way it really makes no sense at all - and I would ask you to remember this in future - always to combine the subject of human rights with the question of the external integrity of the Peoples ' Republic of China , in which things are demanded for Tibet which even the Dalai Lama does not ask for !
I do ask you to consider that .
We are united in our opposition to violations of human rights .
We cannot permanently connect this , however , to the question of the integrity of the Peoples ' Republic of China !
Madam President , of course I must take issue with the previous speaker , Mr Swoboda .
We are referring here to the last great colonial power on Earth .
We are talking about a country with three huge colonies , Tibet , East Turkestan and Mongolia .
If we do not make it absolutely clear what we stand for , what we accept , that we stand for the right of races to self-determination , that we stand for respect of human rights in China 's various colonies , then we shall , in my view , have indeed missed our target and our purpose .
We can certainly see that in all three parts of the area the same means are being used .
People are deported , there is forced sterilisation , there is forced abortion . Chinese immigrants are moved in with unbelievable promises : they are told they can have more children than in China , where they are allowed only one .
What sort of conditions are those ?
They get up to all kinds of tricks , the population structure in the sub-areas is completely altered , and in these colonies , representing different areas , we are supposed for all practical purposes to close our eyes to it .
That cannot be in the interests of our Parliament .
I believe it is absolutely essential for us to express clearly what we stand for in this .
In the European Union we have a whole group of Mongolians who live amongst us , who have spent years in gaol in Beijing and in concentration camps in other places , and have only got out because of pressure from the West .
Many of them are my friends and I know their circumstances very well .
The Mongolians are in a particularly difficult position , because large numbers of them have been involved in various demonstrations - particularly the demonstration in Tienanmen Square .
Many died there , or in the aftermath to it . Many were just able to escape and are now exiles without a chance of returning to their homeland .
I think we must also be quite clear in this case what we are talking about : that we represent the self-determination of peoples , particularly in all those places where this is being violated .
We must not shirk this , just because we are talking about the largest country on Earth .
We must speak of human rights , we must stand up for them ; in other words , we must accept the consequences of being the European Union and the European Parliament .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
Mr Moorhouse now wishes to raise a point of order .
Please do not re-open the debate , but keep to the point of order .
Madam President , I think I owe it to Mr Tomlinson to make an apology for my rather strong statement in relation to his views .
I feel sure that he and I are at one in wishing to expose human rights violations , not only in Ethiopia , but in any country that we may feel obliged to do so and he , like I , will want to take action where necessary against offending governments .
Therefore , I gladly withdraw the particular remark I made which I know he felt very deeply about .
Thank you very much , Mr Moorhouse .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the motion for a resolution ( ( B4-0786 / 97 ) by delegates Mr Günther and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party on the conference in Oslo towards a total ban convention on anti-personnel mines .
Madam President , as a Parliament we were active participants at the Ottawa Conference , called by Canada when it became clear that the official organs of the United Nations would not be in a position effectively to fight the mines situation .
The first success came during negotiations in Brussels .
During the Brussels meeting we were able to observe that the United Nations had indeed moved their position slightly at the standing talks in Geneva , and had appointed a coordinator for mines problems .
I must admit , however , that since then his activities have rather escaped my notice .
The Ottawa Conference represented a source of hope for millions of people .
In the meantime we have learned to keep our objectives very limited and to reduce them .
I should myself be satisfied if we could achieve a situation in which markedly more mines were cleared than were laid .
We had hoped to come a small step nearer this objective when we learned that the United States was also to participate at the Oslo talks .
This was a hope which has now unfortunately come to nothing .
In my view , though , this cannot be the end of this development , because I believe that public opinion in the United States will finally cause the USA to refrain from isolationism and become active participants in the process once more .
I think this should be a lesson to the United Nations , that there are countries that want to progress , and will not wait until the very last mine manufacturer is ready to stop production .
I should ask you , when voting on this resolution , to ensure you adopt the oral amendment resolution that Mr Bertens and I have introduced , so that the declaration is brought up to date .
I believe that a unanimous vote by this House on the matter would greatly hasten the subsequent conferences in Ottawa .
Madam President .
First of all I should like to thank all those in this House , such as Mrs Günther , Mr Bertens , Mr Cunningham and others , who have made such an important contribution to the fact that we can celebrate success today , despite all the limitations mentioned .
My sincere thanks , anyway .
I can also say that my Party will support the motion because of our interest in the subject , despite the reservation that the introduction of oral amendments of this size must not be made a precedent .
As has already been said , the last day or days in Oslo have proved to be a success .
We are very pleased that agreement has been reached .
I may say with pride and pleasure that Austria , my homeland , was one of the first to speak out for a total legal ban .
I am of course sorry that America is not , or not yet , participating , even though this really contradicts the principle that President Clinton himself always puts forward .
I hope that there are forces in America strong enough to persuade the President - force him , I would almost say - to add his signature after all .
I and my Party , however , should like to see this total ban remain undiluted .
We simply have another task ahead of us regarding the United States of America , rather than having to accept a diluted version now .
There is certainly still a task to be carried out in Europe .
That can be seen from the resolution and the amendment resolutions to it .
Even in Europe there are some who need to be convinced that it is not right , even with the problems which may arise from its long frontiers , for anti-personnel mines to be used here .
No one who has been to Bosnia , no one who has been to any country where every day they produce casualties killed and wounded , can accept any argument for the continued use of anti-personnel mines .
The situation in these countries , the situation of the families , the children , the people , demands that this total ban be signed by every European country and by the whole world .
Madam president , the humanitarian aims expressed at the Oslo conference for a total ban on landmines are in themselves worthy of support .
The infantry mine , however , when used responsibly , offers an extra dimension to security , which cannot be compared , for example , with the situation concerning mines in former Yugoslavia .
For Finland infantry mines are a vital force in our land defences .
Finland has just under 1300 kilometres of shared frontier with Russia .
For around one thousand years , wars and conflicts have been common and , almost without exception , the attack has been from the east .
Although the situation on our eastern border , which is , furthermore , the sole frontier the EU has facing Russia , now appears more peaceful than before , the permanence of this situation in the long term is unfortunately not guaranteed .
Infantry mines are used in Finland only in crisis situations to halt an aggressor .
Mine fields are precisely marked and are all collected when the conflict eases off .
A ban on the use of infantry mines would mean an intolerable increase in the cost of defence for Finland .
That is why the call in the resolution on land mines made by the EPP group to change options in border-zone security is meaningless unless it includes concrete suggestions as to how a country like Finland can , when threatened with conflict , protect her land borders efficiently and effectively .
I believe that the previous speaker does not know the story of the Maginot Line .
However , I do not intend to give any of my colleagues a history lesson .
Ottawa has been a success and the fact that the Americans did not join in is a pity , but we have achieved a great victory in that the participating countries did not give in to the American pressure to react in the same cowardly way to the Canadian initiative .
I also wish to ascribe the success that was achieved in Oslo and will soon be confirmed and signed in Ottawa , to the NGO International Campaign to ban landmines .
Mr Cunningham and I and Mrs Günther have worked closely together on this and I must say that I salute this success .
I hope that Greece and Finland are persuaded to sign the new treaty so that the Union as well , when it acts outside , can give credible international support to this treaty .
The Union must next also let the support for the Ottawa treaty appear in its bilateral political dialogue with third countries , including third world countries .
After the official ceremony in December , we shall have to build on the momentum to actually ban anti-personnel mines .
The first battle may have been won , but there is still a lot of work to be done , also for countries that still think that they need anti-personnel mines for their own security .
Madam President , landmines , anti-personnel mines , mines of any kind are the Devil 's work and should be neither used nor manufactured .
The conference in Oslo is a first step , a first victory , but we should beware of praising its result too highly .
I think that would be a hypocritical policy .
Many Third-World countries are not participating : Russia , India , China , and now even the USA , are not signatories .
For the most part they are not signatories because western countries manufacture high-tech mines , and thus do not want anti-tank mines to be included .
When we look at the situation in Bosnia we see that 30 to 40 % of deaths in Bosnia are caused by anti-tank mines .
Anti-tank mines which have anti-personnel mines integrated in them .
Of course they must also fall within such an agreement .
In the Bundeswehr of the Federal Republic of Germany there are still 1.5 million of these anti-tank mines .
When we are talking about anti-personnel mines it is easy for a Foreign Minister or the Minister of Defence simply to say there will be no more anti-personnel mines by the end of 1997 . If we really want to ban mines , however , then these anti-tank mines must be included .
Furthermore , we must not allow any more funds to be invested in research , with which point I should like to come to a close : companies such as Diehl and Rheinmetall are developing the next generation , in which a single mine will cover an average area of 300 m2 , which makes it impossible to search for these mines .
We have advanced a small step , therefore , but there is a long way to go , and mines have got to be banned .
We must not produce any more of them , and we in the European Union should put that into practice and present a good example .
Madam President , we are again discussing one of the cruellest episodes in modern warfare and each of us who experienced one of these wars from close quarters lost a friend , or approached or treated several victims of these killing machines .
We therefore give our unconditional support for the Ottawa process and the total , final and unconditional ban on this type of weapon .
Our American allies , for misleading reasons , have not always joined us in this fight .
Let us help them to share this common ground .
A certain number of events are particularly repugnant , in particular the surreal proposal , made to the Member States who are signatories to this Treaty , to withdraw from the Treaty should they face an armed conflict .
In other words , waive the use of anti-personal mines as long they do not need them , but pledge to use them the day the need arises .
This defies belief !
I can tell you , Madam President , that over 600 , 000 victims whose lower limbs have been amputated , will not be fooled by this kind of alibi .
Madam President , this debate , like others calling for arms reduction and bans on production of certain weapons , is surreal .
In fact it is my impression that the search for an international agreement signed at all costs by all the countries which produce anti-personnel mines hides the secret desire that opposition from some country will ruin the whole agreement .
Let me explain myself : why do the British Labour , French Socialist , and Italian left MEPs , who claim in this European Parliament to be fiercely opposed to the production of anti-personnel mines , not act with conviction to persuade their government colleagues in England , France and Italy to pass a tiny little law in their respective parliaments , worded more or less like this : " production of anti-personnel mines by the British , French or Italian arms industry is prohibited ' ?
Waiting for the signature or an agreement which binds all the producer countries is , in our opinion , a hypocritical excuse for not starting to ban production in European countries immediately .
Then we would not be worrying about the good deals others might make if we ban this production in our countries , but rather about our own consistency and sense of justice !
Madam President , it is a question of humanity that we are debating .
We want to reduce human suffering caused by anti-personnel mines .
It is important that we devote resources to this , and that we strive to achieve a lasting reduction .
As a Finn , I cannot myself , unfortunately , support all parts of this resolution , even though my group does so .
But the goal is right . We should strive for verifiable , international standards which are really binding .
Today there are great differences in how we will be able to verify or live up to the agreements we are discussing .
The ban will also have different effects in different countries .
It affects mines which are placed in advance , but not those fired by artillery .
Unfortunately , we must recognise that mines for defensive purposes have not outlived their role , in spite of opposite claims in the Red Cross report .
As a colleague here has pointed out , Finland only places mines for defensive purposes , against aggression .
By so doing we want , in any event , to reduce the suffering of the civilian population in incidents of aggression .
We neither produce nor sell anti-personnel mines .
Madam President , disarmament would never get off the ground if in negotiations we always returned to the idea that in certain circumstances certain weapons of defence are indispensable .
This , I think , is something Finland should take note of also .
Finland should endorse the agreement banning infantry mines as quickly as possible , and Finland ought to reconsider the image she has of outside threats .
We Finns should now admit that the military threat in Europe has greatly diminished and security policy is based more on repelling threats from outside .
This should also lead on to practical solutions for Finnish defence .
It is not necessarily so , either , that Finland would have to replace infantry mines with technologically more advanced and more expensive equipment .
Since the Commission fully endorses the sentiments in the motion , I would just add that we know that our work will not be completed until there is an effective global ban implemented by all states , until all mines are cleared from areas of habitation and economic use , and until all victims of mines are properly cared for .
This is an achievable goal .
In the ACP area , the Commission and I , in particular , will continue to make a major contribution , as we have done over the past five years .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint on the following four motions for resolutions :
( B4-0757 / 97 ) by Mrs Hautala and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on toxic blue-green algae in the Baltic Sea ; - ( B4-0772 / 97 ) by Mrs Myller , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the ecological problem in the Baltic Sea ; - ( B4-0781 / 97 ) by Mr Thors and Mr Olsson , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party on the environmental situation in the Baltic Sea ; - ( B4-0799 / 97 ) by Mr Sjöstedt and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on pollution in the Baltic Sea .
Madam President , the protection of the Baltic Sea is certainly a timely issue .
This Summer saw something quite unbelievable in the Baltic Sea .
A full sixth of the surface of the Baltic was covered in flowering algae and the bluish-green algae was responsible for the eutrophication of the sea .
This will have to be quickly addressed .
The European Union also has a role in this .
The Commission is a full member of the Baltic protection organisation , Helcom .
It has come to my knowledge that the Commission 's ways of working are rigid and bureaucratic to the point that the work of Helcom is even hindered .
Apparently the Commission cannot decide something without consulting all fifteen Member States on their opinion on the protection of the Baltic Sea .
The protection of the Baltic Sea shouldn 't really have to sink in EU bureaucracy .
The other problem with the Commission seems to be that there has been too much meddling in the question of the protection of the Baltic Sea and yet they cannot cooperate with each other .
The commission must definitely improve on its role in this matter .
The Green Group would also like to emphasise that it is essential to bring in an environment tax to lessen the use of fertilisers .
The use of fertilisers is very noticeably responsible for the eutrophication of the Baltic Sea .
Actually , there are other reasons too , for instance the community waste from the eastern part of the gulf of Finland , especially from St Petersburg , with its population of five million .
The TACIS fund should definitely be used more efficiently for the protection of the Baltic Sea .
It is , furthermore , absolutely essential that the protection of the Baltic sea gains prominence when the EU begins negotiating membership with Poland and the Baltic countries . These matters really cannot be delayed any longer .
Madam President , the environmental problem in the Baltic Sea is nothing new .
We have known about it for a long time .
With its vulnerable shallow bays and large loading points the Baltic is in a really serious crisis at the moment .
This is now on the agenda as an urgent matter because this Summer a huge number of people have had first-hand experience of what a polluted Baltic means , because a vast area of the sea was covered in poisonous blue-green algae .
This pollution of the Baltic Sea , the seriousness of this kind of environmental problem , calls for some stringent measures .
We know in principle what the sources of the pollution are , and what the biggest problems are , but no measures have been taken .
The European Union is perfectly capable of getting involved in the Baltic clean-up operation .
And EU regional programmes , such as Interreg II C , are a possible co-ordination tool in this region .
Actually , it is not a question of whether there are enough organisations , enough agencies , or even enough sources of funding .
The real question is how these can be put to better use than they are now , and how things that have to be done can be prioritised so that the Baltic Sea can become cleaner and safe .
Generally speaking no one source of effluent can be singled out .
All those known to be responsible for effluent must cut down the amount they release into the sea .
Agriculture is a very big problem .
To resolve this we need both national decisions and supra-national regulations .
The Helsinki Commission regulations must be taken seriously .
More effective means of treating community waste must be adopted .
In membership negotiations with East and central European countries , it is essential to stress that environmental standards of this sort must be observed .
The harmonisation of environmental standards for the Baltic , and generally , must be an essential part of the strategy for the enhancement of unification with these countries .
St Petersburg , taking up an enormous area of one end of the Gulf of Finland as it does , is a very serious problem .
The TACIS fund has not yet been used to serve concrete environmental projects .
It is now high time we got away from the drawing board and addressed matters in a practical way , got some practical co-operation going for the environment in the Baltic Region , instead of just consultants ' reports .
Madam President , after the alarm bells which the events of the summer have been , I hope that the debate we have today leads to the Commission recognising how serious the people of Europe are about the conditions in the Baltic Sea , even though only Finns have spoken so far .
The Commission must take a more active role in the Helsinki Commission now that it has one year left in the chair of this important organ for environmental co-operation .
This week in a reply to my question the Commission promised that it would be guided by a desire to achieve the highest possible level of environmental protection .
I hope that the whole Parliament is going to see that the Commission keeps its promise .
The preceding speakers have talked of eutrophication .
It is important to look at that , but we must take wider action to avoid ecological collapse .
An inventory must be made of all the risk factors .
We must know who has dumped what in the sea over the past fifty years .
We must prevent vessels from dumping more in future .
Finally , I would like to point out that in this debate a proposal is being made that the whole of the EU should introduce a tax on fertilisers .
Many in our group support this proposal in principal , but many also believe that this is not the right context in which to take it up .
Madam President , the ecology of the Baltic underlies the importance of interBaltic state co-operation .
In the present situation the EU and its Member States are in an excellent position to get this co-operation into gear .
That is why the Commission 's input into the co-operation taking place in the Baltic region , like the implementation of the Baltic Region AGENDA 21 programme , must be increased considerably .
Furthermore , the inclusion of the Baltic countries and Russia in the clean-up talks will add considerably to their successful outcome .
It is vital to restrict the overloading of the waters , mainly due to agricultural fertilisers , with recourse to stringent regulations for both present and future members of the EU .
For example , over seventy percent of Finnish waters suffer from eutrophication due to agriculture . New Member States coming into talks must be aware of this , because they are important agricultural countries .
The Helsinki Commission has a programme for action to reduce nutrient loads .
The EU Commission must do more to support the implementation of the measures contained in this programme .
The algae seen in the Baltic Sea this Summer is not just a one-off .
The heavy floods in Poland and central Europe this Summer will have a real effect on the Baltic in terms of fertiliser pollution .
The result will be that next Summer we 'll have an even worse algae problem than we did this year .
The Baltic Sea needs help now . Fast .
Madam President , when the new Member States got involved in EU policy , they got involved in a new sea too , one which is now an EU sea .
That sea is the Baltic .
Furthermore , another northern sea must be included in all co-operation actions , and that is the Barents Sea , which has an immense economic bearing on policy , from the EU standpoint also .
We , the new nations in the EU , are net payers and we would like our money to be visible in EU activity .
It is best seen in the development by the EU of northern projects and the start-up and co-ordination of projects in a programme which can be reported on regularly to Parliament , so that we can see how the Commission is spending our money .
It is very important that the Tacis fund is used not just for nuclear safety but also for harmonisation on the environment .
Nuclear safety funds go far beyond the borders between the EU and Tacis countries , but if the money is spent on environmental co-operation , for example in the Baltic Sea region and in the Finnish border zones , we 'll be dealing directly with the EU border with Russia .
For this reason , it is very important that this subject is prominent also on the budgetary agenda .
Madam President , to begin with I would like to say that I am Swedish and am therefore breaking the Finnish domination .
The Baltic Sea with its brackish water is one of the world 's most sensitive inland seas .
This year the bloom of toxic algae covers an area which is twice as large as the whole of Belgium .
It is necessary for the EU to begin to work actively as the environmental organisation it claims to be , and to take the resolution of the Visby meeting seriously as well as to recognise that it is the sum of all the emissions and acts of pollution which could be the death of the Baltic Sea .
It is therefore unacceptable for the EU to give grants to projects which further contribute to environmental damage .
The right hand has to know what the left hand is doing .
Examples of such projects include the high-tension cables for the distribution of electricity being planned to crisscross the Baltic Sea , and which apart from large , direct emissions of chlorine , and enormous magnetic fields , will also lead to increased lignite consumption in countries like Poland .
A topical concern right now is a high-tension cable planned between Blekinge in southern Sweden and Poland which has met strong opposition among citizens who are concerned about their environment .
Can they count on any help from the EU to stop this crazy , large-scale , anti-environmental project ?
Or will short-term economic gain , in the form of Transeuropean Networks , actively contribute to the death of the Baltic Sea ?
For two years , since July 1996 , the European Commission has chaired the Helsinki Commission , the executive organ of the Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea .
In this involvement , the European Commission is always guided by the principles of the highest degree of environmental protection possible for the Baltic Sea region .
The prospect of accession to the Union of the Central European countries has led the Commission to further intensify its cooperation , so that candidate countries can adopt and implement the acquis communitaire including the EU 's environmental legislation .
This is clearly set out in the Agenda 2000 documents .
The PHARE programme will be fully geared towards preparing the applicant countries for accession to the Union .
Environmental issues will also attract greater priority in the TACIS programme .
But the responsibility for the environmental well-being of the Baltic Sea lies primarily with the countries around it .
The Union has sought to cooperate with them in all the appropriate fora which promote the protection of the Baltic Sea .
Our engagement in the running of the Helsinki Commission , the Council of the Baltic Sea States and the development of the Baltic Sea Agenda 21 currently under way are some examples of such actions .
There is a need that the Baltic Sea countries also accentuate their efforts in the context of the implementation of the 1992 Baltic Sea Convention , which has not yet come into force because two countries have not yet ratified it .
The Commission believes that the answer to the preoccupations expressed in the submitted draft resolutions lies primarily in the full implementation of the actions foreseen by the Baltic Sea Convention and the programmes of the Helsinki Commission , in particular , its up-dated Joint Comprehensive Environmental Action Programme , the adherence to Union environmental standards and the appropriate assistance from the Union and other sources , but especially from the countries concerned .
Thank you , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote on topical and urgen subjects will take place in a few moments .
Beef and veal ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on beef and veal .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , high quality meat products must no longer remain just a catchword .
In the light of the extent of the BSE crisis , and continuation of the enormous market imbalance , an investigation into the common market organisation for beef is urgently needed .
The Agricultural Council has already agreed a package of measures designed to stabilise the beef market , influenced by the BSE crisis .
Throughout the debate on the sales market for the beef sector it must be remembered first and foremost that European farmers and their co-operatives are confronted by ever-stricter restrictions , such as those on landscape conservation , environmental protection , veterinary regulations , health authority hygiene standards and animal protection standards . These often involve them in seriously increased costs .
This leads partly to a loss of competitiveness by EU producers both on the internal and external markets , because in many other countries strict standards are applied .
It is essential that appropriate measures are introduced in order to regain consumer confidence and encourage consumption .
Measures in support of specific sales campaigns are in my view one of the most cost-effective means of rebuilding market balance in the beef sector .
Even though Germany has more than a fifth of the European population , and German beef and veal production is about 20 % of the total EU production , only about 10 % of benefits from the EU sales promotion programme have so far flowed into our country .
This shows quite clearly that there is an urgent need for amendment to the draft regulation prepared by the Commission .
Principally , the planned financial means must be increased and distributed amongst Member States using objective criteria .
By objective criteria I mean beef production and beef consumption .
That means that Germany must have a share of at least 20 % .
This distribution criteria must be laid down in the Council regulation .
Furthermore , I believe it is urgently necessary to take into account different consumer preferences in the EU .
For regional peculiarities to be taken into account in the quality criteria , Member States and those involved in the economy must be given greater influence on , and more freedom in , the establishment of their own sales promotion programmes , even regional ones , which would be encouraged by EU funding .
We must achieve a situation whereby beef is not transported all across Europe . We must think more about regional circulation , so that the consumer can buy local meat whose production he also knows .
It has been shown particularly in Germany that a mark of origin plays a central role in regaining consumer confidence .
For this reason a specific authorization should be introduced , allowing the advertisement of regional origins within the framework of the proposed programmes .
Quality meat products must no longer remain just a catchword .
For this more attention must be paid to the fact that in the EU concepts of quality and consumer preferences are very varied .
Bonus regulations detrimental to quality production , such as trimmings thickness regulations or second premiums for castrated male cattle , must receive urgent amendment .
Let me say finally , that you should all support a situation in which the expectations and requirements of the European consumer and producer receive better consideration than hitherto .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking also on behalf of Mr Santini , coordinator of our group on the Committee on Agriculture .
It is said that necessity is the mother of invention . It took bovine spongiform encephalopathy to make us understand that even in a controlled and supported production system consumption can collapse because of disasters or consumer caprice .
The fall in consumption has been intensifying for ten years now and suggests a diversification in the eating habits of European consumers .
This may be part of the explanation , but it is largely linked to the BSE .
Also , while the flashpoint of the epidemic occurred between 1994 and 1996 , it was already present in Great Britain in 1986 .
Many knew about it , including the consumer organizations , but few could imagine the criminal behind-the-scenes activity concealed by what appeared to be just a more serious zoonosis than the traditional ones .
The fact is , someone in Great Britain tried to hide something - the gravity of the epidemic - to save something else - its own market - with the complicity of someone else - departments of the European Commission .
This whole thesis of illegality , now laid bare by the Committee of Inquiry , was already known to many .
And this was not just suspicion : there were alarming signs .
The 1993 regulation dates from the period of the Commission 's deep sleep and the veritable explosion of the epidemic .
Bear in mind that it began to appear in 1986 .
Animal starch was identified as the proven cause only a year later , but it was not until 1990 that its seriousness was recognized in Brussels .
But from that year until 1994 all the veterinary controls were suspended ; the order went out not to talk about it so as not to damage the markets , and in 1992 this regulation , No 1318 / 93 , was produced , with the objective of promoting consumption of meat , including English meat , which was known to be dangerous .
The proposal for a regulation under discussion today completes that implemented in 1993 and is intended to promote not only the best cuts but also the lesser ones , putting them on the market with the same labelling .
We think this is a weakness in the proposal , because in the present atmosphere of mistrust , the consumer may have reservations about all the legislation , reservations which we partly share .
Madam President , I wish first to thank Mrs Hardstaff for her excellent report .
The EU beef markets were shaken when mad cow disease made an appearance and became publicly known .
The markets almost collapsed in 1996 when it was found there was an undisputed link between BSE and CreutzfeldtJacob disease , which affects humans .
There has been an EU attempt to intervene in problems of the beef markets .
From the start of 1993 a quality regulation came into force followed last February by a livestock identification scheme and provision for passports for animals , animal identification schemes and the marking of beef .
The aim was to find a trail , through legislation , leading to the possible source of the disease .
Now the intention is to revise the rulings of 1993 and add certain new elements to the problems of the beef market ; a new common marking scheme and classification system for beef , a scheme to encourage marking in the place of origin , and an educational campaign ,
The beef question is a typical example of a problem which gets harder to solve the further you get from the original source .
The new schemes threaten to become mind-bogglingly complicated .
The bureaucracy and costs of monitoring grow at a tremendous rate whilst the effect of the measures diminishes and a return to the confidence of former times becomes less likely .
The situation shows clearly that the measures should be addressed at source , and monitoring should concentrate on the production of beef and the cattle feed industry .
When we know how the meat comes to be contaminated , its elimination will be easy and restored confidence in the markets will be nothing less than overwhelming .
It is therefore most desirable that the Commission concentrate more earnestly than before on discovering and eliminating the source , and monitoring the work carefully .
The regulation in force is important not just in the eradication of BSE , but in addressing the difficult challenges of the future .
Hormone meat might flood EU markets in the not too distant future , and problems arising from that will require sturdy weapons to deal with them .
In this respect it is a good idea for good-quality EU beef to be stamped with a common logo , denoting the fact that you are bringing good-quality meat onto the market with the result that consumer confidence grows again .
Madam President , the draft regulation submitted to us and Mrs Hardstaff 's report considerably improve the area of information to consumers and the promotion of beef .
Indeed , we must meet the crisis of confidence among consumers in the EU countries not only by promoting the sale of all quality beef products but also by giving consumers genuine information on the origin of meat , breeds of livestock , locations of production and methods of production .
The efforts already deployed in this direction by regional and national professional organisations show that this is the right way .
But first we must ask one question .
Do the national and European authorities ensure the necessary basis for enacting this quality policy by providing controls and by sanctioning fraud ?
What guarantees does the Commission provide us in this area ?
What is the point of promoting quality meat if the resources for conducting controls are non-existent or insufficient , as highlighted by the work of the BSE Commission ?
In that event we would be deceiving both the consumers and the producers .
The question is rendered all the more important since one wonders whether the Commission and the Council wish to restore the confidence of consumers when at the same time they adopt , or allegedly adopt , contradictory provisions in other areas .
How can quality be defended if the Commission and the Council do not follow through on their denunciation of the verdicts of the WTO on the Banana OCM and hormone-treated meat and their verdicts are dictated by the USA whose criteria on food quality lead to 9 , 000 deaths by food poisoning a year compared with 5 % in France , for example ?
How can we defend quality by proposing a reform of the CAP which , through a 30 % reduction of the price of beef , leads to productivism which has already resulted in impaired health and caused social and human harm that we are now trying to repair through this procedure .
This raises a final question . Should we not pledge to break with the liberal and productivist logic that is a feature of the current workings of the Union , which is inspiring the Agenda 2000 project and for which producers and consumers are today paying the costs ?
Madam President , consumer protection begins with the type of product .
For this reason it is understandable when consumers have show caution in past years , and also in the most recent past , in the consumption of beef .
If we had allowed cows to graze on pasture and had not fed them with meat protein - which also happened to be infected - we should not have this problem today . Then we should probably not have had to introduce a sales promotion programme , because beef is a delicacy and everyone knows that ; enough meat would certainly have been sold without this measure .
We now do have BSE , however , simply because we paid too little attention to the method of production , and also because consumers established no channel for monitoring products in the shops , as they knew where the meat came from .
Now the state has got to intervene and put the train back on the rails .
This regulation which we are debating today is not new .
It became effective back in 1993 .
I quote : " The quality of beef depends upon the breed , the method of rearing the animals concerned , and the conditions of slaughter , transport and marketing ' . It continues to say that which materials are used , and which not , is also relevant .
I welcome the fact that a new version of this regulation is now pending , particularly if we are really given the opportunity to direct the method of production .
We do not have just this sales promotion , however , but an extension has been made within the framework of this regulation . This concerns the support given to the tagging of beef , its identification .
This tagging , required of farmers as an obligatory measure and of the industry as a voluntary one - we then altered it in Parliament , Mr Mayer was the rapporteur - was accepted by Council .
You are aware of the decision whereby our submission according to 100a was unanimously rejected .
According to this measure tagging is now to be financed 100 % by the industry .
That is not contained in the Articles at all , only in the Annex .
In the Article there is a mention only of a requirement for between 60 % and 80 % .
That is for the sales promotion , but the 100 % is , I quote : " for information about the new tagging and the technical support ' .
What has occurred here is that the whole logistic effort to be made by the industry in order to introduce tagging is to receive a subvention from the Commission - this would not be controversial , if it were not 100 % !
I asked the Commissioner about this today , and you have heard how he insisted on a 100 % subvention .
I approached him and , Lo and behold ! , he was entirely unaware that this was a new regulation because of the introduction of logistics .
He will consider the matter .
For this reason I believe we must refer this report by Mrs Hardstaff , good as it is - and I congratulate her on it - back to the Committee , so that we can clarify this point and not , in a manner of speaking , force the 100 % money down the throat of the industry .
Madam President , Mrs Hardstaff 's report is particularly timely since it touches on our current major concerns , such as BSE and the transportation of beef cattle , their carcasses and by-products within the European Union , as well as the consumer 's demands for quality - issues central to the reform of the CAP and to discussions on the Agenda 2000 project , both from the viewpoint of replacing quantity in order to adjust overproduction , and from the viewpoint of consumer health .
We are all concerned , firstly because we are consumers , secondly because the Committee on Agriculture has appointed our colleague Jan Mulder to compile an initiative report on the quality and recognition of farm produce and foods .
Two points are crucial : the method of production and consumer confidence towards products thanks to traceability from the breeding farms to the consumer 's plate .
I will emphasize three points : firstly , rigour in the method of production which must be more ' natural ' : we must combat the authorisation to use hormones and to link production to the land .
Secondly , anti-fraud controls and provisions , which must operate more effectively - especially in Great Britain - as revealed by the recent discovery of illegal shipments to Belgium .
Finally the more active promotion of quality beef which must involve consumers and steer them to healthier products , failing which consumers will again prefer pork and poultry products whose production is highly intensive and which has a considerable impact on the environment .
My group will support the report compiled by Mrs Hardstaff whom I congratulate in passing for her work .
However , the lack of genuine harmonisation of wording on labels is regrettable .
Moreover , we are only talking here about beef .
What about other meats ?
For full transparency we must scrutinise these questions too .
Madam President , as the agenda has not been followed as scheduled , Mr des Places , who was to have spoken , cannot attend this sitting and has appointed me to speak on his behalf .
This report is central to the BSE crisis which has caused consumers to largely shift their loyalty away from beef .
I remain convinced that the loss of consumer confidence in beef has been mitigated thanks to the embargo .
The Commission , administrations of Member States and the entire ' European beef industry ' , including the livestock farmers , have done much to improve traceability to restore this confidence .
In its proposal on promoting beef , the Commission is in no way challenging the quality of eligible products .
This quality is defined in the applicable legislation .
We naturally support this position .
Conversely , Mrs Hardstaff in her report proposes to convert this promotional campaign in favour of quality products into a generic campaign in favour of indiscriminate and standardised products encompassing all products and Member States .
In plain language , there are shortcomings in the rapporteur 's proposals to develop promotional measures partly financed by the European Union to support British beef as well as beef derived from slaughter dairy cows whose organoleptic quality is widely known .
Although the rapporteur 's proposals were accepted as such by the Council , the entire quality beef industry which control its supplies under a strict set of specifications , would be penalised .
Madam Rapporteur , as staunch defenders of quality agriculture , you will appreciate why Mr des Places and myself asked our group not to vote in favour of your amendment since we believe that the Commission 's proposal must be adopted as it stands .
Madam President , we are again addressing the meat issue in an environment in which , as the saying goes , you can lead a horse to water , but you cannot make it drink .
Similarly , when consumers do not want to eat meat , there is not much you can do to make them .
In a ruling dated 30 June 1992 an attempt was made to promote the consumption of beef products .
This was not very successful since in February 1997 in this very Parliament we adopted a system of identity tags for beef cattle .
Humans can now travel without a passport thanks to the Schengen accords but here we are introducing a passport for cows , an identity card to reassure people with the grand term " traceability ' .
This did not reassure people much since tagging was optional and will not apparently be compulsory until the year 2000 .
Until then , importers of British beef will be allowed not to tag .
Moreover , even when the tag is added , the decline in consumption slows down but does not stop .
The slowdown is so slight that we are now asked to examine a new draft ruling aimed at revising , updating and revoking the 1992 ruling since previous measures clearly did not produce the expected results .
On the internal market consumption is falling while on the external market third-party countries are reluctant to buy European meat .
Consumption is therefore promoted through advertising , with supermarket promotions - " Eat meat ' and participation in trade fairs .
This shows how low we have stooped .
We now turn our attention to supermarkets and trade fairs while meat consumption continues to fall and pork , sheep and poultry meats , which are heavy pollutants in terms of livestock farming , continue to increase .
In other words , we are still feeling the consequences of BSE because a British company , De Mulder brothers , wanted to poison British beef cattle .
Now the whole of Europe is paying the price .
Within the system introduced , the aim is to obtain meat that inspires trust and confidence , meat that is derived from healthy animals , sound livestock farming and healthy animal feed .
For this purpose a sound budget is allocated with joint financing .
A budget line is provided , B-1.38 , on aid for promotional purposes , of which up to 60 % could be co-financed .
A grant of up to 32 million ECU 's may also be provided for the Raphael programme .
In other words , for broken cow 's brains receive more financing that the brains of European intellectuals .
That is how confused we have become !
This argument is all very nice and useful , but it comprises a series of contradictions .
The first is central to the system on confidence : on the one hand the aim is to reassure the consumer through advertising policies but at the same time the consumer becomes worried through imports of hormone-injected beef following the verdict of the panel of the World Trade Organization .
The second contradiction concerns revenues .
The aim is to safeguard the market by protecting consumption and by increasing the income of farmers but at the same time , authorisation is given to import hormone injected meat which will be cheaper and which will lower the income of our livestock farmers .
The third contradiction has to do with prices .
Here , too , the aim is to safeguard the market by advertising or other measures but at the same time , the Agenda 2000 project provides for a 30 % reduction in the intervention price of beef , which is tantamount to hammering the livestock farmers hard on the head with the four tomes of the Agenda 2000 project and then administering them with an analgesic to reassure them !
We are still practising a baling out policy !
However , all is not in vain .
Paul-Valéry said that even Sisyphus , in rolling his stone , was not working in vain since he was flexing his muscles .
In addressing for a third time this beef issue that no one wants to handle after all the media hype we know about , we are flexing our legislative and regulatory muscles !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am deputizing for Honor Funk because he has been called away urgently .
It is a fact that , at the moment , the pleasure of eating British beef is a somewhat limited one , although I would stress that Mrs Hardstaff of the United Kingdom has presented a good report , and I should like to congratulate her on it .
We know , however , that beef consumption has been in recession for years .
Last year , when it became known that there was a connection between BSE and Creutzfeld-Jacob disease , sales reached absolute rock-bottom .
The results are well known , and I do not need to go into them here .
Prices have collapsed , beef surpluses have had to be removed from the market by intervention .
For these reasons we expressly welcome the fact that measures are being taken to stop the crisis in sales and improve the situation .
It is always better to support and finance a sales promotion for quality meat , than to store it .
It is now critical that the proposed financial means - and I emphasise this particularly - pass into the right hands .
It must not be permitted for the money finally to end up in the hands of advertising agencies or wholesalers .
In recent months - and I attach great importance to this - regional markets , in some areas called farmers ' markets , and farmers active in selling their own produce have come to pay more attention to this market and built it up considerably .
This is a meeting of specialist knowledge and local needs with corresponding consumer requirements .
These institutions are now in place and in many regions do not need to be established afresh .
We should support them .
I was the rapporteur for the report on identification marking for beef .
The quality of the animals , and particularly the identification and traceability , are a major concern to consumers .
This home produce selling is obviously one of the best ways of ensuring that the consumer who has an interest can learn precisely where , and under what circumstances and conditions , the animal has been reared .
These regional standards of origin and quality are regularly monitored and sales promotions are regularly held .
That should become clearly recognised .
Mrs Hardstaff , in Amendment No 8 to recital 7 we regarded the description " meat marketing industry ' as a little restrictive and we therefore rejected the phrase .
The Commission has admittedly phrased things very generally , but this was a bit too limiting .
I must make one comment to Mr Graefe : I believe Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf was rather casual in his phraseology when he generalised that - and I reject this also - all producers make mistakes .
Some do , but not all .
Mr Mayer , I would remind you that you have had two minutes , but I granted you four because you inherited the two minutes allotted to Mr Cunha who is a member of your group .
Mrs Hardstaff , do you want to add anything in conclusion ?
Madam President , I would just like to thank all those who have contributed to the debate .
I would remind colleagues that this was already delayed to get the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection when we had really hoped to vote on it in July .
The fate of our farmers and meat industry , in terms of getting the market moving , depends on getting this started as quickly as possible .
So I hope that it will go through tomorrow and that it will be possible to put this action into place and start to sell European beef not only within Europe , but also throughout the world so that it will again be recognized as among the best in the world .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow morning at 9.00 a.m.
As you can see , Mr Hallam , we will not waste our time tomorrow morning , in two respects !
The next sitting will begin at 9.00 a.m. tomorrow morning .
( The sitting was closed at 8.55 p.m. ) .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , we are used to having the Minutes in two parts .
This morning we have them in four .
How will we know when we have got a full set ?
We shall leave that to the intelligence of the Members .
Mr President , in yesterday 's Minutes , halfway down page 19 , it says the following : " Mr Wijsenbeek referred to his remarks at the start of that morning 's sitting ( part 1 , item 1 ) and reported on how he had spent his time until the resumption of the sitting ' .
This Dutch is not correct , but the fact is I have still not received a reply from the Bureau as to whether it is actually true that the Bureau is now going to record Members of Parliament entering and leaving Parliament on camera .
Would you also state whether this is in accordance with the legislation in Europe on the protection of personal privacy and tell Members - because as the Bureau you wish to monitor how we spend our time - how many extra members of staff this will take and what that will cost the taxpayer , so that we can weigh one up against the other .
I believe that we Members are entitled to a reply to this question from the Bureau and we have not given you carte blanche to take measures that mean we can be spied on and be monitored from dawn to dusk .
Thank you very much Mr Wijsenbeek .
As usual , I have no idea what you are talking about .
Mr President , yesterday , in the debate on the banana issue , my colleague , Mr Liese , discovered a discrepancy between the resolution we were debating and one that had been handed in .
It concerned three missing words .
I should like to ask you if you have now clarified this matter .
I understand it is still being investigated .
Mr President , yesterday a very important decision was taken .
In the absence of any Members from Wales , I should like to take it upon myself to congratulate the people of Wales on the exercise of their democratic right to self-determination .
We look forward to Wales and Scotland going forward together .
I would endorse your congratulations to the Welsh .
It is probably just as well no Welsh were here , given how narrow the vote was .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Mr President , I should like to raise another matter .
Travelling to this place each week I have to pass through Charles de Gaulle Airport , Paris .
On three occasions this year I have been refused entry into Terminal D on my laissez-passer .
I am told that it is not an official document .
On the last occasion , last Monday , I was actually held aside and not allowed to pass until I produced my national passport .
Surely the French realise that we have a Union and that we have a laissez-passer which gives us the right to travel anywhere within the 15 nations .
( Applause ) Could I ask your office , in that case , to write to the French immigration authorities , pointing out that it is a document which does allow us to pass , so that we do not have this embarrassment in the future .
I agree with you entirely .
As you know , I used to travel on the same flight with you .
I stopped doing so because I was so damned annoyed at the inconvenience at Paris airport .
Could I ask you to include Frankfurt ?
( Laughter ) I travel through Frankfurt airport and there our European passports have been described by customs as a joke .
( Laughter )
All right . I have Paris , Frankfurt and I also heard someone say Amsterdam .
Anyone else can give it to me in writing .
Mr President , I would also request you to instruct the German authorities to finally recognize European passports because one has , from time to time , great difficulties - including , I am sad to say , even at Munich airport - which is generally the best airport in the world .
( Laughter ) It would be a good idea to take steps to secure universal recognition so that all these countries recognize the European passport .
Thank you , Mr von Habsburg .
Votes
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
On behalf of the Greens I should like to move referral back to Committee under Rule 129 , on the following grounds : we have just accepted Amendment No 22 by the Green Party . In this we say that under no circumstances do we want a 100 % subsidy .
Yesterday Mr Fischler , in anticipation of this vote , said he would not accept the 100 % withdrawal , and that he insisted on it .
Now we come to the interesting bit , where the sales subsidies , which is what concerns the rapporteur and ourselves , will only be 60 % and 80 % .
The 100 % subsidy is for the technical introduction , in other words , the logistics of introducing labelling into the industry .
100 % is proposed for this category .
Now , the Commission did not put this into the main part of the article , but included it exclusively in the financial section .
So the 100 % , which we cannot do anything to change , is included there .
I spoke to Mr Fischler again yesterday .
He made it clear that there had been a lapse in the information chain within the Commission , and that they had not intended this .
So we need to refer this report back , so that the Commission can correct its line and follow our suggestions .
I urge Members to support referral back .
Mr President , I want to speak against referral back .
This has already been delayed .
The original request was for urgency and for it to go through in July to enable this programme to go ahead .
This is something which is going to save the Community money .
If we spend money to try to ensure that people eat our beef , we will save a great deal of money on storage and intervention in the longer term .
This was the whole point .
The Commission is very anxious to set this in train to save the Community budget .
I do not want to see it held up any further .
Mr President , I am in favour of referral back .
Yesterday Mr Fischler systematically and insistently refused to answer questions or to give any clarification on the disclosure at the parliamentary Committee of Inquiry that there are loopholes in the law and that it is possible to violate , legally , the legislation which we have gradually been building up over the year for identifying animals , labelling meat , and reestablishing consumer confidence .
He gave no explanation and gave no pledge to improve the situation .
I am therefore in support of referring back the regulation so that the Commission can consider it better and so that Parliament can do its work better on behalf of the citizens and consumers .
( Parliament decided against referral back to committee )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , we have lost the vote on for referral back to the Committee , but the problem remains unsolved .
We have been successful , nevertheless , in having this report dealt with under Rule 129a , and that means that it goes into a second reading .
Before that we shall follow with keen interest whether the Commission resolves its insecurity , which was obvious , about the withdrawal of the 100 % subsidy for the industry .
The introduction of labelling concerns not just the industry , but also farms , although farmers do not get repaid a penny for their efforts .
I think that is sensible , just to make my view on it clear .
I do not want any subsidies .
However , if one side wants to introduce something which should be taken for granted , namely the identification and traceability of beef for consumers , and must accept the financial liability , then there is no sense in paying the other side , the industry - and then a full 100 % at that !
Admittedly , setting up the logistics in abattoirs for this tagging is not insignificant , but 100 % subsidies are almost immoral .
When this is contained only in the finance section , it smacks of lobbying , of cooperation between the administration and lobbyists of the meat industry , who do not wish to bring this into the parliamentary process , but would force it on us more or less behind our backs .
We must reject that most emphatically .
We want to deal with this here in Parliament , and I hope that will happen at second reading .
Mr President , on behalf of my group I first want to acknowledge Mrs Hardstaff 's excellent work , and that of the draftsmen of opinions , Mr Papayannakis and Mr Giansily .
Moreover , I should like to state that my group considers it absolutely necessary to bring in measures to ensure that consumers are correctly informed , by means of correct labelling .
Nevertheless Mrs Hardstaff 's report , which as I said is excellent , needs to be considered within the context of the BSE crisis .
Both in the Committee of Inquiry into BSE and in BSE monitoring , shortcomings have been detected which can make this legislative initiative less effective .
It is clear that there is a shortage of legislation covering the identification of beef and veal .
At the moment there is nothing to stop the removal from cattle carcasses of the identification marks which specify their origin , and this is creating serious problems .
The existing shortcomings in the regulations on identification and monitoring can produce effects which are the opposite of what is being sought .
Moreover , since there is no guarantee that the Commission will correct these shortcomings immediately , my group has voted against the legislative resolution , to put pressure on the Commission to make the necessary amendments to the regulations and monitoring .
We would like to thank the rapporteur for a thorough report .
However , we have abstained from voting on the proposed amendments concerning the proposal for a publicity campaign to promote the consumption of beef .
In our opinion , consumers themselves can decide what kind of food they want to consume .
To subsidize campaigns for a certain type of meat is inappropriate .
Campaigns for different types of products should be paid for by the food industry and not through Community funds .
We think it would be preferable to let the price mechanism of the market create a working balance in the beef sector with supply matching the price allowed by demand at the consumer stage .
Given the suspicion that beef is arousing among consumers , the best and most immediate strategy was to prove the origin of beef products and develop communication .
In France , for example , despite accusations of protectionism levelled by certain Member-States , a communication campaign was developed by deploying different advertising media at sales outlets and with the financial backing of professional groups .
Thanks to this strategy , the worst was probably avoided although the market was severely shaken .
Between 60 and 70 % of French consumers questioned said that they found the " original beef ' logos reassuring .
Through this initiative the decline in consumption was limited to 15 % on average in the second half of 1996 , whereas following the announcement of the outbreak of BSE , the decline exceeded 30 % .
Clearly , the Commission 's proposal is a move in the right direction but I fear that the Hardstaff report will lead to a generalization of products by supporting a generic message .
This is likely to penalize high-quality beef products heavily as they would then be confused under a European generic label without explanation .
I believe , however , that the identification and traceability of beef products are all-important .
Information for the consumer 's benefit is crucial in this context and is necessary to help kick-start the market which has been hit hard and which has heavily penalized producers upstream .
We must not lose sight of the fact that the consumer holds the trump cards here .
Let me say at the outset that all participants are agreed on the aim . It concerns re-establishing consumer confidence in the safety and the quality of beef .
We appear not to be in agreement , however , about how this is to be achieved .
The Commission , which proposes financial support of both sales promotion measures and an information campaign on the marking of beef , seems to possess the majority support of this House .
I consider this move to be a mistake , however , because it does not define the main point of effort sufficiently clearly .
The insecurity and mistrust of the consumer stem mainly from the fact that on the European internal market the origin of beef and beef products is often unstated or untraceable .
It is for just this reason that the new regulation on identification of beef and registration of cattle has assumed such importance .
The consumer can only obtain information on the origin of beef by means of identification and registration , and only thus will confidence be created .
I think it is urgently necessary to establish political priorities .
This wish was clearly expressed at the time of the debate in plenary session on the identification negotiations .
It has become diffused in the current debate , however .
If we declare our wish for simultaneous and equally weighted financial subsidy , both of sales promotion measures and of an information campaign , then we are failing to make the clear political statement which is so important in the struggle against BSE and its effects . Health and consumer protection have priority in European policy ; security of agricultural markets is only possible when this initial priority has been ensured .
Certainly , sales promotion measures are necessary . But we should concentrate our limited resources on what we think is of first importance , both politically and economically , and here is the creation of consumer confidence by clarification of the origin of beef .
As my colleague Edouard des Places mentioned during the debate , our group rejects most of the amendments proposed by the rapporteur .
Indeed , at the present time only quality meat products offering health , taste and organoleptic guarantees are eligible for European Union aid with a view to financing promotional campaigns .
What exactly does the rapporteur propose ?
Mrs Hardstaff , in her report and various amendments , asks that all beef products benefit from Community aid in favour of promotion .
These proposals are contrary to the interests of the quality meat industry .
I know personally that the United Kingdom is seeking an early lifting of the ban on beef .
How will the lifting of this embargo impact consumer attitudes ?
I strongly suspect that Mrs Hardstaff wants British beef to benefit from Community aid for promotional purposes .
Of course , given the poor press that beef is getting at present , Mrs Hardstaff calls for a general promotional campaign , which is unacceptable .
Agri-monetary system for the single market
The next item is the report ( A4-0261 / 97 ) by Mr Hallam , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the agri-monetary system for the single market : 1 July 1995 to 30 June 1996 ( COM ( 96 ) 0636 - C4-0026 / 97 )
Mr President , I am delighted to see the rather large turnout of Members today , which indicates the importance attached to this subject .
I should like to explain very briefly what we mean by the agri-monetary system . Basically , it is a way of ensuring that our farmers have some stability in the way in which they plan their businesses .
One of the problems we have at the moment is that this lifeline - if I can use that analogy - is sometimes rather long and at other times rather short , according to the fluctuations in the monetary market .
In the past , Parliament has quite rightly asked the Commission to provide it with some information about how this system is working .
It has produced a report - which is the one under consideration today - for the period between July 1995 and 30 June 1996 .
The report includes information on the granting of compensatory aid , an assessment of the economic and financial impact and proposals for the future of the system .
Quite rightly , the Commissions says that it would be difficult at the moment to make vast changes to the agri-monetary system on the very eve of European Monetary Union .
Consequently , that is something we will have to discuss at some point .
Nevertheless , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development looked at the report .
We agreed that we could not make any dramatic changes at this stage but there would be changes to be made in 1998 as we approach EMU - if we do approach EMU . So we have taken the opportunity of making a number of suggestions .
Firstly , we want more simplified rules , and we want to ensure that people understand exactly how the system works .
Secondly , we want to ensure that there is a ceiling and a floor around which the money cannot vary dramatically .
Farmers in my constituency have lost nearly 20 % of their earnings under so-called green pounds in the last year .
There are already too many variables in farming and it is essential that we ensure that these variables , which we can control , do not fluctuate so widely .
Finally , I want the agri-monetary system to be self-financing : when it goes up and when it comes down it means that we can do some cross-referencing of money .
This will ensure that the people of Europe are well served in their taxation .
My friends , I wonder whether we will be having this discussion in ten years ' time .
It may well be that with the advent of EMU events will overtake us and we will get to a position where every farmer is able to receive the same amount of aid in the same package wherever they are in the European Union .
I want to assure the farming community - not just in my constituency but in every corner of the European Union - that this Parliament is aware of the difficulties which it faces , and this Parliament will do its best to ensure that it can serve its consumers as effectively as possible , at a decent price and in a way that enables them to maintain a relatively good lifestyle .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , yesterday , when Mrs Fontaine was in the Chair , I spoke for rather a long time .
Today my speech will be quite brief .
In the past it has been demonstrated many times over the years that changes in exchange rates have led to very considerable disagreements and distortions in competitiveness .
The agriculture of Member States has had to offset this in some way or other .
The compensatory mechanisms have been insufficient .
In the reporting year 1 July 1995 to 30 June 1996 - an agricultural accounting year , therefore - there were hardly any exchange rate movements , and where there were any , they were exactly the opposite of previous years .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Hallam , on his report .
Even in the committee stage there was general unanimity , which I should like to record today .
There is support for it today , as well .
We should like to emphasize the demand for continuation of efforts towards simplification and greater transparency , and in particular the introduction in 1998 of new regulations , even though monetary union , the enlargement of the Union , the WTO round of talks , and particularly the discussion on Agenda 2000 , are imminent and will be very emotive .
Enough about that for today .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , let me immediately congratulate Mr Hallam on the enthusiasm he has put into the discussion of this very important subject for each and every farmer in Europe , north or south . Although we agree with the Commission 's theses on the agri-monetary system in force , that is , no basic change in the present arrangements , simplification without comprising the system as a whole , or abolishing the agricultural conversion rate and reappraising possible future choices , we nevertheless consider it necessary to make some comments .
In the first place , it is probable that the agri-monetary system will have to be revised retroactively - it is not the first time this has happened - and not just in view of the introduction of the Euro , which is actually becoming a European ideal .
During the whole period up to that date there are very good grounds for apprehension about a significant increase in the EAGGF costs with dangerous instability on the exchange markets .
Limited presence of the Euro in the early stage of implementation would significantly prejudice agricultural production , whose equilibrium depends - as we all know - on a complex and integrated common architecture , weighted as the result of a continuous , difficult and controversial political adjustment .
There is acute sensitivity to and fear of the implications of this scenario in the agricultural world , a sector prey to the negative effects of any weakening of European structures , especially after the difficulties experienced as a result of excessively strict monetary convergence criteria .
The agri-monetary report presented by the Commission at the end of 1996 fully confirmed suspicions of deviation of major financial flows , which will take the increase in the base level of the agricultural guideline to about 28 % .
A situation of this magnitude for the European Union budget will , in practice , compromise the CAP reforms and make it completely impossible to make the necessary improvements in the structures and organization of markets for Mediterranean crops .
Mr President , I should also like to begin by complimenting Mr Hallam on his report .
If I have read the report properly , I have understood between the lines that he is already a long way ahead of his government and his party because he is already arguing in favour of all the countries of the European Union being part of the future EMU .
I think that is a courageous point of view for a member of the Labour Party .
In the first place , I believe we can say that since the abolition of the switch-over mechanism , the present agrimonetary system has worked extremely well .
The costs are considerably less and at the moment the difference between the green rate and the normal rate is about 2 % .
With a bit of luck it will become even less over the next year .
But there will have to be a bit of luck .
I wonder whether the Commission is making adequate preparations for the abolition of the green rate if EMU ever does come about .
Because what will happen then ?
Will there be compensation for the farmers or will prices be temporarily increased so that the farmers in Europe do not suffer any disadvantage ?
As the Finance Ministers have already made clear , in May certain rates will be " rivetted ' to each other and I think that it is also appropriate for European farmers to know what will happen to the green rate system .
Will they also be rivetted to each other ?
Because that then automatically means that the present system will become superfluous .
The big question will be : what will happen to those countries and those currencies that do not take part in EMU ?
Will there be a similar system of application , etcetera ?
The main point is also - and I am mentioning it because I am the rapporteur for the 1998 agriculture budget - that in the whole agriculture budget for 1998 not a single provision has been made for contingencies of this kind .
And I wonder whether that is a good thing .
It is quite probable that nothing much will happen until after 15 October 1998 , but if the currencies are being rivetted together in May , then something could happen the green ECU and I think the Commission should be ready for this contingency .
I should also like to know the Commission 's position on what Mr Hallam has just set out : at the moment there is an upper limit of 5 % before action is taken and a lower limit of 2 % .
Is it possible to even them up : for example , both at 3 % or both at 5 % or are they just mentioned because in the future , after EMU has come about , these things must be neutral in the budget ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this present report from the Commission keeps the pledge given at the Agriculture Council meeting in June 1995 to compile a report each year that analyses the impact of currency fluctuations and the current agri-monetary system on the CAP and the single market , together with suitable proposals to counter any difficulties that might result .
Parts A and B are devoted to a description of the monetary and agri-monetary events that occurred during 1995-1996 , including the granting of compensatory aid .
The drafting of preamble A , as proposed in Amendment 1 , tallies with the part described in the Commission 's report .
For these reasons we will vote in favour of this amendment .
Part C contains an approach on how all this will economically affect agricultural markets and the income of farmers , while part D assesses the impact of the agri-monetary system on Community achievements .
In substance , the Commission 's annual report on the agri-monetary system proposes abandoning the green tariff for import duties by emphasizing the need to ease agri-monetary processes .
Mr Hallam 's initial draft report proposed this option .
Under the current system , two tariffs co-exist to calculate customs tariffs : the customs tariffs and the green tariff or agricultural conversion rate .
We all want to simplify this system but unlike the rapporteur 's initial proposals , this simplification must not only entail the application of customs tariffs but , conversely , the systematic application of the green tariff .
In fact , the green tariff is higher than the customs tariff .
The conversion rate differential between these two tariffs may reach 5 % .
Consequently , the proposals of both the Commission and the rapporteur tend to lead to a lessening of Community protection .
We all know that in the very tough international context that we are experiencing the principle of Community preference is constantly under threat and is often challenged both by the WTO agreements and the host of agreements signed by the European Union with third countries .
It is therefore paramount to ensure maximum possible protection and hence preserve the green tariff .
The latter will continue to apply for repayments and domestic market prices , whatever the method of calculation chosen to calculate customs tariffs .
In the amendment I have tabled with my colleague Edouard des Places , which was passed by the Committee on Agriculture , I proposed an effective means of simplification .
Effective simplification entails the use of the green tariff to calculate customs tariffs , as indeed it is already used to calculate repayments and domestic market prices .
The other amendments tabled with Mr des Places in committee , which were all adopted , enable us to support the rapporteur 's resolution , apart from preamble A , to which we prefer the wording of Amendment No 1 .
In conclusion , Mr President , we all want to see an easing of the administrative formalities that European enterprises need to complete .
Our approach diverges from that of the Commission on one specific point : we want to preserve community preference as far as possible .
The choice of a single customs tariffs demonstrates that the Commission has systematically opted for solutions that do least to safeguard the interests of the European agricultural economy .
No international agreement or legal stipulation obliges the Commission to propose the customs rate instead of the green rate for customs tariffs .
So why does it do this ?
Following these proposals and especially after the approval of the Agenda 2000 project , I , like many farmers , wonder whether the European Commission really has the will to preserve the one and only genuine integrated Community policy which broadly gives the European Union legitimacy - I refer to the Common Agricultural Policy .
Mr President , I should like to add my congratulations to our colleague , David Hallam for the excellent report that he has produced , which actually sheds some clarity on what is a very , very complicated issue , namely the way in which the agri-monetary system works .
I certainly feel , having read his report , that I understand it very much better .
I would also like to assure colleagues that he did not write the text of my speech this morning , any more than I did the text of his speech yesterday on my report .
The compliments are meant very sincerely .
One of the reasons for welcoming this report is that farmers have to contend with so many uncertainties in their job .
One very heavy storm or two or three weeks of very dry weather at the wrong time of the year can make all the difference as to whether they make a profit or loss on a whole year 's work .
Fluctuations in exchange rates add a further hazard in terms of forward planning .
The agri-monetary system is supposed to give some protection against this .
However , as the report points out , the rises and falls in exchange rates do not necessarily balance each other out and adjustments are necessary to ensure that farmers in one group of countries are not disadvantaged through such monetary movements .
I very much welcome the proposals in Mr Hallam 's resolution recommending the maintenance of maximum stability in the run-up to the introduction of the Euro .
We want only minimum changes in the existing system , those which are required to maintain financial equilibrium in the agriculture sector during this interim period .
I believe that farmers throughout Europe will welcome these recommendations as uncertainty is their greatest problem in an area where long term planning is absolutely essential .
I too want to congratulate Mr Hallam on his report and thank him for his heroic efforts to shed light on a very complicated subject .
I once heard a former member of the Council of Ministers say that he put the question informally to all of the finance ministers who were seated around the table : ' What are NCAs ? ' .
There was not a single minister able to explain that .
They had to send for someone in the Commission .
Mr Hallam has gone one better than that .
I take issue with one point in the opening of the first paragraph of his report which says that there is considerable doubt about the whole question of EMU , or words to that effect .
We , in this House , should not accept that there is any doubt about EMU .
Parliament has to accept that EMU is going to proceed according to the timetable .
By the middle of next year we will , in effect , have European monetary union for perhaps 80 % of the entire economy of our 15 countries and we should proceed on that basis .
Another point I want to make is that Mr Hallam seems to suggest that we might continue with this system after monetary union has been put in place .
Even if it does not cost the Community budget any money , it gives some farmers in strong currency areas payments at the expense of farmers in weak currency countries .
I could not agree that there is any need for that .
I believe that we will have monetary union by the middle of next year .
Once the rates are fixed , this makes the whole agri-monetary system totally redundant .
We will have something like 80 % of the economy of the European Union in the system and there will be one or two countries who want to join but whose currencies are too weak .
It would be very wrong if we were to suggest that there should be a tax imposed on the farmers exporting from those countries if their governments are forced to submit to a devaluation of their currency .
On the other hand I cannot accept that countries which have strong currencies and are eligible to join the European Union , but are not willing to do so , should be given the facility of subsidizing the nominal reductions in prices which occur if their currencies appreciate against the Euro .
To do this would be to offer some sort of an incentive to those countries not to participate in monetary union if they have strong currencies and are eligible to do so .
I believe that we should proceed on the basis that we will use the Euro from the day that the currency rates are fixed .
From there on , the entire system is redundant and farmers within the system have absolute certainties while farmers outside the systems will deal with the problems just like any other sector in their economy - manufacturing , industry , services , importing or exporting .
They exchange their money at the rate that the Euro gives them .
There is no need to have any other system .
I can understand in the past why there was political pressure in countries like Germany and Holland where currencies were appreciating very rapidly .
There was political pressure to give some concessions .
I recall that in 1992 , in a report that I wrote , Parliament rejected the switch-over system . That system eventually incurred costs for the European budget .
My group did not agree with me at the time .
But that system incurred costs of something like ECU 7 billion in the European budget .
I was against it because it provided for unplanned and unscheduled increases in farmers ' incomes which they were not looking for and did not expect .
If we had that ECU 7 billion today to devote to the rural development aspects of our agricultural policy , it could be put to use to achieve social and economic objectives which are closer to the hearts of most people in this Parliament .
Mr President , I would like first of all to congratulate Mr Hallam on his report on a very sensitive issue .
However , I still have many worries , as do other Members , about certain proposals of the Commission .
The Commission proposal on the agri-monetary system of a single market is , in its basic outline , correct .
The rapporteur was quite right to emphasise that at the present stage it is not advisable to make vast changes , as the third phase of Economic and Monetary Union from January 1999 will make these changes .
I would like to add , however , that , particularly in respect of the proposed safety net , in section ( d ) of paragraph 1 , with a ceiling and a floor in local currency , this cannot exceed the limit of + 2-3 % at the most , and it appears that section ( e ) of the same paragraph causes more problems than it was meant to solve .
In my opinion it would have been better to remove it completely .
Such a possibility of redirecting community funds , as is proposed here , will very easily lead to countries with strong economies playing monetary games with exchange rates at the expense of economically weaker countries , which will not be able to do anything about it .
What is more , it limits the free exercise of a policy of public economy by Member States in the run up to EMU , since this section is in fact a system of rewards and punishments .
When a country with a weaker economy is obliged to devalue its currency in order to achieve economic recovery and a more conducive environment for exports , then the European Union comes along with this system and punishes the farmer .
In other words , it takes money from the weakest members and gives it to the strongest , thus perpetuating a vicious circle .
On the one hand the Commission points out that there are no great monetary fluctuations , but it also states that strong currencies have been devalued while other currencies have tended to be revalued .
This may be a fact , but it is not sufficient to make us resort to such measures .
In his conclusions to the report under consideration , the rapporteur supports the Commission in its stance that the Community must in some way end its present guarantees of farmers ' incomes .
" The Community role should be to even out and soften the effect of appreciable fluctuations , rather than to ensure , as the present system does , that whether a currency is devaluing or revaluing , farmers in both situations get more ' , as he puts it .
In accounting terms this position may have a basis . In practice , however , farmers do a very difficult job , with many imponderables , dependent on thousands of external dangers , not only weather conditions and natural disasters , as has been mentioned here today , but also decisions taken by technocrats at a European level .
Mr President , Mr David Hallam 's report on the function of the agri-monetary system for the years 1995-1996 describes the scheme admirably .
I would like to thank him accordingly .
With the green ECU scheme there is an intention to implement the two goals of article 39 of the Treaty of Rome : the guarantee of a reasonable standard of living for farmers , and the freeing-up of markets .
In serving these basic tasks the system has done well .
This of course has been helped by the relative inter-stability of the currencies of the EU Member States .
There was no currency crisis during the early part of the decade .
In the future the agri-monetary system has to face two challenges : the possible implementation of the third stage of EMU , and agriculture turning its attention to world markets .
The switch to a single currency from the start of 1999 should bring a certain degree of stability to the common agricultural policy .
Those Member States which belong to the EMU will no longer experience any major monetary fluctuations .
On the other hand , there will remain the problem of those countries that possibly stay outside the EMU area .
These important agricultural countries may , at least as far as we may gather from our open debate , include Britain , Denmark and Sweden , and perhaps others .
There are no plans by the Commission for a new system .
The formulation of the system , however , is becoming a burning issue , as other speakers have mentioned .
The second question is agricultural production and its importance , even more than before , in view of world markets .
The basic principle in agricultural policy , as contained in Agenda 2000 , is the reconciliation of the level of agricultural aid with world market prices .
World markets are , however , dominated to a large extent by the US dollar .
Over the last year the dollar has increased in value by more than 20 % in relation to the ECU .
This may be at least partly due to the uncertainty that prevails in the world with regard to the single currency .
Because the new Euro exchange rate might be particularly unstable in the early stages , there may be large fluctuations in prices for agricultural products on the world market when they are converted into Euros .
This of course would be promptly reflected in EU internal prices and agricultural aid , when there would be rapid swings in value .
For this reason , the internal connections in Agenda 2000 to world market prices and via them to the US dollar , for example , must be considered thoroughly .
It is worrying that , with the establishment of the Euro , prices for agricultural produce and the value of agricultural aid might not grow and , indeed , may instead fall .
Mr President .
May I first of all turn to my friend Mr Hallam , who started by saying with some justification that he unfortunately had to deal with this most important issue before a very empty Parliament .
I have been here since the beginning , and so I should like to offer him some comfort by saying that in my experience those who are here on a Friday represent quality ; those who are absent do not !
Mr Hallam 's report comes at just the right time .
He emphasized in his speech term , that today one can only work in the short term , because a very big change is imminent in the whole monetary system .
In this very debate it has become clear once again how important it is for us to have a common European currency .
I can only say on behalf of my own electoral constituency of Upper Bavaria that our farmers are waiting for this European money , because our main trade takes place with Italy , and of late there have really been huge fluctuations in the Lira rate , causing our farmers the most serious problems .
As soon as we have a European currency , that can no longer happen .
We shall then have stability , we hope , and I would say that the whole of Mr Hallam 's proposal is really only a temporary solution , but a vital one .
It is really important in all questions to do with agriculture , that we create a temporary solution .
In my personal view the long-term outlook for agriculture is excellent .
There is one simple reason for this : our industrial society is running at full tilt into a cul-de-sac .
We have built up most of it on non-renewable raw materials .
Now the time for renewable raw materials is approaching .
We should take note of the fishing wars as a major warning , though .
Only ten years ago we were told that the oceans were an infinitely large resource , and we should solve all our problems there .
Today we already have problems with fishing conflicts between Europe and Canada , Europe and Africa , France and Spain .
We must recognize that the end has come for non-renewable raw materials .
Renewable raw materials will now come from agriculture .
If you study the problem a little and do not allow yourself to be blinded by criticism from certain large multinational companies , you will see quite clearly that that is no futuristic dream .
Let us take fuels , for example .
Last time I drove to the plenary session in a car that was propelled by natural oil ; not rapeseed oil , but an oil derived from grasses .
It is wonderful to drive with it .
It is a fact that in Germany everything possible is being done to stop the construction of a network of petrol stations where this oil can be bought . This is because it would be much cheaper than conventional products , probably because the state has not yet fully extended its highway robbery to include it .
For us , the most important thing is to do everything in our agricultural policy for the maintenance of the agricultural structure against the day when it is really needed .
I would say - at my age one can allow oneself prophesies by saying to oneself that one will not be here when the test comes - we must simply hope that this farming structure is maintained as the subsequent basis for our agriculture , and that we should do anything to create traditional measures for farmers .
So my warmest thanks to Mr Hallam for what he has said , because he represented this view very well .
I think we should welcome this report and the resolution .
I can second Mr Habsburg 's words as far as the importance of traditional farming for our European continent is concerned .
At your age , however , Mr Habsburg , you really should consider whether you ought to join the Green Party , because with your proposals you are not in good company with the Christian Democrats .
This Christian Democratic Party has supported a policy here , and not only here , but in the national Parliament , which is heading in precisely the opposite direction : the destruction of those farms which you warn us we shall need .
A farm goes bankrupt every two minutes in Europe , and those are the smaller businesses .
Every year 500 , 000 jobs are lost in European agriculture .
That is a shocking figure , and if we want to stop this , then we must either accept your concepts , or we must do what has always been Green agricultural policy , and declare support for the traditional farming as the aim of agricultural policy .
In that case we should not have to mention this report , which we have to deal with here , because , Mr Hallam , there are two possibilities for beating the system : one is that we join in monetary union , which you already mentioned .
The other system would be to withdraw from interventionism , state buying and export subventions .
Because these monetary measures and the offset measures being debated here are only necessary for areas and products to which intervention is applied .
These are , indeed , the classic market regulatory products not , for example , potatoes , not vegetables , not fruit , not the whole range of products which we in Baringdorf place on the direct-sales market , the direct path to producers and consumers , from our farm .
These are completely unaffected by variations in the exchange rate .
Nor do we benefit from offset payments which are affected by this monetary system , but we obtain our prices from the market ; we get the prices from the quality of our products and from the awareness of our consumers that these products have a special value for them .
We see here increasingly that the value of the product is not merely measured by the quality intrinsic to it , which can be quantitively measured , but that these products are valued increasingly for their external quality - as one might call it : that there must be an agricultural structure to ensure that our old people do not become poor , that our variety of species is maintained , that there is a landscape with farming businesses and not one , as we can see in the former GDR , with farms devoid of any aesthetic value .
Europe 's cultural achievements lie in rural areas and have their origins there .
Without wishing to blow our own trumpet , farmers made this culture , they were the basis of this culture .
If we attack this basis we should not be surprised if Europe 's culture changes .
For this reason these monetary matters have a great deal to do with general development ; so I should like to complain here that we are using the discussion on Agenda 2000 - which comes next and in which such hesitant attempts are being made to leave an intervention system for one producing quality products - as a way of submitting in the European Parliament the brave outline of a new agricultural policy lying beyond all agro-industrial logic .
Whoever then wishes to produce within a particular agro-industrial production for world markets - as authorized by our constitutional law and our free economic laws - may do so , but then , if you please , without state support .
And for those who maintain the culture and the landscape , who produce quality , who are in contact with the consumer , who are actually not responsible for the billions we now have to spend on BSE , there must be support .
The agricultural budget is not too high , agriculture is not too expensive .
The money is simply being spent incorrectly . It is being spent against maintenance of the structure , instead of in support of it .
If we dare to make a courageous proposal here , and you , Mr Habsburg , reconsider the matter with the Green Party , then we shall be on the right path and your memory will be honoured .
Then it will be said that at his age he still did the right thing !
Madam President , first of all I would like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , its rapporteur , Mr David Hallam , and the honourable Members of the European Parliament for the support they are giving to the report on the agri-monetary system for the single market in the period from 1 July 1995 to 30 June 1996 and for the debate in this House today .
I am quite sure that Commissioner Fischler is looking forward to the debate on Agenda 2000 and agricultural policy , and I shall make a point of not dealing with that on this occasion .
I would like to address one point with which the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development agrees .
The Commission believes that it is too early to put forward a proposal for a Council Regulation on the adaptation of the agri-monetary system on the basis of the Euro .
We do not yet know which or how many currencies will participate and we have no idea what exchange rates will be set , so nor do we know anything about the monetary deviations between these exchange rates and the current agricultural conversion rates .
As long as there is uncertainty about the size of the problem , the Commission 's view is that it serves no purpose to draw up a proposal for a Council regulation .
Even though the Commission can fully accept the guidelines in the proposed resolution , I shall allow myself to make a small observation on the first reading .
I think the statement on the currencies ' relative stability for several years is too general .
I am therefore pleased that an amendment is being submitted for the first reading to limit it to the period covered by the report , that is , from 1 July 1995 to 30 June 1996 .
Mr Mulder asked some specific questions and I have been informed that the departments are also considering the questions mentioned here , as well as the various possible scenarios , so we are aware of the problems .
In conclusion I would like to say that the Commission agrees with the guidelines which are listed in the resolution concerning the future agri-monetary system , i.e. simplicity and transparency , a limited number of changes to the agricultural conversion rates and manageable costs . And with these observations , I thank you for the debate .
The debate is closed .
We will now vote on Mr Hallam 's report .
We abstained from the vote on this report .
In our opinion it is desirable to change the agri-monetary system of the internal market as soon as possible .
The cost of ECU 1.3 billion per year is not acceptable .
The question is whether the system has not had its day , now that almost all farmers can gain financial benefit from it .
There is no balance , since amounts paid out to farmers in countries which revalue their currencies are not balanced against savings on amounts which are paid out to farmers who receive more in national currencies because of devaluation .
We welcome the rapporteur 's conclusions that agri-monetary systems should play a smaller role and cost substantially less than they do now .
A saving in this area is desirable as soon as possible .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on this excellent report .
It is reassuring to know that he also wants the rules to be simplified .
I agree with him that this is not the time to make any dramatic changes , in view of the uncertainty about EMU .
In the longer term a radical reform is necessary .
For the moment , fluctuations in exchange rates are not a thing of the past .
We must endeavour to achieve a system that is self-financing .
The conditions in paragraph 1 ( d ) of the draft resolution do not remove the openended nature of the system .
That open end could be closed up with an asymmetrical system .
Compensation for farmers in devaluing countries can be frozen in the national currency , while the payments for the revaluing countries are established in ECU .
From the savings , the farmers in revaluing countries can receive compensation afterwards .
In this way the agrimonetary compensation can be neutral in the budget .
With regard to the reform of the system , this Parliament already pointed out in 1995 the risk that the Member States would contribute to the compensation for the revaluation of the green rates .
From the annual report of the Commission , it appears that Luxembourg , Germany and Belgium additionally compensated their farmers .
The Netherlands , Denmark and Austria , among others , did not pay their share of the compensation .
In this way , producers in comparable circumstances are treated differently ,