Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 15 May 2003 .
I have a number of announcements which I would like to make to the House
As regards the calendar of part-sessions for next year , I have received from the Conference of Presidents a proposal to hold an eleventh part-session from Monday 3 May to Thursday 6 May 2004 .
The deadline for tabling amendments to this proposal is tomorrow , Tuesday , at 4.00 p.m.
The vote is scheduled for Wednesday at 12 noon .
Mr President , I would just like to ask you to check whether , for legal reasons , a fully valid part-session is possible at all after 1 May , as the new Treaty of Nice stipulates 732 as the fixed number of Members .
However , as far as I am aware , there are 788 of us .
I would be interested to know how the qualified majority is meant to be worked out if there is a part-session in May .
I would ask that it be checked whether this proposal is at all legal .
Thank you .
The point which you raise is perfectly correct .
In the discussions in the Conference of Presidents it was agreed that since we will then be in an election period it would be appropriate to deal with political rather than legislative matters .
If we were to deal with legislative matters then the question you raise would be unavoidable .
The final draft agenda as drawn up pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of the Rules of Procedure by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Wednesday 28 May 2003 has been distributed .
The following changes have been proposed :
Wednesday
As regards the oral questions to the Council and the Commission on a transatlantic partnership tabled on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , I propose to extend the deadlines as follows :
motions for resolutions : 12 noon on Thursday 12 June
amendments and joint motions for resolutions : 12 noon on Tuesday 17 June .
The proposal is thus have the debate this time , and the vote at the next part session .
Mr President , the matter I raised on Wednesday 's agenda is linked to the Council 's non-participation in the debate on the Nigerian elections , at which the Commission will be represented .
We cannot understand why , when the Council is represented in the Chamber , it will not participate in a debate during which it just so happens that the Chairman of the Delegation of Observers , Mr Van den Berg , who was proposed for that appointment by the Council , is going to report .
It is surprising that Council should not want to make a statement about such an important matter , even more so since it is represented in the Chamber .
I ask you to repeat Parliament 's request that the Council participate in this debate .
I am happy to repeat the request , and should like to inform the House that to the best of my knowledge the Council will indeed be present .
Under current indications , it does not intend to participate in this debate .
I shall reiterate the request made in the Conference of Presidents which you have repeated here today .
Mr President , I wish to raise another matter , although I leave it to your wise judgement as to whether , if it gains majority support in this House , it should be dealt with on Wednesday or during the short sitting on Thursday .
I refer to the need for information from the Commission concerning the events surrounding Eurostat .
These cases of fraud - which I will describe as matters of suspicion - have not yet been considered by the Members of this House , although they are receiving blanket coverage in Europe 's media .
Our group requests that we should have a communication from the Commission , on the basis of which we could discuss the Eurostat problem , either on Wednesday , or during the short sitting on Thursday .
Mr President , I understand that the Group of the Party of European Socialists ' proposal has been accepted , which is to say that the Commission will participate in both debates , on the Middle East as well as on the illegal small arms trade .
Is now the moment to talk about the point Mr Poettering has raised , or will he submit it later ?
It seems to me that the most appropriate way to deal with this would be to take it as a proposal to the Conference of Presidents this week , to see what the groups wish to do , and then to choose to invite the relevant institutions to be here .
Mr President , I think it would be appropriate for the Chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control to participate , since it is essential to respect the work of this House 's committees .
When preparing the Conference of Presidents for this week , could the groups please consult the Committee on Budgetary Control and see whether there is a consensus to move forward with regard to Mr Poettering 's suggestion .
Mr President , as you are aware , on 14 June the Convention will conclude its work , on 20 June there will be a Summit in Thessaloniki and we , most appropriately , will be holding a mini part-session in the week between the two events , on 18 and 19 June to be precise .
My group therefore felt it was important that we should hold a preliminary debate on the outcome of the Convention , maybe inviting the Chairman , Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , to be present .
I would stress what Mr Barón Crespo said , namely that this does not mean there would be any less need for a more in-depth analysis after the Thessaloniki Summit , carried out according to whatever procedure Parliament decides to follow .
Given the public nature of the Convention 's work , I believe it would be politically appropriate to discuss it in this House , even if we are not the first to do so , publicly and transparently at least , and , if possible , in the presence of the Chairman , but even without the Chairman if he is not available .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , having considered this matter , our group supports this proposal .
We would very much have appreciated it if the resolution of the Conference of Presidents , which was - as I recall it - unanimous , could have been acted on this week , and if the Chairman of the Convention could have visited Parliament this week .
I do not know why this has not been done .
The reasons for this remain to be clarified , but I would very much welcome it if the Chairman of the Convention were to join us for our short sitting .
Mr President , I thank you for proposing that we deal with the Eurostat affair next Thursday , as well as the flax case , which is also under discussion in the Committee on Budgetary Control , and is attracting public attention .
In relation to Mrs Frassoni 's point , I think that , since the members of my political family are in Amsterdam and will be continuing their work in Brussels , we could consult them to gain a fuller knowledge of the facts , and then discuss the issue at Thursday 's Conference of Presidents , when we could also repeat our request to the Convention President .
I feel that we should debate this on Thursday rather than take a decision at this precise moment .
Mr President , I would like Mr Barón Crespo to clarify for us the relationship between the flax case , which is being tried in Spain , and the Eurostat affair .
It is akin to my asking us to debate the result of the Madrid city council elections now .
There were winners and losers in those elections , but , to be quite honest , I can see no connection between the two points .
Please reply , Mr Barón Crespo , and then we will move from this Spanish tennis match back to our European agenda .
I would like to thank Mr Galeote for his desire for information .
Council elections in a country are one thing ; financial irregularities affecting the Community budget , which have given rise to reports in this House and related legal actions , are quite another , Mr Galeote .
I believe that this does indeed fall within the competence of the European Parliament and that you , who are as concerned as I am for there to be no financial irregularities affecting the Community budget , will also support this proposal .
Furthermore , you will support the involvement of the Committee on Budgetary Control and of Parliament in this matter .
Mr President , quite frankly , I believe it is the European Parliament 's duty to be the first to hold a public debate on this subject .
Politics , I regret to say , has its idiosyncrasies , and so I do not feel it would be very wise to put this proposal to the vote now , for it would certainly be rejected .
We will therefore wait for all the various exceedingly important decisions to be taken within the Group of the Party of European Socialists , and then we will see whether we shall be able to convince the Socialists to launch the debate , with or without the Chairman , Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing .
I would stress that it is not so much a question of deciding our position on the Convention as carrying out an initial assessment of the outcome of the Convention as soon as its work is finished and before the governments can do so .
I feel that this is the very least we can do politically , not least for the sake of public opinion .
Mr President , let me just reiterate the point that , as I recall it , the Conference of Presidents resolved unanimously - something it very rarely does - to ask the Chairman of the Convention to join us for this part-session .
I do not know whether an official summons or invitation was issued , or whether it was declined .
That may well be the case , but I would like clarification - which we are not going to get right now - as to whether , if the Conference of Presidents ' resolution was unanimous , that resolution was implemented as regards our procedure , and I would be obliged if we could be given more precise information on the subject on Thursday morning .
I can only offer you the facts .
He is not here and he is detained doing the work that he is meant to do : chairing the Convention .
These are the facts of the matter and I do not want to make any interpretations as regards his willingness to engage with us .
I suggest that we put this item on the agenda for Thursday 's Conference of Presidents meeting .
We should take note of it from today and then try to make a recommendation , hopefully on a consensual basis , on how to proceed on Wednesday 18 June or Thursday 19 June in Brussels .
The order of business was thus established .
Mr President , as Chairman of the College of Quaestors , I have been asked to help arrange transport to Parliament tomorrow for assistants coming from Brussels .
I would be grateful if colleagues whose assistants are experiencing difficulties in their travel arrangements and , indeed , colleagues in the same predicament , could contact my office as soon as possible .
A train leaves Brussels at 7.20 a.m. , and we are considering the possibility of arranging transport from Luxembourg , where the train arrives at 10.00 a.m.
Could I ask colleagues who have problems with this to contact me in my office here as soon as possible .
For colleagues who are not aware of it , there is yet another general strike in France tomorrow , so the trains will not be able to get here .
I presume the planes will not be able to get here either .
Mr President , I should like to ask your help once more regarding a very human problem : the problem of the Roma refugees from Kosovo .
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other international organisations admit that these refugees cannot go back to their home country .
They are also being deported from Germany and Belgium .
My question is as follows : around 600 refugees in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia have been turned out of a reception centre .
They made their way to the Greek border and requested political asylum , but received rough treatment at the hands of riot police .
Could you use your authority to contact not only those international organisations , but also the Commission , to confirm that these refugees cannot return to Kosovo ?
They also have problems in connection with their property in Kosovo and with asserting ownership of that property .
The Roma are human beings belonging to the European Community , but are repeatedly being reminded in an inhuman manner that they are second-class citizens .
Can we not use your authority to do something about this ?
I should be grateful to you for your intervention .
I will take up the matter , Mrs Maes .
Thank you for raising it .
Mr President , I endorse the remarks that have just been made .
When you write to the Council perhaps you could also point out how hopelessly ineffective the Council 's own sanctions have been in respect of Zimbabwe and how they need to be toughened up .
I would like to say a word about the situation in Cyprus .
For a long time many of us who have wanted reconciliation in Cyprus with due regard to the interests and concerns of both communities have called for some serious confidence-building measures on the part of the international community in relation to Turkish northern Cyprus .
In particular , measures need to be taken to lift the wholly unfair international embargo on the north , which has been imposed for so long and which has been directly responsible for holding back economic development .
I wish tentatively to welcome proposals which are anticipated from the Commission to provide a goodwill package of economic assistance , along with measures apparently to lift the embargo .
I trust these measures are being made on a genuine basis and that they have been worked out in full concertation with the Turkish Cypriot authorities .
Furthermore , I hope that the easing of travel restrictions by the Turkish Cypriot authorities between the two parts of Cyprus will be reciprocated by the Government of the Republic to enable the free movement of all people coming from the north .
Mr President , I would like to draw Parliament 's attention to a case of blatant discrimination that is about to take place in the county of Northamptonshire , which I and my colleague , Mr Helmer , represent .
The Labour-controlled county council has decided in its wisdom to cut the number of free school bus passes it gives out .
However , instead of doing this fairly and across the board , it has vindictively decided to target denominational and single-sex schools .
This Labour council conducted a listening consultation exercise with parents across the county and , out of over 1 120 replies , only 17 concurred with their plans .
At this point , 119 parents complained that they felt this policy amounted to either religious or sexual discrimination .
Many of these parents have now decided to petition this Parliament .
Mr President , through you , I ask that the Committee on Petitions investigate these complaints as soon as possible , as I am sure that no one in this House would like to see such discrimination tolerated .
Mr President , following on from the comment made by my honourable friend on Cyprus , I should like to say that we must not forget that the northern part of Cyprus has been under Turkish occupation as a result of the invasion in 1974 .
Now to my point : just as official spokesmen are admitting that Iraq 's famous weapons of mass destruction were no more than the pretext for the invasion , new threats to world peace are emanating from the metropolis of imperialism .
The United States Congress has in fact given its approval for research into so-called mini nuclear weapons and for new nuclear weapons that penetrate the ground , causing ten times as much damage .
This development comes just 18 months after the Nuclear Post Review calling for ways to be found so that nuclear weapons can be used within the framework of the new American preventive strike strategy .
At the same time , Mr Bush himself is making headlines on the continuing campaign against Cuba , with his well publicised message on 20 May , while the United States of America are jamming the country 's radio and television network in order to broadcast their cheap propaganda .
As I condemn the foregoing , I wonder what those who directly or indirectly supported and support imperialist aggression have to say .
I also wonder to what extent those who called American agents in Cuba human rights activists will articulate even one word in protest against the new escalation of aggression against the island of the revolution .
Mr President , on Wednesday 21 May 2003 , I was sent as a European Parliament delegate to the United Nations in New York to speak at the Permanent Forum of indigenous peoples from all over the world , which meets once a year in the UN headquarters .
I did , of course , convey the greetings of the European Parliament , and I emphasised the consideration we have given over the past three years to all the indigenous and aboriginal races of the United States of America , Canada , South America , Africa , Oceania and so forth , and all the representatives of the world 's indigenous peoples asked me to inform the European Parliament that they are waiting for us to speak out resolutely to support them and to provide practical aid to promote respect for their human rights .
Above all , however , they are waiting for Europe to make its voice heard so that it is not just the United Nations which takes any notice of them , for we all know that the Europe of yesterday was responsible for situations which are causing them to suffer today .
I hope that you , Mr President , will listen to me personally when I pass on to you the requests made by these peoples to the European Parliament .
Mr President , during the European Union-Russia Summit in St. Petersburg , we faced a cornucopia of totally unacceptable statements from the Council , but even more so from the Commission .
At this summit , indeed , Mr Prodi drowned the Chechen question in vodka and caviar .
These positions are fundamentally opposed to those of the European Parliament .
I am astonished ( I address these remarks to chairmen of groups , and of course also to you , Mr President ) that the question of a report by President Prodi and the Council on Chechnya , and on European Union-Russian relations in general , is not on the agenda either for this part-session or for the Brussels mini-session .
Mr President , I would like to point out that the Andalusian fisherman Agustín García has been held in prison in Faro by the Portuguese authorities since 8 May last .
I would like to point out that the means used to arrest him were entirely disproportionate and that he was subjected to excessive violence and poor treatment .
A simple offence was handled as if it were a terrorist act .
It should be noted that he has been held in preventive detention since then , among dangerous criminals .
Furthermore , he is unwell and has not received adequate medical treatment .

The imprisonment of Mr García has already led to a general strike by the Andalusian fishing community and I believe that Portugal is trying to make an example of Mr García , making a simple fisherman , who has only committed this one offence , carry the can for a lack of political will .
Mr President , I would ask you to intervene in order to solve this problem .
Perhaps you might be able to contribute to resolving this lamentable situation .
Mr President , there is one problem whose urgency is clear for millions of workers in the European Union : attacks on pensions .
This problem is not limited to the workers of France , who will be on strike and holding demonstrations tomorrow : it also concerns the workers of Austria , Germany , Greece , Italy and everywhere in Europe , where governments are trying to raise the retirement age while reducing pensions .
Raising the retirement age means that people who have retained their jobs to the end will die in harness , and that people no longer wanted by their employers will finish their active lives on the dole .
What can the reason be for this retrograde step on the part of society ?
Can the European Union have become such a poor and underdeveloped region that it cannot provide for the twilight years of those worn out by work ?
I maintain that it is possible to provide proper pensions for all , if more taxes are imposed on employers .
I should like to pledge solidarity with all those , throughout the European Union , who refuse to favour capital and who do not agree that it should be possible to possess capital at the expense of salaried employees .
Mr President , I am pleased that Commissioner de Palacio is here , because this will perhaps be of interest to her .
I should like to draw attention to a series of serious accidents involving lorries that have occurred in Belgium on the E17 , that is , the motorway from Antwerp to Lille , in recent weeks .
The cause is always those lorries using cruise control , which is a kind of autopilot enabling drivers to drive without keeping their feet on the pedals .
Careless lorry drivers are driving into traffic queues because their reactions are too slow .
The balance sheet for the last 7 weeks shows 6 dead and 13 seriously injured , indicating that this is very bad technology .
Problems and accidents involving cruise control can be seen all over Europe .
The relevant directive on technical regulations for heavy goods vehicles must be amended to contain a provision banning this .
Belgium wants to ban cruise control on its territory and should be given the chance to do so .
I think that the Commissioner should take the necessary steps .
Mr President , it is with great concern that I note - as do many of our fellow citizens - a decision taken by the US Congress , which makes the implementation of an aid package for Aids amounting to USD 15 billion in value conditional upon the willingness of the recipient countries in Africa to accept supplies of genetically-modified food .
Although this composite measure is not legally binding , it is clear to me that it puts African countries under a great deal of pressure .
This , in my view , amounts to a trade policy pursued at the expense of the poorest , and that is to be repudiated !
This decision by the US Congress has made that plain , and one wonders how much leverage the biotechnology and agriculture lobbies , with their business interests , are exerting on the American administration 's humanitarian aid policy .
There is no doubt that recent decades have seen many millions of dollars poured into the development of genetically-modified seeds , and now , as I see it , every market is to be pressured into opening up to them .
Humanitarian aid can , however , be effective only if it does not play second fiddle to commercial interests , and so I would like to ask the Commission what it is contemplating doing about this , or what view it takes of such a development in this area .
Mr President , the rich and powerful of the world gathered in Evian in order to discuss international security , development and economic stability .
Basically , they want to coordinate in the face of the crisis plaguing the capitalist system and leading to huge unemployment , poverty and exclusion .
They want to consolidate their authority and take further measures to concentrate the wealth of the planet in their hands in any way they can , even with the fear of fanaticism and terrorism which they have created .
The eight are concerned not for the poor and how they live , but with how to stop them rising up against them , against miserable exploitation and injustice , which is why they also took harsher repressive measures , preventing thousands of protestors from coming to express their opposition to the globalisation of capital and their predatory exploitation .
The Presidency and the Commission must make a statement to the House both on the content of the discussions in which they participated and on the repressive measures taken against the protestors , the same and perhaps worse measures that are also being taken for the European Council in Thessaloniki .
Mr President , I believe it is my duty to draw attention to the fact that , only today , 12 African migrants have disappeared , and must surely have died , while they were trying to reach the Spanish coast close to Africa , looking for work .
Once again , I think that the European Union will have to take the necessary political steps , doing everything possible to avoid such frequent , terrible disasters .
Mr President , I would like to say a few words about the situation in Guinea-Bissau , which is extremely serious and has been dragging on for some months .
The parliament was dissolved last year ; the elections scheduled for April have now been postponed until July , and it is expected that they will be delayed further .
The situation is extremely delicate and sensitive : the country is experiencing a general crisis - economic , financial , social , political and even military . That is why we placed Guinea-Bissau on this week 's agenda .
I would like to express my regret at the discourtesy of certain groups , who proposed that Guinea-Bissau be replaced on the agenda by Zimbabwe without communicating any of this to us ; I received this surprise in my office just after I arrived from Brussels .
For that reason , I was unable to take the floor just now .
I understand the feelings of some of my fellow Members on Zimbabwe .
We have always shown our solidarity with those fellow Members over this problem , which is very serious and which we have already discussed four or five times in Parliament .
It is important for us to remember , however , that Zimbabwe is not the only country with problems : other countries have them too , and we must find time to discuss them .
We will reschedule this important debate for July ; I would appreciate the understanding of my fellow Members .
I am certain that a gesture by Parliament will be timely and effective in this very sensitive case of Guinea-Bissau .
Mr President , respect for human rights has proven to be the most effective mechanism for democracy anywhere .
This formula asks for an improvement of the actual implementation of the rule of law , meaning respect for such fundamental freedoms as political association and peaceful assembly , the independence of the judiciary , the right to a fair trial and the exclusion of all forms of torture and ill-treatment .
This must apply everywhere , the Basque country included .
Now , in a telegraphic manner , I shall put forward some other recent outstanding events concerning human rights in the Basque country , in addition to those you mentioned , Mr President :
Last Wednesday , 28 May 2003 , the suicide of a young Basque in a French prison ; the case of Jesús María Etxebarría , who has already lost 20 kg and is in the 41st day of his hunger strike ; the refusal of several Basque prisoners to use the toilets for almost two months in order to attract the public 's attention to their situation - Mr President , you will remember Bobby Sands and his colleagues ; the arrest and imprisonment of the Mayor of Ondarrua , Loren Arkotxa , and other elected representatives of Udalbiltza ; the Amnesty International report 2003 , which refers to the period from January to December 2002 , during which Spain kept prisoners incommunicado , a situation which facilitates torture ; resolutions of the Bilbao and San Sebastian Lawyers ' Associations , denouncing ill treatment in police headquarters ; and the banning of 225 local lists of candidates for the municipal elections .
Apparently , it makes no sense in this House to mention the outlawing of Batasuna .
Mr President , I do not know whether Mr Gorostiaga has something to do with this and is also trying to restrict my freedom of speech .
I am very happy that Mr Gorostiaga is concerned about the right to freedom of speech and assembly and I hope that from now on he will also be concerned about the representatives of my party and the Socialist Party assassinated by a terrorist group supported by his political group , which thank God is now defunct .
I am sure , therefore , that from now on he will also defend the rights of my political party and the Socialist Party to assembly and freedom of speech .
It is incredible that you are able to speak in this House following the assassination of two members of the national police force , carried out by the terrorist group that you are unable to condemn .
I am able to condemn and regret all the deaths that have occurred , including the deaths of the prisoners , whose rights I recognise , except for the right to restrict our freedom of speech and assassinate us in such a despicable manner .
Mr President , I would like to remind the House that elections should have taken place very recently in Northern Ireland and regrettably , unlike in Scotland and the Welsh Assembly , those elections did not go ahead .
I would like this House to urge the participants to please come together and hold those elections as soon as feasible .
Nature abhors a vacuum and while , hopefully , we will not go back to condemning killings and burying the dead on the island of Ireland , undoubtedly street events will occur with increasing frequency if we do not hold elections .
We are all agreed that the way forward is through the democratic process .
I hope we can see those elections held very soon .
The debate is closed .
The next item is the report ( A5-0193 / 2003 ) by Willi Rothley , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the adoption of a Statute for Members of the European Parliament
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are nearing the end of a long journey , an odyssey that has , from time to time , seen us wandering far afield and sometimes finding ourselves in choppy waters .
The attempt has been made to persuade us that this statute was about nothing more than reforming the reimbursement of travel costs , that it was about money and nothing else .
A statute dealing only with money , with its reimbursement , and with costs , is not , though , the sort of statute that the European Parliament needs at the present time .
We were told that primary legislation would run aground on the cliffs of the Council , and that our ideas on tax law would drag us down to the depths of the ocean .
Now , if I may pick out these as examples , I think that we have good arguments on our side .
The two problems that remain to be resolved are taxes and primary law , and - as far as taxes are concerned - the Council thinks it can leave it to each individual Member State to decide whether or not it wants to levy an additional national tax .
It so happens that , in 2000 , the three legal services - those of Parliament , the Council , and the Commission - met to discuss this issue .
The minutes of their deliberations record their conclusion that they could find no justification for a derogation for a Member State , and then they continue in the following terms :
So what the Council is now proposing to us is precisely what the three legal services unanimously ruled out .
It is obvious that we cannot go along with this !
There is a similar situation as regards primary law .
Why is it that this House is in this difficult position ?
It is because , in 1976 , when the Act concerning the election of the Members of the European Parliament by direct universal suffrage was introduced , the Council fought shy of harmonising the general conditions applicable to the exercise of the mandate .
It found that too much of a hot potato .
That is why the European Parliament retained the structure of a parliamentary assembly even after it started to be directly elected , a structure it retains to this day .
The object of this statute is to break down this parliamentary assembly-style structure and for us to become a real Parliament .
That is what the Statute is for !
The fundamental issue is of whether this European Community is a real community or an international organisation .
If it were merely an international organisation , then the Council would indeed have the prerogative as regards Members ' privileges and immunities .
The question as to whether or not we should now regulate MEPs ' privileges and immunities boils down to the question of whether this European Community is a community or an international organisation , of whether we are a parliamentary assembly or a parliament worthy of the name .
That is what it is about !
( Applause )
The rules we have now date back to 1965 , when the Protocol was introduced .
In that year , Charles de Gaulle beat Mitterrand to win the French presidential elections , and it was in that year that the first contraceptive pill was put on the market .
( Laughter )
And now the Council - it is apparently the Council , although I am unsure , as it used to be only the Permanent Representatives who dealt with these matters - is trying to tell us that it is these rules by which Parliament should continue to be governed in the future , almost a quarter of a century after it was first directly elected .
If we do not get to grips with this issue now , then when is it going to be dealt with ?
After all , it is not as if the Council thought that the system of privileges and immunities had to be reformed .
It expressly confirmed that only last year , when the uniform right to vote was introduced .
It is clear that the Council sees this as a long-term solution , and of course Parliament cannot accept that .
As I have said , the Council has not previously given this issue its serious consideration .
The governments are showing themselves to be something less than interested in it .
That is why it is no bad idea to say that the Statute should enter into force at the same time as the European Union 's new constitution .
We would then have a guarantee that both the Council and the Intergovernmental Conference would do intensive and serious work on this topic , and also that the issues of taxation and of primary law would be discussed at intergovernmental level in an appropriate way .
If we now dispense with these rules - which we do not want to come into effect , something they can of course do only after those provisions in the Protocol that are contrary to them have been suspended - then we will remain , for an unforeseeable period of time , in the Council 's Babylonian captivity .
That is what this Statute is about !
I am very grateful to the Bureau for coming up with rules on the reimbursement of costs , general expenses , the daily subsistence allowance , and the lump sum for staff .
That was very helpful and a step in the right direction .
I am very grateful to you , Mr President , generally , for having taken more trouble over this Statute than any previous President .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the PPE-DE Group 's Mr Lehne ,
( Applause )
who , with his criticisms , his solidarity , and his reliability , has been with this project every step of the way .
Many thanks for that , and many thanks to you all !
( Applause )
. ( ES ) Mr President , I shall be very brief .
I would like to say that this is a complex issue .
Clearly we are talking about an issue which has not changed since 1965 , despite the spectacular progress which has been made in the institutional elements of European integration and particularly with regard to the capacities and duties of Parliament , such as its means of election .
Nevertheless , we have been unable to adapt the Statute for Members of the European Parliament to today 's circumstances .
As a former Member of this and other parliaments , I understand the importance and the implications of the Statute for Members and of the report presented to us today by Mr Rothley .
I would like to congratulate him on his work and , on behalf of the Commission , wish him the best possible results .
We hope that tomorrow there will be a concrete response so that we can vote on this matter .
Our objective is to cooperate actively so that , ultimately , we achieve an agreement that might be accepted by the Council , because otherwise we all know that it will serve little purpose .
We hope to be able to achieve this agreement once and for all .
Mr President , I would just like to start by expressing my gratitude to Mr Rothley , who has , with almost boundless patience , steered this tanker through the sandbanks ever since 1998 , and has done so in a way that commands admiration .
I also think that , without him , this tanker would have ended up on the rocks more than once .
Mr Rothley , in his speech earlier on , addressed in a few words the important issues , some of them of a constitutional nature , that this statute raises .
I would like to say something about some rather more down-to-earth problems .
I also believe that the statute , as it has emerged , is a very balanced piece of work .
In the Committee on Legal Affairs , we were , essentially , guided by the instructions that we had been given by the experts and wise men that Parliament had mandated .
The fifty per cent of a judge 's salary that is at issue here corresponds , more or less , to what an Austrian , French , German or British MEP currently receives , after health insurance and old age pension contributions have been taken into account .
It is less than what our Italian Members currently get , and so I would like to express my thanks to them for their understanding and for their willingness to accept a reduction in income , as it were on behalf of future Italian MEPs and in the interests of common European rules .
In addition , I would like to thank MEPs from the Greens , the European United Left and the Liberals , who have not , in this part-session , submitted any amendments aimed at reducing the 50 % or resubmitted the amendments put to the Legal Affairs Committee , as I believe there to be no objective argument against what it has produced .
This has been unequivocally confirmed by the wise men , from whom we received clear guidance .
There is , however , one amendment tabled by a number of Members who basically want future MEPs ' salaries to be based on those of their national counterparts .
I regard that amendment as nonsensical , to put it mildly .
The fact is that the whole point of the statute is to create equal conditions for this country 's parliamentarians in accordance with Article 190 ( 5 ) .
It follows that those who submit such amendments must , in order to be consistent , be opposed to the statute as a whole , in that they in fact seek to retain the legal status quo .
Let me turn now to the issues of primary law .
A number of Members have tabled amendments - Amendment No 28 is one example - aimed at adding to the Statute the old protocol on privileges and immunities .
That , though , makes no sense .
For example , Amendment No 28 , which I have just mentioned , refers to MEPs ' customs privileges , which , as we are living in an internal market , no longer exist .
That shows how old this law is .
This issue calls for new law .
I might add that it is also the case that the way is now at last clear for us to have transparent rights to indemnification .
This is something on which the Bureau will decide .
I will conclude with an appeal to the Council , which now has a real opportunity to ensure that we get a forward-looking Statute for Members of the European Parliament .
Putting it simply , it must act swiftly to approve what this House has decided , and it should not block a decision by using flimsy and superficial arguments on tax law that have all been conjured up from nowhere .
What I expect of the Council is that it should , as soon as possible - by which I mean before the elections - decide in favour of what Parliament demands .
Once we have taken our decision tomorrow , the next move will be for the Council .
( Applause )
Mr President , I am very happy to be here today to support the work carried out by the rapporteur , Mr Rothley , and I would like to join Mr Lehne in thanking Mr Rothley for his work .



As Mr Lehne has said , Mr Rothley 's proposal is balanced and received the support of a broad majority of the Parliamentary Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
I believe it should be adopted in plenary .
A total of 36 amendments have been tabled in plenary .
Mr Lehne has referred to them .
There are not too many for a subject such as this , but the Group of the Party of European Socialists has decided to support the rapporteur 's direction as a whole , with some of the amendments which the rapporteur has also suggested to us in plenary today , so that we might remedy some of the flaws that were still present in the final version of the proposal .
As the rapporteur has said , the aim here is essentially to create a Statute that allows Members of the European Parliament to be recognised , not as an extension of the various national parliaments , but as representatives of the peoples of the European Union as a whole .
Mr Rothley said that the European Union is more than simply an international organisation and that , consequently , the Statute for Members of the European Parliament should be based within a Community framework rather than a national framework .
That is what we are currently addressing .
It is not a simple decision on remuneration .
Our current , somewhat flawed , system supplements the flaws in national legislation with Community legislation on allowances , which has been the subject of a great deal of criticism .
I believe that if we adopt the rapporteur 's proposal , if the Commission also adopts it and , in particular , as Mr Lehne has said , if the Council adopts Parliament 's proposal , we could soon have a Statute which would effectively allow Members of the European Parliament to be differentiated from members of national parliaments , with their own status , which would be appropriate for the kind of European Union that we are currently trying to create .
Mr President , I hope we do not have to come here again to talk about our employment conditions .
When I looked at the UK press over the weekend I could not recognise myself or indeed any of my colleagues in the lurid descriptions of our supposed lifestyles and endless perks .
Many journalists have telephoned me with the opening line ' Oh , so you are about to vote yourself a 25 % pay rise . '
When I explain the whys and wherefores , they suddenly lose interest , it is not an interesting story any more .
Surely this is the point .
Our conditions of employment and our expenses should not be the story , they should be transparent , a matter of public record : proper recompense for a job well done and reimbursement for monies paid out in doing that .
Colleagues , I believe this is our last chance to reach the stage where we are no longer the story , but our work is .
We have a package before us that in most ways represents a compromise for all of us .
It is a package that should get through the Council if we are reasonable regarding items of primary law , but the Council too must compromise over tax .
Some Members of this House may be uncomfortable about the level of salary : for some it is too much , for some too little , but finally we seem to have a figure that we can all just about live with .
Then the expenses : again at last we seem , thanks to your work , Mr President , to have a proposed system that is much more transparent than hitherto .
For some it may not go far enough , but it is a vast improvement .
There will have to be some compromise and understanding on all sides .
What we will have finally established , the big prize , is a single statute for MEPs .
This is our last chance .
It was hard enough to get here , and the circumstances will not arise again .
We have a chance for interest in this House to focus on our work and not our pockets .
I hope sufficient numbers of us will have the courage to bend a little and vote for this package and the amendments by the ELDR and other groups .
Quite frankly , colleagues , although I pay absolute tribute to the work of our rapporteur , I do not want to listen to him in committee meetings on this subject for another five years .
His very considerable talents and our time could be much better employed on other legislative work which directly benefits all Europe 's citizens .
It is now five years since Parliament embarked upon the negotiations concerning the Statute and , for some of my fellow MEPs , this is a significant political process that , at one and the same time , secures Parliament 's power and legitimacy , with Parliament 's right to adopt its own statute an expression of a federal , European democracy .
For others , however , it is a farce of almost surrealistic dimensions .
Behind the democratic principles of parliamentary self-determination , we in fact find another agenda , one as prosaic as MEPs ' personal financial interests .
It is difficult to make democratic principles credible when the real agenda is MEPs ' own money .
This Parliament has no impressive , democratic legitimacy to begin with .
The turnout in every single election has been low .
In a democracy as rich in tradition as Sweden 's , turnout at the most recent election was less than 35 % , and in the UK was less than 24 % .
I can assure you that this shaky legitimacy would be further undermined through the adoption of the proposed Statute . At least in the Nordic countries , people find it completely baffling that the Members of this Parliament are to be paid significantly more than national parliamentarians , especially when we are also safeguarding the possibility of maintaining or reintroducing the absurd expense systems which , in the Nordic countries , have been central subjects of criticism .
Certainly , the Praesidium decided last week that travel expenses would be reimbursed as per account rendered , but Article 29 states clearly that the current absurd systems can be reintroduced .
I would also observe that the issue of the national taxation of remuneration has now entered its final phase .
At least for the Nordic governments , that is a crucial issue .
The point is , of course , that national taxation would possibly be in conflict with EU law , and so the problem has not been solved .
Those of us in the Danish People 's Movement are unable to cooperate .
Mr President , I only partly agree with Mr Krarup .
I agree with him in the sense that there is a democratic crisis .
This Parliament is in a crisis because we come under permanent attack by many of the public media in all the Member States for the indefensible state in which we are made to work at the moment .
We all know that people in this House doing exactly the same job are paid a huge range of different salaries for it .
There is only one thing which has made this tolerable . That has been an expenses regime which would otherwise be totally indefensible because it is absolutely untransparent .
We are greatly indebted to Mr Rothley for bringing us so far down the road .
We must take the step that will make it possible for this Parliament to stand tall and stand legitimate with a proper scheme on a common salary and a common , defensible and transparent expenses regime .
Putting it quite simply , I would like to see to it that we have a system that can be understood , that pays people the costs they incur and that pays us all a fair day 's wage for a fair day 's work .
It should be slightly smaller but it would just have been gesture politics to retable the amendment we put in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market since it was obviously not going to be carried .
I respectfully disagree with Mr Rothley on the issue of privileges and immunities .
I would like to see it in the Statute in something like the way he suggests , but frankly the provisions there strike me as much too sweeping , covering far too much .
Immunity in these Berlusconi days is a difficult concept and we should not challenge our electorate .
It is better to stick with the regime that we have , with the primary law that we currently have .
Most of the amendments that we , the liberals and others have put forward seek to keep that basis for immunities .
With these crucial amendments , the resolution can be carried .
Finally , with great respect to everybody here , I do not regard myself here as an employee of the European Union : I am a representative of my constituents .
I do not ever wish to pay tax on my income at a different level or on a different basis from my constituents .
The permissive Belgian compromise that would let Member States bring a Member 's taxation liability to the level of his constituents is a good one .
I hope that we can find a way of making it legally valid .
Mr President , the debate on a Statute for Members has now been running for five years , since the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Before the European Parliament elections in 1999 , Parliament and Council seemed unable to agree .
In a year 's time the elections are coming around again .
Will there be unambiguous rules in place regarding the legal position of Members then ?
I fear that that will possibly not be the case .
The Rothley report still contains elements which are controversial as far as the Council is concerned , but , even worse , there are amendments which would postpone entry into force until 2009 .
Does the European Parliament really think that this is the way to seek the confidence of the electorate in May and June of next year ?
The rapporteur has shown himself to be a tough negotiator over all these years .
Why is he putting the matter on the line , however , by describing not only the position regarding primary and secondary law , but also the privileges and immunities , because the latter constitute primary law .
It would be a good thing if a majority tomorrow supported the series of amendments by the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party and others to abolish these .
What is really important is that all Members receive equal remuneration .
As far as we are concerned , reimbursing travel costs on the basis of the costs actually incurred is even more important .
The latter is essential if we are to be able to face the electorate , and therefore we must do something about this quickly .
What do we see , however , but amendments proposing waiting for a new Treaty , or until 2009 .
With all due respect , this does not make any sense .
25 years after the first direct elections , it is high time we cut the Gordian knot on this issue ; it is high time we put the interests of Parliament 's work above our personal interests .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you are all aware , the issue of the Members ' Statute has been on Parliament 's agenda for countless years now , and , like other Members , I am doubtful whether , despite tomorrow 's vote , we will succeed in resolving the matter completely under your presidency , President Cox - which is not to say that I do not hope it will be possible .

We Radicals have consistently maintained - and continue to do so - that , with the Members ' Statute , we need to look beyond the scope of Mr Rothley 's report , to look beyond the administrative , bureaucratic status of European Union employees , to use Mr MacCormick 's expression , and consider the rights of MEPs , first and foremost .
It is intolerable , for instance , that , after 25 years of direct election , MEPs should still be forced to bear the consequences of the decision on the location of Parliament 's seat .
It is intolerable that they continue to be denied the same rights as national members of parliament , such as the right to visit prisons and other rights related to the electoral mandate to represent the European people .
I hope that , pending the outcome of the European Convention , the Rothley report will spur us on to launch a wider debate on the need for the MEPs of the 25-Member State Europe to be granted , in addition to administrative status , rights which make them genuine elected representatives of the European people .
Mr President , a Committee chairman can only feel great satisfaction at seeing colleagues congratulate each other , as Mr Rothley and Mr Lehne have done , on work carried out under his guidance .
I am genuinely pleased because we have been working on this project for years .
In actual fact , when I had the honour of taking on the chairmanship of the committee , I found areas of strong disagreement which it has only been possible to resolve through debate .
As you can see from the speeches , we have worked together harmoniously , never losing sight of two important things : on the one hand , our desire to support the constituent process which is to give shape to a Parliament , its rights , responsibilities and privileges , and , on the other , the fact that the provisions of the Treaty are antiquated and obsolete , as Mr Rothley explained clearly , dating from the sixties , when Parliament was just a consultative assembly .
Mr Rothley 's draft , which we are about to adopt , seeks to lay down a new legal framework for the European Parliament and rules governing the exercising of its mandate .
I too want to stress that it really is a Statute for a genuine Parliament , which covers not just the financial side of things and , if I may be so bold as to mention it , remuneration , which were fairly minor issues on which the debate in committee had reached an impasse , but the structure and organisation of Parliament 's function , role , characteristics and mandate as well .
I would like to be able to quote a major point of a report dating from 1986 , which was tabled by Mr Georges Donnès , a great liberal .
As far back as 15 years ago , this report stressed that the European Parliament was an institution destined to play a crucial role in the Community 's activity and in the process of producing Community documents , and that there could therefore be no opposition to changes deemed to be necessary for the Community bodies .
Even then , it was clear that some bodies would have to undergo a process of change .
As regards the possibility of genuinely equal conditions of immunity for all the Members of Parliament , the author of the report wondered whether it would not be possible to define a position of genuine autonomy and immunity for Members of the European Parliament as such , for as long as the current distinction made in Article 10 of the Protocol - which we are now attempting to amend - was preserved .
It can be inferred from the report I have just mentioned that such equal treatment is necessary not just to avoid the negative psychological effects of there being first and second class MEPs , but also because it is the fulfilment , a good sixteen years later , of a dream , a plan : making the Parliamentary institutions independent of other powers through the protection of the individual Members .
This protection concerns our work and the image we want to give Europe of MEPs who , after many years , first and foremost after this Parliamentary term , through and under your presidency , are establishing a firm point of reference , which , not least , can only benefit enlargement by giving MEPs the effective role they should have .
Mr President , this report is all about bringing respect back to this House .
We should not forget that this is only the halfway stage , because when this report leaves here it has to be approved by the Council .
The principle behind this report is good : equal pay for equal work .
However , I have to ask whether we are all equal .
According to some of the amendments tabled , I do not think we are .
One of the amendments talks about the considerable economic differences which exist between the existing Member States and the accession countries .
Is it not the case that there are considerable economic differences even within the 15 Member States ?
So when we set out the principle of equal pay for equal work , the 10 accession countries do not fit into that principle .
So we have got this wrong .
The big issue for me is the whole question of the expenses .
I congratulate the working group on coming up with a formula .
Transparency in expenses is essential .
We must stick to the principle of travel at cost .
That is an issue which is in our hands and we can approve it without going to the Council .
Let us not squander it and let us not waste it .
Mr President , our aim today is to remove all those rules that make our work ridiculous .
We must also appreciate the work done by our President to improve Parliament 's reputation .
Ladies and gentlemen , I therefore appeal to you not now to permit the use of legal quibbles , hair-splitting and primary laws to prevent what in this case is most important , namely that everyone who votes in the European election in 2004 should do so with pride and that our work should be easy to understand and our rules transparent .
That is what is most important .
Even though we all believe there are details that are not quite perfect , we must adopt a global perspective and take the opportunity that now exists and that many previous speakers have said will not perhaps be there again .
A vessel runs aground if its crew has a false perception of the seabed .
I am afraid that many people have a wrong idea of what is possible .
We must use a proper map , a genuine maritime-style map .
The correct way forward in this case is to approve the liberals ' and others ' amendments .
That is the right course to follow .
Mr President , what this boils down to is that this Statute for Members of the European Parliament , with which we are dealing , is a never-ending story , and the way in which it has gone backwards and forwards , backwards and forwards , in this House for years on end , actually passes all understanding .
I cannot do other than agree with the rapporteur when he says that , politically speaking , the core issue is whether we are a parliamentary assembly or a Parliament .
If we consider how it is that the European Convention is discussing the Constitution , while we have for decades been unable to sort out the issue of the Statute for Members of the European Parliament , then the public will have every right to ask just what is actually going on here .
It has often been my experience that the public are quite amazed by the differing salaries paid to MEPs for their work , and , above all , by how large the differences are .
I am certainly in favour of this one House , by way of a Members ' Statute , adhering to the principle of ' equal pay for equal work ' .
It goes without saying that I also expect the Council to take up this issue and very speedily take the decisions that will enable the Members ' Statute to enter into force with the minimum of delay .
I wish to associate myself with those speakers who have made reference to the issue of reimbursement .
The fact that , in future , it will be our actual travel costs that are reimbursed is something that I see as being a core issue in terms of the credibility of the work done by this House and by us ourselves .
I want briefly to discuss Article 20 of the Statute , which deals with old-age pensions .
Our group has very lively discussions around this issue , as we , of course , cannot do other than note that discussions are going on in many Member States about raising the retirement age , and by a substantial margin .
This goes hand in hand with an attack on social security systems .
The proposal for the Statute , however , provides for us to have a retirement age of 60 , which is low indeed .
I believe this to be a contradiction , and one that we will be unable to explain to the public , and I see the application of differing standards to the pensionable ages of Members of this House and members of the public as amounting to privileged treatment .
Mr President , this report is not about drafting the most ideal version of the Statute for Members .
It is now about taking the negotiations with the Council a step further , and I am starting to despair of this .
The Commissioner , Mrs de Palacio , said that spectacular progress had been made in other fields , but that that was not the case here .
In my opinion , that is very true .
Why was the Belgian Government 's compromise involving a supplementary national tax rejected ?
Why do the major groups persist in wanting to regulate the new immunity and rules in this Statute ?
Why must the language regime , too , come up for discussion in this Statute ?
This contamination makes the negotiations too difficult .
Objections of principle are all very well , Mr Rothley , but an acceptable agreement is even better ; not only for the sake of principle , that is to say , a European rule for Members of the European Parliament , but also in order to put an end to the current questionable expenses practice .
Last week , the Bureau adopted a new rule which will enter into force when the Statute does .
My group grades the present rule an emphatic ' unsatisfactory ' , but gives the new one a good seven out of ten .
It is true that we find the tiredness surcharges absurd and regrettable , but we welcome the fact that travel costs would be reimbursed only on the basis of the costs actually incurred .
That is a considerable step forward .
If an agreement on the Statute is rendered impossible , we are back to square one as regards the travel costs , too .
That cannot be the intention ... can it ?
I do not wish to intervene in the debate , but when that issue of the time allowance was discussed at great length in a working party , the idea was first commended to the working party by the Eminent Persons ' Report to this House in June 2000 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I see this debate and the resolution as being about self-respect .
This Parliament has been directly elected for twenty-four years .
In a year 's time , these direct elections to Europe 's citizens ' chamber will involve the citizens of twenty-five Member States of the European Union .
In a few weeks ' time , the Convention on the Future of Europe will be presenting a draft treaty for a European Constitution , and the next Intergovernmental Conference will be getting underway .
There are important roles to be played by parties - including European parties - by the European Parliament as the only EU institution directly elected by the European public , by the citizens ' representatives , all of which are an important part of the European project .
To this day , nevertheless , there is no Statute for European Political Parties ; despite that fact , there is to this day no Statute for Members of the European Parliament .
The time for them has come ; indeed , the resolution is overdue , and I tell you that today 's debate is important , because it is not only the Council that needs to do its homework on many issues - we do too , transparently , determinedly , comprehensibly , and in full awareness of our responsibilities , and , if the game of ping-pong is to be brought to an end , then it has to be spelled out that we decided that seven hundred MEPs were sufficient ; it was the Council , in Nice , who arbitrarily increased our number .
We are enacting the Statute for Members of the European Parliament on the basis of a report produced by outside experts .
So far , the Council has not made the choice as to whether to go for a uniform European Statute or twenty-five differing assessments of the same work , and so , to put it briefly , our development from a parliamentary assembly into a European Parliament has not yet been completed .
The public nature of this debate also means that we have to openly address the point that no member of a national parliament - exceptions prove the rule - travels as much as we do .
No national parliament has more democratic freedoms than we do .
No national parliament is as consistent as we are in increasing the amount of work it does .
Although nobody can say that he does not need to improve , to become more efficient and more professional , most of us in this House do good work , work that has a value of its own and requires framework conditions specific to itself .
In the coming weeks , the new European order will come into being .
This will also involve a new role for the European Parliament and the revaluation of its freely elected members .
All these things justify a transparent and uniform statute for the Members of the European Parliament .
There is nothing to be said in favour of deficient self-confidence or of populist self-laceration , nor indeed of superciliousness or arrogance .
It is important and right that the fundamental issue that Mr Rothley and I have raised should be decided rather than continuing to be postponed .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us , with all the representatives of the Member States , not be afraid of making decisions or of the decisions that may be taken .
Mr President , it seems that this time we are genuinely making progress and we are going to take an important step in solving one of the most flagrant anomalies that characterise the functioning of this House , by achieving something as simple as each and every Member being subject to the same system .
It goes without saying that the text proposed by the rapporteur , Mr Rothley , whom I congratulate most sincerely , is a balanced text and naturally we are going to give it our full support .
This fact , however , does not prevent me from making a few comments .
In my country we say that military justice is to justice in general what military music is to music .
There are times when I think that this Parliament is to a parliament what military music is to music .
Tell me , ladies and gentlemen , if in any parliament of any Member State you are subject to the rules to which we are subject in this Parliament or whether it would be acceptable for any parliament to be subject to the degree of control and monitoring - for example in areas as important as drawing up its own rules - to which we are subject with the intervention of the Council .
This , therefore , is not acceptable .
I understand that there is cause for debate here , such as the subject of tax , and I believe we could debate this within this House .
What I would like , however , is for the result of this debate to be the final decision , rather than , regardless of what we decide here , always having to be subject to the will of a body , the Council , which , ultimately , is only partially legislative , and to the will of the governments of the Member States .
Mr President , the starting point of this debate is incredibly simple . It is that the terms and conditions of Members of this House are not satisfactory , either from a Member 's or from the public 's point of view .
Not only should MEPs receive a fair day 's wage for a fair day 's work , we should be taxed on the same basis as those who send us here .
As a number of speakers have already said , we are not civil servants - we represent the citizens of the four corners of the European Union , here at its centre .
The arrangements put in place should be appropriately drawn up and transparent , and the expenses regime which is back-to-back with them should not be disguised remuneration , and in particular travel should be reimbursed on a cost basis .
Although politically , expenses and remuneration are two sides of the same coin , their legal bases are distinct .
We must not be pompous , hypocritical or self-serving about this .
For obvious overriding political reasons the Council and Parliament must reach a political agreement about the two together .
If either steps back from this it is breaking faith with the electorate and is culpable of wrecking the process .
As a Member , I am sick and tired of cheap jokes about the ' gravy train ' : let us recall that the basic salary we , the UK Members , receive is , so I am told , about the same as that of a decent-sized supermarket manager in a provincial town .
Such jibes degrade Parliament as an institution and the European Union as a political process .
Quite simply , I say , let us stop the talk and sort it out , because if we do not , we demean ourselves and degrade the process of which we are part .
As far as the contents of the Rothley report are concerned , we British Conservatives have deep reservations about some of them .
The only way to break this impasse is to vote for the report as a whole , to take the process a step forward .
We shall continue to work for a final outcome which will meet with our stated policy requirements .
The immediate priority is to stop talking incessantly about the Statute and take some steps to do something about creating it .
Mr President , the new rule the Bureau adopted last week stipulates that only travel costs actually incurred will be reimbursed .
That is good news , and is also largely thanks to you .
There is a fly in the ointment , however .
The new rules will only enter into force when the Statute does .
The chance of that ever happening is very small .
The draft Statute provides for a common salary for all MEPs , but the proposal also stipulates that MEPs will pay European income tax from now on .
That is unacceptable to many Members , myself included .
I live in the Netherlands , I was elected by Dutch people , I use Dutch public services , and I therefore wish to pay Dutch taxes .
Two years ago , there was a consensus on that point between the Council and Parliament .
Member States would be given the freedom to supplement European taxes with national taxation .
The rapporteur has swept that compromise off the table , however .
Thus , the proposal does not stand a ghost of a chance , and everyone in this Chamber knows that .
Last week 's decision by the Bureau will not enter into force , therefore , and we will be back to square one .
At a time in which budgets are under pressure and citizens are having to tighten their belts , we are opting to live it up , with outdated expenses rules .
Although it may have been naïve of me to think that it would indeed be possible and that the political will existed , I sincerely hoped that within my own group , of all groups , a majority would opt in favour of the public interest and against self-interest .
Unfortunately , that is not the case .
Mr President , it is important for the European Parliament to obtain a Statute governing MEPs ' conditions .
It is also important for us to obtain a system that is transparent and that our electorate can scrutinise .
What , above all , have been stumbling blocks for us , as Swedish Social Democrats , are the cut-and-dried travel allowances , the salary level , the Community tax and the lack of transparency .
We have set down a number of absolute requirements as conditions of our supporting a new Statute for Members : firstly , that we can continue to pay tax in Sweden ; secondly , that there be reformed travel allowance systems based upon actual expenses ; and , thirdly , that we obtain a system that is open , that can be monitored and that our electorate can scrutinise .
The proposal now before us contains a great deal of what we wished for , but it departs from what we want on one crucial point , namely when it comes to the possibility of paying national tax .
In the vote , we shall support an amendment aimed precisely at retaining the right to pay national tax .
If this proposal is rejected , we shall unfortunately be forced to vote against the whole proposal .
Mr President , on behalf of the French socialist delegation , I offer our full support for the draft Statute for Members proposed in Mr Rothley 's report .
The success of the enlargement process renders the adoption of this report even more urgent .
We approve of the approach taken in it and its underlying principles , above all those of openness and equal pay .
The transparency of the system through which Members are paid must be increased : citizens are far from unconcerned about this issue .
They demand answers from us .
We should , moreover , apply the principle of equal pay for all Members as rigorously as possible .
In order to put this principle into practice intelligently , allowances need to be adapted to reflect differences in living standards among the Member States .
This is the means by which we will achieve truly equal pay .
Similar mechanisms for adjusting pay according to the location of the workplace already exist for European officials , and are considered fair .
The French socialist delegation has accordingly tabled an amendment to Article 16 of the draft Statute to this effect .
We invite you to join us in supporting it .
Please allow me to make an appeal to caution : democracy has a price , as we all know , and citizens must understand that .
I would like to close by saying to you that this Statute , although not perfect , is a step forward , a step towards true European democracy .
I hope that the Council will respect Parliament 's work .
I should like to thank all those who have taken part in the debate and the Commission for the positive tone of its contribution .
In particular , I thank the rapporteur for his endless endeavour on behalf of the House in this regard .
The vote on the draft decision will take place tomorrow , Tuesday , at 12.30 p.m. and the vote on the motion for a resolution will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .

The debate is closed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that today 's debate is an important one .
We are about to enter the final phase of the legislative process relating to the range of measures on the internal energy market .
I would insist that I consider it important to bear in mind that this package is emblematic within the Lisbon process , the objective of which , we must remember , is to create a more competitive Europe , with an economy which by 2010 will place the European Union at the cutting edge of international economic activity , with a knowledge-based society , full employment and also respect for the environment .
I would particularly like to stress the extremely positive role the European Parliament has been playing throughout this procedure , in the quest for the result which I hope we will achieve during this part-session .
The European Parliament has always firmly supported the Commission in its efforts to create a competitive and integrated internal energy market , which furthermore means moving beyond national markets .
I would sincerely like to thank the three rapporteurs , Mr Turmes , Mr Rapkay and Mr Mombaur , for the fantastic job they have done .


And I would also like to mention the shadow rapporteurs and the other members of the committee who have participated actively over recent months in particular in order to achieve this positive result ; I would particularly like to express my gratitude for the efforts of the delegation which has been negotiating within an informal tripartite dialogue so that we could hold this discussion today and on Wednesday reach an agreement in this Parliament allowing us to achieve a definitive text .
The compromise we are reaching does not differ substantially from the Commission 's initial proposals .
What is more , these proposals have subsequently been reinforced by a series of points following first reading by Parliament , particularly with regard to the public service aspects laid down in the Directives .
Once this series of measures has been established , all European Union consumers will be able to choose their provider from 2007 .
Small consumers will not therefore be deprived of this right and of these internal market advantages .
From a structural point of view , many of the obstacles to fair competition will be removed , in particular the lack of independence of system operators and the absence of effective rules .
At the same time , the public service requirements have been reinforced , largely , I would insist , at the request and on the initiative of this Parliament , with the universal service obligation in the electricity sector and strict protection measures for vulnerable consumers .
The range of measures includes an essential component relating to the internal electricity market , that is , the Regulation on cross-border electricity exchanges which lays down clear rules in order to facilitate trade in the European Union .
Although Parliament and the Commission would have liked to have made quicker progress with regard to a series of points , such as the opening up of the market and legal separation , I consider it essential that the directives establish unconditional dates and that the regulatory framework is clear for the industry .
Everybody now knows what the rules are going to be and I would therefore insist that this is a very important step forward .
The common positions have improved the results of the parliamentary amendments , above all with regard to labelling and the competences of the regulatory authority .
The degree of influence of the parent company over the activities of the network operators has also been clearly defined .
There is an aspect which I would like to deal with expressly this afternoon , because it is one of the most controversial aspects .
It is of course the issue of the funds for decommissioning nuclear power stations .
We all know that it is an essential part of the agreement reached .
So much so that the last Conference of Presidents has included it as a specific point in this afternoon 's debate , Mr President .
I would like to present the Commission 's positions with regard to it .
Firstly , as I said on the occasion of the debate on these texts at first reading , the Commission fully shares Parliament 's concern that the funds reserved for decommissioning and waste management should be spent as they were intended to be .
On 30 January 2003 , the Commission adopted two proposals for directives relating to a Community strategy and standards on the safety of nuclear power stations and the treatment of waste .
The first of them focuses specifically on the issue of funds for nuclear decommissioning .
I would like to remind you , ladies and gentlemen , that I committed myself to this before Parliament at the first reading of the legislative package , and that in January 2003 I gave the response I had committed myself to at that time .
Secondly , following our contacts during the tripartite dialogue , we have reached an agreement amongst the co-legislators on the basis of an interinstitutional declaration and a Commission declaration on control and transparency in the management of those funds .
In particular , Mr President , and in accordance with the request of the Conference of Presidents , I would like to refer to the statement which the Commission will make , a statement which corresponds to the Commission as a whole and which has been debated within the College of Commissioners .
In the statement , the Commission points out the importance of guaranteeing that the funds established for decommissioning and waste management activities relating to the objectives of the Euratom Treaty are managed transparently and used solely for those activities .
Within this context , and within the limits of its responsibilities in accordance with the Euratom Treaty , the Commission intends to publish an annual report on the use of the funds for decommissioning and waste management .
In particular it will stress the need to guarantee the full application of the relevant provisions of Community law .
Therefore , the Commission will review the situation of the funds and their use in an annual report , which will be transparent and will be communicated to this House .
Thanks to the specific directive and the Commission 's report , I am satisfied that this issue is coming to fruition and that it will impose greater transparency in relation to these funds because , ladies and gentlemen , although you proposed it here , in Parliament , I believe it is something that concerns all of us , and that in the meantime the facts have proved us right with regard to the need to deal with this issue , and I am thinking specifically of something that happened over recent months in a company in Great Britain .
Mr President , I would like to repeat that the Commission accepts all those amendments which are in line with the agreement reached .
I would like to end by thanking Parliament once again and in particular the three rapporteurs and the delegation which has participated in the negotiations with the Council and the Commission within this informal tripartite dialogue which we have carried out and for the constructive work they have done with regard to all these measures .
I believe that , without this fundamental contribution , we would not be on the point of creating the most integrated internal energy market in the world , a market which means , furthermore , implementing the Community model , that is to say , liberalisation together with regulation , something which previously was thought to be contradictory , but which , as we in Europe are demonstrating , can be combined : the advantages of the market and the maintenance of a cohesive society , from which nobody is excluded , which not only looks after the weakest , but which also thinks of the future , of future generations and specifically of the protection of our environment .
Mr President , after three years of intense debate , Parliament will this week vote on the second directives on the electricity and gas markets .
What did Parliament and the rapporteurs try to achieve ?
Instead of focusing only on the quantitative aspects of market opening , Parliament and the rapporteurs have made efforts to ensure that equal importance is given to the qualitative aspects .
I am proud to be able to say today that we have managed to re-regulate and to make this market ' greener ' in many areas .
Those who are sceptical about the process of liberalisation will have to admit that this second directive on electricity implies a much better regulatory environment than was the case with the first directive from 1996 .
What have we achieved ?
The objectives of the market today give equal status to competition , security of supply and the environment .
Secondly , we have stronger regulators and we have taken the first step on the way to unbundling the separate interests of grid generation and retail .
We were able to strengthen the public service obligations and impose stronger obligations on grid companies to ensure the necessary investment .
There are strong requirements on the suppliers of electricity to inform customers in the contracts .
I am particularly happy that we have obliged the suppliers to give full information on the mix of electricity and on the environmental consequences of their production .
This will allow consumers in Europe to make an informed choice .
It will also allow society to continue the debate on energy services .
We also have a universal service , but not only that , we now also have the obligation to establish a supplier of last resort .
All these measures will not be enough , however , to ensure that small customers will receive the benefits of the liberalised market .
A single domestic customer will have to compete with big industrial consumers to get a fair price .
It is only because we will favour and encourage small customers to bundle together in order to form sales communities that small consumers will now be able to get a good price .
We were also able to strengthen the status of decentralised energy producers .
We managed to establish the concept of long-term avoided costs .
This will mean that the practice in certain countries , where you pay as much to transport energy for 200 metres from a co-generation unit to a neighbour as you pay to transport energy for over 500 kilometres will change and this will give small generators a real chance .
It is the small generators , the innovation which we have through the miniaturisation of engines , the intelligent grids we have through the development of software , together with new independent power producers , that will be the panacea of the market .
But these innovations will only come onto the market if , as politicians , we have the courage to impose a real level playing field .
Innovation will not come from dinosaurs .
Therefore we have to be careful over the next few years to ensure that the large integrated companies are not allowed to play too many games .
We need ownership unbundling .
We need ring-fencing of the decommissioning funds .
It is absolutely nonsensical to speak of a level playing field if we allow the EDF to use EUR 30 billion , Eon EUR 12 billion and RWE EUR 10 billion from the decommissioning funds in the market .
We also need a much more stringent merger policy against these oligopolies which are coming onto the market .
Finally - and probably the most important point - we need one competition policy for one market .
We cannot allow double standards in a single European market and we therefore need the DG Competition competences under the EU Treaty rules on competition .
The game which the Commission , and especially Mr Lamoureux , as head of DG TREN played with the Council and Parliament over the last weeks is not right .
This was an attempt to remove the decommissioning funds from Mr Monti 's competences on competition policy .
Commissioner , you did a good job on ensuring the establishment of an internal market .
The games must stop .
We as a Parliament will not accept double standards on competition policy .
Finally , I want to thank all the rapporteurs for their good cooperation .
Often it was trust in the rapporteurs that secured this important piece of legislation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by making the point with which my friend Mr Turmes concluded his speech , namely that we owe a debt of gratitude to our fellow rapporteurs and to the shadow rapporteurs .
We have a total of two years of work behind us , and I have found the cooperation between the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs right across the groups to be highly collegial , very frank and full of trust , something I believe to be reflected in the outcome that we have achieved .
I think this is a good result .
Let me make four observations following on from what Mr Turmes has just said , with which I can only agree .
Firstly , this legislative package opens up the way for more competition in Europe 's energy markets .
In opening up the way for a truly integrated internal market in energy , we are making a contribution - our contribution - towards our shared goal of making the European Union the most competitive region in the world .
We have to make use of the efficiency gains arising from an integrated internal market and its capacity for bringing about political integration in order to achieve this goal , but also especially so that our small and medium-sized enterprises should benefit from this internal market , and so that other consumers benefit more than they have done in the past from its outcomes and from its positive effects .
Secondly , the essential consequence of previous directives on the internal market was that markets were opened up in an unbalanced way .
They certainly brought about greater competitiveness , enhanced efficiency and reduced prices , but the unbalanced development of the opened markets and substantial deficiencies in the detailed rules mean that we now have to enact specific measures to speed up the process of opening up markets still further .
This means that we have to ensure equal conditions for all participants in the market , minimise the danger of the market being dominated , and , as far as possible , put a stop to predatory practices , for example those engaged in by the big players to the detriment of small enterprises .
The fact is that we are not aiming at the replacement of public monopolies by private ones , but at a wide-open internal market in energy .
My third point is , therefore , indisputable .
An essential component of what we have submitted to the vote in this House is to lay down an ambitious timetable for the complete opening-up of the market .
The timetable that we have now laid down jointly with the Council is ambitious , and , if we can make it work , this will be a great leap forward in comparison with what we have had so far .
My fourth point is that the access of third parties to the network - competition , in other words - has to be regulated , with transparency but without discrimination .
One of the essentials for this is unbundling , the use of company law to unbundle the network from production on the one hand and retailing on the other .
We need one or more regulatory authorities with supervisory capacity , with the capacity and obligation to report , but , above all , the power to give instructions and the capacity to impose sanctions .
We have also established the need for the State to be able to impose obligations for the general benefit without at the same time nullifying competition .
Although the basis on which this will be done is laid down in an appropriate way in the directives that we will be voting on the day after tomorrow , it remains incumbent on the Commission to keep a very watchful eye on market developments .
It is the Commission that must take appropriate measures to prohibit anti-competitive conduct by companies , and , above all , the Commission that must see to it that the Member States transpose the directive properly and promptly .
It must be conceded that the Council has , in the informal trilogue , moved some way from its original position and closer to that of Parliament , but that was urgently necessary in view of the fact that a number of detailed rules in one or more of the Common Positions were , in my view , somewhat problematic , containing openings whereby competition might be nullified .
The tight time-frame therefore means that prompt transposition is of the essence ; everything has to be transposed into national law within the space of a year .
With reference to this , I want again to make it clear that it is for the Commission to monitor the market and the terms of competition .
Let me again underline what Mr Turmes has just said , that the internal market in energy must be subject to Treaty competition law and must be evaluated by reference to it .
The Treaty instruments must be applicable to it , especially where state subsidies and the control of mergers are concerned , and I think that , on this issue , the Commission can depend upon the political support not only of my group - I can promise them that - but also of this House as a whole .
Mr President , I have to start by making a statement in addition to my speaking time as acting chairman of the responsible committee .
The voting lists for Wednesday that have been circulating here so far are wrong , or at least misleading .
Let me say , referring to my own report , that Amendments Nos 1 to 5 , are not the compromises they are described as in the lists .
The Committee officially withdrew them .
Amendments Nos 7 to 10 are compromise amendments , but Amendment No 6 is not , contrary to what is stated on the prepared voting list .
Amendment No 6 is not part of the compromise ; indeed , as I see it , it is out of order .
I ask the Bureau to check whether it is out of order , so that Wednesday 's vote can proceed in a correct manner .
Mr President , please do not include this in my speaking time .
Mr President , I would like to start by reiterating , with reference to the legislation on cross-border exchanges in electricity , that this law uses a number of measures to benefit a truly EU-wide internal market .
There are to be funds to compensate transit networks for their services .
In the Member States , charges on producers in respect of cross-border exchanges in electricity will be harmonised in order to avoid different competition conditions prevailing in different states .
Bottlenecks in the networks will be apportioned in accordance with the laws of the market rather than on a territorial basis , and tariffs will no longer be determined by the distance between the contracting parties , but solely on the basis of the physical flow .
It is also a good thing that this law opens the way for new electricity plant to be properly sited , specifically in the vicinity of centres of consumption , and not , for example , where the primary energy used is especially cheap , thereby giving rise to massive new transport networks .
Taken together , all three laws that we are adopting are milestones for the EU 's internal market .
After fifteen years of discussion , they are putting into practice the freedoms in the area of energy that the Union 's citizens were guaranteed in the Treaties - freedom of establishment , free movement of goods and freedom to provide services .
These directives make these quite explicit .
Moreover , they mean that the competition will put pressure on European firms to perform well , and it is to be hoped that these will soon , to an ever-increasing extent , discover their roles and capabilities in the global market .
Let me make it abundantly clear , however , that those who make laws can do no more than grant citizens freedoms ; it is the adult citizen alone who can make use of them .
It is like an election .
Voting in one is a right , but it is for the citizens to decide whether or not to exercise it ; the reciprocity of supply and demand in the areas of electricity and gas is likewise something that the public have to understand and of which they have to avail themselves .
This legislation hinges upon the question of how the remaining technical monopolies - the networks - are to be brought to market in such a way as to make competition possible .
These laws contain important provisions for this purpose , in that , firstly , they put the networks themselves under the aegis of their own companies ; secondly , they create regulatory systems in the Member States to guarantee neutral management of the networks ; and thirdly - something that has been particularly important to Parliament - they govern the way in which these regulatory authorities in the Member States cooperate with one another and with the Commission , so that we do not end up with fifteen - and soon as many as twenty-five - different approaches in the Member States ' regulatory authorities .
There is one thing I want to make perfectly clear , and in doing so I am following on from what Mr Turmes said .
If , after a number of years , Parliament or - Madam Vice-President - the Commission should find that this legislation has still not brought about a truly Europe-wide internal market in electricity and gas , then let nobody be surprised if the concept of a European regulator is mooted and then actually brought to fruition - which we are not doing right now - along with the unbundling of property rights over the networks , which we are not doing now either .
Both these options are still under consideration .
It is now for the participants in the market to avoid the situation in which the legislature would have to take such action .
In view of that , my hope is not only that the legislation will be adopted , but also that the participants in the market , the consumers and service-providers , will bring it to life in a tremendous way .
Finally , I would like to thank all the rapporteurs and draftsmen , who have worked together in a quite remarkable way on these issues for years on end .
Likewise , Madam Vice-President , I thank the Commission , you yourself and all its members .
Many thanks to all my fellow workers , whom I congratulate on doing a difficult and first-rate job .
I would ask Mr Mombaur to provide the Presidency with a written version of the initial statement he made regarding errors in the voting list , in order to avoid further errors .
Mr President , as regards the written text , I believe that I am no longer able to do that , as , firstly , the coordinators and rapporteurs agreed everything verbally , and , secondly , members of the Committee 's secretariat were present , and they will certainly be able to sort this out .
I will see to it that this is done .
Fine .
Let us trust that everyone will act correctly and that tomorrow there will be no problems .
Making the internal market in electricity and natural gas subject to regulations applicable to the whole of Europe is a fundamentally sensible approach .
The European Union 's energy supply will be a central issue over the coming years and decades , one that will be ever-present and will demand our attention .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy takes the view , and environmental considerations demand , that the primary objective of any directive dealing with the generation and supply of energy , or with trade in it or the distribution of it , should be that the primary energy used should be , and be capable of being , derived in as socially compatible a way as possible and that its ecological aspects should be acceptable .
That the generation of energy is , in itself , a fundamental ecological problem , is an important insight , one that is reflected in this directive and , above all , in the rapporteur 's and draftsman 's positions and reports .
It is therefore incumbent on Parliament , the Commission and the Council to ensure that the conditions under which electricity is produced in the medium and long term are such that the primary energy is derived exclusively from renewable energy sources , such as wind , water , sunlight and biomass .
The same goes for the production of gas , where we should do everything possible to replace the old system of gas supply , with all its weaknesses , with indigenous biogas derived from non-food crops .
This will work if we succeed in compensating for the present disadvantages of renewable energy sources in competition with current fossil and nuclear energy sources , and if we manage to make the production and use of energy reflect the costs involved .
Mr President , I must say first of all that I find it an absolute disgrace that the services were not able to present a package of compromise amendments with which to communicate with the public and the press .
I hope and expect , therefore , Mr President , that you will instruct the services to ensure that we have the right package tomorrow .
It is really disheartening for something like this to happen .
The importance of the issues we are discussing was expressed eloquently by the Commissioner , and I shall not repeat it .
I should like to give sincere thanks to my fellow Members , the rapporteurs , the shadow rapporteurs , and the Commissioners , too , of course - everyone who contributed - for this result .
Above all , however , I also wish to commend the Greek Presidency - as it has not yet been mentioned for its tremendous commitment , because it has done sterling work .
We in the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy have fought hard with the Council .
In all fairness , I must say that Parliament has invested a great deal of effort , and I was not expecting the result that we have now achieved .
I believe we owe this to the flexibility , commitment and constructive approach on everyone 's part .
Let us focus on a couple of points .
Parliament has invested a great deal of effort in strengthening the position of the supervisory body .
We want the supervisory body to be independent not only of the industry , but also , as far as possible , of the national authorities , because we want to avoid the PET problem , as it was then known .
In any case , we have increased the gap between supervisory body and government .
We have tightened up the competences of the supervisory body , and we have obliged it to contribute to the development of the internal market and the creation of a level playing field , in order to avoid the prospect in many people 's imaginations of there being 25 partial markets instead of a single internal market .
My colleague Mr Mombaur also pointed this out earlier .
The second point for which we have fought hard is of course unbundling : functional unbundling , obligatory as from July 2004 , and legal unbundling , obligatory by 2007 at the latest .
It has been made clear that not one Member State may deviate from this , because there is a requirement for the Commission to produce an amended directive , which then has to pass through the whole parliamentary and Council process once more .
This is the way it should be , too .
I am also very grateful that we have strengthened the independence of the subsidiaries , that is to say , the transportation undertakings , from the parent company , so that the parent companies , that is to say the production or distribution companies , cannot just dip into the coffers at the expense of the maintenance of the networks , thus de facto frustrating a level playing field in Europe .
The third point is that a great deal more attention has been paid to the level playing field .
We have fought with the Council , and the Council has been well-advised enough to take over specifically those compromises that we have reached in the electronic communications sector .
That will be the crux of the matter .
The question - the key question - will also be whether the Commission is able to look into whether that level playing field has been achieved on an annual basis , by means of concrete analyses .
There is an enormous amount of anxiety that we will end up having perhaps five , six , seven , eight oligopolistic undertakings - large undertakings - in Europe .
On that point I throw down the gauntlet to the Commission to take hard action in cases where there is a lack of ' fair play ' , in cases of market distortion .
Only then will we be able to convince our citizens that liberalisation is a good thing .
I also think that the compromise on the decommissioning funds was a very significant achievement .
I still do not understand why Member States do not dare to simply put down on paper , in legislation , that a decommissioning fund must be transparent , that it must be used for the intended purpose and that the normal competition rules are to be applied .
Mr President , why do Member States not dare to put that down on paper ?
I still do not find convincing the legal drivel - forgive me - to the effect that all this belongs in the Euratom Treaty .
I can endorse the interinstitutional agreement , I welcome the new declaration by the Commission , but the Member States that prevented that from becoming law , from being incorporated into the directive , have got a lot of explaining to do to their citizens .
We also welcome the fact that , as regards the public service obligations , there is not just an incredibly long list to be seen , but also a provision preventing public service obligations constituting a barrier to newcomers .
This seems to me to be another important point for the Commission to note .
In summary , I think that we have achieved an excellent result .
Of course , as a parliamentarian , one wants more , but , given the point of departure , we have achieved an enormous amount .
We can be proud of this , and if we do have any explaining to do to our citizens , it is that there are going to be improvements in quality and in service provision .
Mr President , Commissioner , Europe will soon be alone in continuing to advocate total liberalisation of the electricity market .
Even the United States is recovering from the California and Enron affairs .
In Latin America , liberalisation has been marked by failure .
In the United Kingdom , the state is facing the bankruptcy of British Energy .
In Sweden , prices rose this winter by over 50 % because of tensions between supply and demand .
Electricity is a sector which requires long-term investment .
It is concerned with security of supply , environmental protection and providing a public service .
It cannot be governed by market forces and competition alone .
In a number of our countries - my own , for example - the public electricity service means , in particular , equal pricing , access for all households , whatever their rate of consumption or geographical location , to low-cost electricity at the same prices .
The mandatory total liberalisation planned for 2007 , which you are proposing to us , will not allow preservation of the social and pricing adjustment mechanisms which safeguard this equal pricing .
That is why we are going to vote for an amendment rejecting the motion which we , the French Socialist delegation , have tabled together with the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left and the Belgian Socialist delegation .
We believe that the plan to open up the market in two stages , without even an assessment of the first stage - the 2004 stage applying to all non-residential customers - being carried out before the sector is then opened up to competition for all residential customers in 2007 , is an approach to liberalisation that is more dogmatic than pragmatic .
Moreover , as regards competition , what we are witnessing is more a powerful trend towards concentrations of companies and the establishment of a market of oligopolies and cartels rather than of a genuinely competitive market .
We consider it to be absurd that total liberalisation is being forced on us when the debate on the Green Paper has just been opened and we have not even had time to examine the possibilities of creating a framework directive to safeguard public services .
Mr President , I am standing in for Mr Clegg , the rapporteur .
I have just spoken to him .
He is ill in bed , but , you will be glad to know , he will be with us again shortly .
He wanted me to say that the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party welcomes this very strongly because it is a major breakthrough in the single market and for the Lisbon agreement into a sector which has previously been closed .
We welcome strongly and fully support the compromise on labelling and unbundling and on the dates of market opening .
However , the principal point that the Liberal Group would like to make is about the funds for decommissioning in the nuclear sector .
We want to support and thank the Commission for its revised declaration .
Previously the Commission had told us that funds from the Euratom Treaty would be sufficient for the decommissioning .
However , as everybody knows , the Euratom funds are not subject to proper transparency and accountability .
Now that the Commission has told us that the competition provisions will apply fully in this sector , we are extremely pleased because this means openness and transparency and proper rule for the single market .
My group will vote in favour of this tomorrow .
Mr President , I would like to warmly congratulate all who have been involved in the hard work of bringing these reports to a coherent , positive and even strong conclusion .
I particularly welcome the demands that nuclear decommissioning funds be fully subject to EU competition law .
The management of nuclear decommissioning funds should never have been used or misused by the utilities as a form of state aid and as an excuse for going on a buying spree across Europe for other utilities .
We risked this acceleration and creation of cartels .
Therefore , I welcome the Commission 's assurances here today .
Neither the Commission nor the Council has covered itself in glory in the past on this issue but we have a more consistent approach now .
In particular , although many Member States ring-fence these funds , France and Germany are allowed to set aside the funds for waste management and use them for acquisitions .
This amounts to a clear misuse and even corruption with regard to them , and I welcome the fact that competition law will now apply .
It would otherwise have had a very distorting effect on the energy market across Europe .
How can we have a free market when there are three companies with EUR 10 billion or more at their disposal to buy up other companies ?
I am glad that logic has obtained and that these funds will be subject to competition law .
I also very much welcome the inclusion of sustainability objectives and the equal status given to sustainability together with competition and with security of supply .
In particular , renewable energies need to be promoted throughout Europe .
For too long they have been the poor relation , particularly to the vast funds that the nuclear lobby has been able to access by fair means or foul , as I have already outlined .
I hope that more funds will be available for renewables in the future .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although separate reports , at the request of Parliament , Mr Turmes and Mr Rapkay 's reports amending the gas and electricity directives respectively have prompted me to table an amendment rejecting the common position in both cases .
In effect , although I am not calling into question the work of my colleagues , I cannot resign myself to accepting proposals from a Commission which is becoming increasingly liberal , especially where energy is concerned .
As in too many cases , the Commission is blindly following the dogma of the opening up of the markets to competition .
Indeed , the Commission does not have the courage to create a universal energy service at European level and to explain how it is to be funded .
Without this universal service , however , which is an essential prerequisite , there should never have been an attempt to challenge , at European level , the public service missions defined in the Member States .
These missions follow definitions and methods of funding decided and guaranteed according to specific territorial , legal or constitutional requirements .
Under the principle of subsidiarity , according to which measures are to be taken at the most effective level , only the Member States are capable of carrying out these missions to meet the demands of their citizens .
I would point out , moreover , that even the rapporteur seems to have reservations as to whether the effects of opening up the electricity market to competition will be entirely beneficial .
Therefore , I cannot endorse a Parliamentary debate which does not provide a solution but continues to destroy what does exist .
Furthermore , it is inconceivable that we should presume to pursue the opening up of the energy sector to competition by extending to individuals a system originally designed for companies .
It is irresponsible of the majority of the Member States to have given way to the Commission 's proposals in the end .
It is true that the primary responsibility lies with the Commission , which has sole right of initiative and is disregarding the negative economic , social and territorial consequences of its proposals in its endeavours to create a single market which is subject to competition alone .
In conclusion , in view of all these considerations , I confirm my opposition to these proposals seeking to finalise the opening up of the energy sector to competition .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thanks to the constructive cooperation of the European Parliament and the other European institutions , we are now on the threshold of the opening-up of the energy markets in Europe .
Many of our fellow Members have dedicated themselves to this for years .
At the very least , then , the result can be described as commendable .
In the first place , the long-awaited liberalisation should provide benefits for the consumer : I am thinking in particular of improved service and more competitive prices .
I should like to point out that there is a paradox inherent in this .
In my view , liberalisation will come at a price .
It is a price which , paradoxically , will primarily be borne by the consumer .
Particular attention will have to be paid to the way in which the distribution network is to be used , therefore .
The price that the consumer will have to pay is of course the sum of the generation price , the tariff for transportation via the high-voltage network and the distribution tariff , plus all the levies on distribution and transportation .
Distribution costs are the largest cost item on the bills of customers of the distribution networks .
Besides , the chance of the average consumer seeing his or her electricity bill go down significantly as a result of the liberalisation of the electricity market is very small in some Member States .
The reason is obvious .
The limited increases in efficiency in the sector are too small to compensate for the new levies .
On the other hand , account must also be taken of the fact that the scant connections between the various national networks are not designed for importing or exporting large quantities , but rather as mutual support in the event of the unexpected failure of generation units in one country .
There is still a considerable lack of commercial intercapacity , therefore .
If a genuine internal market is to be achieved , there is an urgent need for us to effect a significant increase in this commercial intercapacity .
In conclusion , it can be said that an important step has been taken in the opening-up of the energy markets in the European Union , but that a close watch will have to be kept over the way in which this opening-up is realised , on an ongoing basis .
Mr President , the energy reports up for discussion today must be understood as an integrated whole , which will have an important impact on the viability of the energy market in Europe .
The European-wide energy networks will heal the market 's spine and skeleton .
The liberalisation package will , moreover , improve the market 's circulation and digestion .
Liberalisation must be continued and the network improved .
In the first round of enlargement the new Member States must also be involved more fully .
We have really had to wrangle with the Council over both issues .
With regard to the energy networks , a compromise was eventually reached that will guarantee there is the necessary flexibility to amend Annex III , while at the same time ensuring there is sufficient parliamentary monitoring .
Achieving this compromise has not been easy .
The liberalisation of the energy markets is not any dramatic breakthrough , at least not from the point of view of the Nordic countries , although it is good that they are indeed being liberalised .
This is definitely a step in the right direction .
If necessary the Commission will probably make new proposals for further liberalisation of markets .
Contrary to what some of our Socialist friends think they know , the free and open markets of the Nordic countries are functioning well .
Freedom of choice for the consumer has grown , prices have fallen , services have improved and things run more efficiently .
The market mechanisms have been working perfectly .
It has to be accepted that prices can sometimes also rise in a free market .
Rarely , however , are there situations where the same year sees one of the century 's driest summers together with one of its coldest winters .
What is most crucial in the liberalisation of the energy markets is that unhindered access to the networks is guaranteed .
Consequently , the clear unbundling of network activity and the fact that the tasks of the regulatory authorities should be sufficiently harmonised are two of the most central elements in this package .
Without them we can forget the word ' competition ' when we talk about the electricity and gas markets .
Now is the time to bring the debate on the package to an end : the compromises before us are completely acceptable .
The package is an essential , albeit inadequate , condition for a viable market .
We are now establishing framework legislation , but its implementation must also be monitored .
The Commission must be equipped with the proper tools to monitor the viability of the markets .
It will also be crucially important to ensure there is sufficient investment in the future .
Finally , thank you again to all those of you who have been involved in working on this package .
This has been a long , challenging and arduous process .
Mr President , let me start by saying something to my friend and colleague Mr Désir , who spoke before me because he had a plane to catch .
Much as I respect him , the great majority of our group backs this resolution , this compromise that we have reached .
I might add that we also take the view that this directive safeguards the service publique or - as we would say - services of general interest .
Indeed , what results from it is a new legal certainty .
Services of general interest are compatible with competition , and , should the public interest so require it , the Member States will also be able to decide on derogations from the law on competition .
What the French may , however , find painful is the fact that péréquation will come to an end , so that prices will not be the same everywhere , but I wonder what disadvantage is involved in the possibility of prices falling in one part of a country ?
That is precisely the effect we intend competition to have .
I would remind you , by the way , that one of the reasons why we started this debate on the liberalisation of energy markets at the beginning of the 1990s was that prices in Europe were very high , so that it was not only the companies , but also we ourselves , who were complaining that we were at a competitive disadvantage against the USA , our main competitor .
These directives , in fact , represent the end of a long process .
Having been in this House for a long time , let me point out that this process actually began at the end of the 1980s - with the absurd variation , incidentally , that the White Paper on the internal market made no mention of energy - and that , at that time , it was by way of the European Court of Justice that the attempt was made to open up the internal market .
We said at the time that we did not want to leave the opening-up of the market to judges , but wanted to make it a political process , and that political process has now been concluded at European level by the resolution on these directives .
What comes next ?
That is the question .
Transposing this directive into law will not be straightforward .
It will affect the companies , and - as national enterprises become European enterprises - the work of trade unions as well .
This liberalisation will entail new legislative tasks , especially as regards our obligations in the areas of environmental and climate policy .
We will also have the important task of introducing elements of these into liberalisation , in that it will be a new task to make climate policy compatible with competition policy as embodied in these two directives .
It will , not least , be important to involve the candidate countries in this process .
I too would like to end by thanking all those who have played their part in this .
Let me say this : it is not often that we work together in such a collegial fashion !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have expressed our complete and categorical opposition to the liberalisation of energy being promoted by the European Union on numerous occasions in the past .
The proposed restructuring only benefits the strong monopoly groups and has adverse repercussions on the cost to the average family , national energy planning and the position of the workers in this specific sector .
The Communist Party of Greece considers that energy is not simply a consumer product , but a sector of strategic importance to development and , as such , it cannot be the object of business activity and speculation , but should belong to the public sector .
Consequently , we refuse to discuss the details , the terms and the speeding up of liberalisation and the relevant rules of competition ; instead we shall support the proposals for overall rejection tabled by our political group .
Allow me , however , a few comments on the regulation for the networks , which is being used to promote increased exports from strong Community monopolies which will benefit from the reduction in actual transportation costs .
At the same time , it safeguards high profitability by passing the new financial burdens on to the average family , while the increase in exports will limit the development of generating stations in the weaker Member States in order to make use of domestic energy sources .
In addition , control of national grids is being shifted from the Member States to the Commission , thereby cutting the potential for national energy planning in order to reduce energy dependency and ensure the needs of each Member State are satisfied .
Cross-border exchanges in electricity can be used to reduce energy dependency , safeguard cheap energy and make use of domestic sources .
However , the precondition for this is a policy of mutually beneficial cooperation between countries , quite unlike that being promoted by the regulation and the policy of the European Union in general .
Mr President , I cannot help observing that we have ended up with two directives after all , just as we suggested at the beginning .
May I congratulate all my colleagues on their hard work with the Commission and Council in achieving this compromise result .
It is a tribute to the effective working of our committee .
We have not achieved all we want .
Past experience on previous directives shows that a foot in the door can and does lead to more opening than expected .
My particular interest is in the interaction between market opening and liberalisation and the issue of security of supply .
It needs to be said that more effective markets make for more efficient use of energy , and that is an essential element in maintaining security of supply .
We should also stand back from the details to remember the purpose behind these measures .
First and foremost , it is about choice , better value and better service to consumers of energy , both domestic and commercial .
Experience shows that competition drives these objectives forward , and we have seen the benefits in lower prices and improved service in the UK .
We need to see more improvement throughout Europe before we can say that we have done enough .
We have learned over the past 15 years that progress in liberalisation cannot be achieved all at once and a step-by-step approach is more likely to lead to a better outcome in the end .
I would like to advise the Commissioner that the Kangaroo Group working party on energy liberalisation is presently discussing the next steps we need to take in order to address the shortcomings not fully addressed in the current proposals .
We must not think these directives and regulations are the end of the process .
Mr President , we believe that the liberalisation of the energy markets illustrates once again the conflict between the European institutions and the peoples of Europe .
It is highly likely that Parliament 's vote will serve only to support the strategy for the - rapid - liberalisation of the electricity and gas markets and of the public service sector as a whole .
The exaltation of the alleged positive effects of competition , namely transparency , lower production costs and increased job possibilities , is being contradicted every day by reality .
In actual fact , what are most apparent are non-transparent decisions , the diversion of public funds into private interests , whatever the status of the undertakings , the rapid increase in prices for users , the granting of benefits to unethical private groups and the abolition of hundreds of thousands of jobs in Europe , while , as for workers ' statutes , they have gone right out of the window .
For us , energy is an absolutely essential requirement and access to it a fundamental right .
We believe that only genuine public , democratic control would allow us to streamline energy production and consumption while still guaranteeing respect for the environment and flat-rate adjustments .
This would be an initial step towards a European public service which meets the needs of users and employees today .
Parliament appears to be disregarding this concern .
If it is to fully shoulder its responsibility to the citizens of Europe , Parliament must reject the directives on the energy sector and launch a genuine democratic debate on the actual effects of the policy which seems to be taking root in the European Union today .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the liberalisation of the energy market is , above all , to the advantage of consumers and for Europe 's citizens .
Why is it to their advantage ?
It is because they can buy on the market the service that is best for them .
Not only , as they did before , can they differentiate quantities , but now also in terms of quality and , in future , they will be able to do so as regards prices .
I believe that one tremendous thing we have been able to achieve together has been with regard to labelling , in that public utilities will , in future , be under an obligation to indicate the source of the electricity , which will in future be independently monitored by the Commission , with the establishment of a group of European regulatory authorities which will share their experience with one another and thereby promote competition , to the benefit of consumers and of Europe 's citizens .
The fact is that competition means service , and that is what the public want ; they want service and freedom of choice .
In future the mix of energy sources will have to appear on the bill every year .
What that means is , quite simply , that I , the consumer , will in future - or at least after 1 July 2007 - have the right to choose an electricity company , 100 % of whose electricity is generated from hydropower .
I think that is a great leap forward for all of us , and that , in future , greater transparency will result from this as a matter of course .
Energy imports will have to be monitored by the Member States , and their sources will have to be certified .
Ultimately , we regard the full application of Community law as having most especial priority .
We believe that the decommissioning funds , together with the interest they yield , should be applied only to their original purpose , so that the costs must be borne by the form of electricity generation from which they result .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is all too good to be true .
The energy market is different from other markets .
On the one hand , there is a natural monopoly in the distribution and transport networks , which reduces competition .
On the other hand , it is a sector in which the lack of adequate regulation means that price variations can be huge , given the rigidity of demand and the impossibility of storing electricity .
Lastly , access to energy for all citizens must be seen as a genuine right , which brings us back to the question of public services .
Of course , the texts do include the public service obligations but they do not go far enough .
Indeed , the Member States are given too much leeway to organise and define these public service obligations , which means that the behaviour of the Member States which attach least importance to social cohesion requirements and citizens ' rights will be legitimised .
In consequence of that , free competition between operators will take precedence in these texts over public service obligations .
This is happening at a time when the Commission , with its Green Paper , is launching the debate on services of general interest !
Why could we not have taken a little time to take stock of the sectoral liberalisation process and to make this issue the focus of a European policy ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , those of you who know me will not be surprised to hear me confirm this evening that , not considering energy to be just another commodity , I and my group are firmly against the new proposals to liberalise the gas and electricity markets .
Despite the procedural precautions and despite the undeniable eloquence of our Commissioner and our rapporteurs , we believe that these proposals run counter to the need to save energy and , therefore , to environmental protection .
They will lead to job losses and , above all , to further deterioration of public services , and to the deterioration of energy networks and price adjustments , which are land-use planning tools .
They will run counter to the diversification of energy sources , even though these are becoming more and more vital .
They will favour short-term vision and calculations .
The logic of the internal market is thus particularly inappropriate for the energy sector .
I will end by reiterating that , far from harking back to the days of state control , I am in favour of a regulated world and a future for which we have prepared .
In this sense , energy is a major tool , maybe even the most important tool .
Thus , I dare to hope that , mindful of what is at stake , we will ultimately , one day , progress from a simple market logic to a political vision based on the concept of citizenship which is worthy of the heritage which we will leave our children in this field .
Mr President , without wishing to detract from the huge accomplishment of our fellow Members , this is a subject on which there will never be an end to analysis and debate .
I would like to focus briefly on the electricity market .
The situation in Europe reveals structural differences which I believe the launching of the liberalisation process will not alone suffice to overcome .
The electricity market in Europe has been concerned with linking markets but not with creating uniform conditions for access to generation , institutional systems and symmetry in fuel choices , with a view to establishing competing symmetrical conditions in the generation sector .
The cross-border regulation , through market mechanisms such as specific auctions , for instance , in countries penalised by internal production conditions , prejudices the situations of economic advantage for the end consumer deriving from the availability of imported energy .
Given the differences in cost and the congestion caused by a demand for energy which is considerably higher than supply , the effect will ultimately be convergence of the external and internal prices .
The nuclear issue would exacerbate the situation , creating the strange situation where some people are called upon to contribute to the cost of decommissioning in other countries when they are not actually in a position to benefit , because of the market-based mechanism provided for by the cross-border regulation , from energy produced by nuclear plant .
While we feel that the cross border flow efficiency mechanisms proposed can be endorsed in the long term , we consider that applying them in the short term would be extremely harmful .
Therefore , we would support the raft of directives only if this were achieved by means of phasing-in the market mechanisms , for the cross border regulation cannot produce identical positive effects for the end consumers of the Member States when there are disparities in trade flows .
Mr President , I am an advocate of an integrated market in the network industries which will serve as the basis for a competitive European economy and for social inclusion , particularly by means of interconnection , but on two essential conditions : that the joint networks are treated as public goods and that we are capable of managing a common energy policy .
I endorse and welcome Mrs de Palacio 's work to this end .
However , I can see that neither our states nor our institutions are taking on board the concept of public goods as yet , nor are they adopting the idea of a common policy .
Moreover , the Treaties do not give them competence to do so and the outcome of the Convention with regard to this matter is extremely uncertain .
The sectoral directives are undeniably seeking to move towards public service obligations , focusing on universal service , the environment , interconnection and security of supply , but they are only recommendations to the states .
As we are quite aware , we have no legislative authority to enforce a European right .
Without a doubt , we are entering the realms of a regulation too , and by a regulation I mean a public measure allowing us not just to introduce genuine competition but also to bring it into line with public service obligations .
Basically , competition needs to be developed further .
Some Members want to force this .
It is easy to criticise dinosaurs , my dear Mr Turmes , and overlook the contribution made by historic operators and what they did for consumers .
It is easy to call for ever-increasing ' deintegration ' , but absolutely nobody has any idea as yet how to regulate a ' deintegrated ' , multinational competition system properly .
It is ten times more difficult than regulating a national integrated monopoly system .
We have not taken into account the Californian experience , price volatility or the inadequacy of long-term contracts .
We are not capable of securing development investment .
In particular , I noted the obligation , which I believe is premature , of separation in respect of distribution , with regard to which the Members are trying to outdo the Commission , for they want to go as far as separating ownership .
We are not the only ones to want to create a retail market for household electricity supply .
There is fierce debate in the United States and Canada .
Do the gains offset the costs ?
What are the gains ?
Maybe the price of a pizza for an average household once a year .
And the disadvantages ?
All the transaction costs and lack of security .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , customers in my own country , Austria , have had a free choice of electricity suppliers since 2001 and of gas suppliers since 2002 .
It is now time for regulated liberalisation to be succeeded by a period of further deregulation .
Rather than the pressures of regulation , we want more competition .
That is why we say ' yes ' to the internal market .
Where this is concerned , I start by asking myself why it is that , in most cases , it is still by reference to the national market that competition is assessed .
Does this old thinking bear any relation to cross-border exchanges in electricity and gas , or to the realities of the networks ?
I would say , no , it does not .
Does it not foster distortion of competition in favour of the larger states and energy-producing companies as against smaller ones ?
I would say that it does .
Reconsideration of this is necessary and appropriate .
Turning to my second area of concern , I am grateful to the rapporteur , Mr Mombaur , and the Committee for taking on board the concerns of the Association of European Transmission System Operators and of Vorarlberger Illwerke AG .
These have to do with the way in which the definition of cross-border flow is being changed to refer to regulated zones instead of to the borders of the Member States .
The old definition is national rather than European and hence contrary to the promotion of cross-border exchanges in electricity through the integration of the internal market in electricity .
It is something that we have to change .
Thirdly , I would like to have something clarified .
We keep talking about the regulatory authorities of the Member States concerned .
By this , we should always mean the competent authorities - for it is not always necessarily the regulatory authorities that are competent .
.

( ES ) Mr President , I would like to thank the three main rapporteurs , Mr Turmes , Mr Mombaur and Mr Rapkay , most sincerely once again for their superb work and their speeches .
I would also like to thank the shadow rapporteurs for their speeches and say that perhaps Mr van Velzen - one of the shadow rapporteurs along with Mr Linkohr and Mr Clegg - summed up best what most speakers have said here , in other words , that we would like more .
I agree .
The work that has been carried out here , however , has been superb and has led to the result we have now achieved .
Perhaps it is not perfect , but it is sufficient to represent a spectacular change or step forward in the electricity and gas sectors , and will boost these sectors and contribute to the internal market .
It will also address an extremely important issue , and here I am referring to what Mr Linkohr , amongst others , has pointed out , as has Mrs McNally , namely the problem of symmetry created by the current situation of partial liberalisation .
What we are trying to do here is establish a European market rather than 15 markets - 25 as of May 1 - that is more or less open to competition .
What we are trying to do is create an internal market and , in this regard , I would like to say , as has already been pointed out , that we do not want uncontrolled liberalisation , but regulated liberalisation , as I said at the start .
Furthermore , Mr Herzog spoke of the problem of networks .
I am going to discuss these by referring to Mr Clegg 's report .
I would like to thank the Greek Presidency once again , in particular , for the work carried out with regard to the liberalisation of gas and electricity in these two Directives and this Regulation .
I shall now address the matter of networks , which Mr Herzog quite rightly raised .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy has just voted on the amendments concerning subjects relating to the financial regulation and in this regard , in this context , I would like to state on behalf of the Commission that in our report to the other institutions we too shall present the reasons justifying increased support for any individual project .
As the Commission proposed in revising the financial regulation , the possibility of such increased support should be clearly justified and should be an exception .
Why do we need to establish trans-European networks ?
Mr Herzog said that there is no Community logic in the networks , which is clear in some cases , and that in order to establish this internal market in the gas and electricity sectors we do not just need regulatory standards , but also infrastructures that support this idea of an internal market , and security within this internal market that allows sufficient capacity for peak demand points ; extraordinary increases or extraordinary situations .
I believe that in this regard the regulation we are adopting today represents a model for something we have been discussing for some time , which is the public service aspect of certain issues .
This is the regulation that most takes account of the public service concept in addressing the issues of protection and support for the most vulnerable customers , security with regard to the service itself - in this case security of supply - and also quality of service , by drawing up minimum basic requirements for all the Member States in order to guarantee security in practical terms , not only in terms of production , but also in terms of transport , which are essential when we are discussing energy .
With regard to these networks - Mr Clegg 's report - I would like to raise two further matters .
As regards the amendment on presenting regular reports , the Commission can accept a reporting period of two years .
With regard to updating projects , all important updates will continue to be the responsibility of Parliament , and I would stress this , while the Commission will simply retain the capacity to introduce technical changes into the projects .
I would also welcome the compromise achieved in this area by Parliament and the Council , which will enable us definitively to adopt trans-European networks in the energy sector , completing the entire framework .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Greek Presidency for the superb work that has been carried out and express my sincere congratulations .
In particular , I would also like to thank and congratulate Parliament , the three main rapporteurs , plus Mr Clegg and all the shadow rapporteurs who have carried out this work that has led , even if we might perhaps have wished for more , to this superb result .
Thank you very much , Commissioner de Palacio .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0144 / 2003 ) by Mr Wilhelm Ernst Piecyk , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 417 / 2002 on the accelerated phasing in of double hull or equivalent design requirements for single hull oil tankers and repealing Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2978 / 94 ( COM ( 2002 ) 780 - C5-0629 / 2002 - 2002 / 0310 ( COD ) ) .

. ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the sinking of the Prestige oil tanker off the Galician coast on 18 November last clearly demonstrated , once again , the insufficiencies of international maritime safety legislation specifically regulating oil transport by sea .
This accident highlighted , in particular , the urgent need to adopt the measures presented by the Commission following another similar accident involving the Erika .
Some weeks after the sinking of the Prestige , therefore , the Commission sent the European Parliament and the Council a new Regulation introducing three urgent measures into current legislation .
First of all , an immediate ban on the transport of heavy oil grades in single-hull oil tankers bound for or leaving ports , offshore terminals or anchorage areas in the Member States of the European Union .
Secondly , a revision of the scheme for an accelerated phasing out of single-hull oil tankers , by reducing the maximum permitted age of vessels and bringing forward the deadlines for abolishment with regard to those originally proposed by the measures in the Erika I package , in order to increase protection of the marine environment , thereby incorporating the Commission 's original proposals in the so-called Erika I package .
Thirdly , a more general application of the special inspection regime for oil tankers , in order to assess the structural integrity of single-hull vessels over fifteen years old .
All this means that the new Regulation aims to change the current situation radically , making it obligatory to transport fuels with the highest pollution risk in safer vessels .
By means of the new system , the European Union intends to apply legislation as stringent as that applied in the US since 1992 following the Exxon Valdez disaster .
Lastly , this legislation increases technical inspections of oil tankers that have not yet reached the maximum age limit .
All single-hull oil tankers , including small vessels - Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would emphasise this point - that were initially exempt , will now , as of fifteen years of age , have to comply with condition assessment schemes ( CAS ) .
Vessels that fail the strict inspection controls will be immediately held in any port of the European Union .
As you are well aware , in March the Ministers for Transport reached a unanimous policy agreement concerning these measures .
Examination by the Council made it possible to introduce a number of amendments that improved the initial proposal .
For example , the Regulation now comprises a clearer definition of what is meant by heavy oil grades , for the purposes of applying the bans contained in the proposal .
The definition is based on technical parameters that are well known to the sector and the authorities will have no difficulty in applying it .
Account is also taken of the situation of the fleet of small oil tankers operating in our ports , islands and coasts , which requires an additional adaptation period , but which should also be the subject of adaptation and improvement in terms of safety .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Greek Presidency , and in particular the Minister for the Merchant Navy , Mr Anomeritis , for its excellent work throughout this process .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , these are the key points of our proposal .
Its final objective is , as we have repeated many times , to prevent another Erika , another Prestige , another Aegean Sea , another Amoco Cadiz , or any other disaster of this kind in our waters .
. ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when we vote on this report this week , we will , I believe , have achieved in record time something that the people of Europe and the public at large have been awaiting with urgency .
It is , after all , self-evident that , after the accidents involving the Prestige and the Erika , something had to happen .
When it comes to transporting oil , we are giving old , unsafe , and dangerous ships no more chances .
At the same time , Parliament and the Council are directing that bulk shipments may now be transported from and into EU ports only in double hull tankers .
By combining these factors , which I see as the most important - heavy oil into and out of European ports from now on only in double hull tankers - and by significantly speeding up the scrapping of the old single hull tankers , we are making the sea and European waters safer to a substantial degree .
Only a few months have elapsed between the Commission 's initiative and the first reading here in Parliament , and this first reading will also be the last , as that is what has been agreed by Parliament , the Council and the Commission , who have , so to speak , taken a united approach .
For that reason I would like to extend very warm thanks to the members of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , for playing their part in this process , as well as to the Greek Presidency , which - as Commissioner De Palacio has already mentioned - has gone to a great deal of trouble , and also to the Commission , for doing such a good job of bringing the Council and Parliament together so promptly to do this .
This fast-track procedure was possible because the political will to find a consensus was there and - for we have to be honest - because the Prestige disaster made the need for action even more pressing .
Let me just make the following points about the preferred timescale for scrapping .
Single hull tankers in category 1 , that is , ships built before 1982 , may not be operated for longer than 23 years and must be taken out of service by 2005 at the latest .
Single hull tankers in categories 2 and 3 , built between 1982 and 1996 , may be operated until 2010 at the latest .
In this , the Council and Parliament have gone even further than the Commission , but I think that there is justification for putting categories 2 and 3 together , as there is no difference between them apart from their tonnages .
Small tankers between 600 and 5 000 tonnes are rightly included as regards the carrying of heavy oil , and here too we have reached a compromise , as , in view of their small number and in order to maintain supplies , we have agreed on 2008 , which means that , from that date onwards , only small double hull tankers will be able to be used to transport heavy oil .
In this connection I would like to emphasise the international dimension .
We know , of course , that shipping is international , and that European rules on their own cannot cover everything .
Without European rules , though , we would make no real headway through the International Maritime Organisation , which is very heavy going , and so it is a good thing that the IMO is holding a conference on this subject at the end of this year , at which the Commission and the Council will attempt to have European rules made applicable internationally , in doing which they have Parliament 's full support .
It is also , of course , the case that double hull tankers on their own are not the safety factor on which everything depends .
Other safety factors include port State control , the way in which a ship is maintained , a well-trained crew , and good navigation , often also with the help of pilots in difficult waters .
The oil industry 's argument , as set out in the ' Neue Zürcher Zeitung ' , that a well-maintained old single hull tanker with a good crew could be much safer than a sloppily-maintained double hull tanker with a sub-standard crew , may well have some truth to it , but it is hypocritical and somewhat stupid .
Nobody , after all , asserts that a fifty-year old car is worse than a brand-new Rolls-Royce whose brakes work and whose driver doesn 't fall asleep .
For the oil industry to adduce such an argument is pretty dubious .
We , on the contrary , agree that it is a combination of diverse factors that makes a ship safer .
Let me address a couple more aspects .
A Chinese freighter has sunk off the Swedish coast , and oil is leaking from it - 400 tonnes of it so far .
That is why we will , in future , also need rules covering how fuel and engine oil are to be made safer even on double hull tankers .
Old ships are to be taken out of service , and must be safely disposed of .
If that is to be done in an environmentally friendly way , that cannot mean scuppering them somewhere in the South Seas .
My final point is that Europe has a particular need for new and better ships , which - in view of the dumping that demonstrably goes on - must , for God 's sake , not all be built in Korea .
Whilst this is not a discussion about subsidies , the Commission and the Council do need to come up with imaginative initiatives on this , for the building of better ships in European shipyards certainly makes more economic sense than what happened on the coast of Galicia .
. ( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , allow me firstly to make a very personal observation .
The week before the Prestige accident , my party and I organised a conference on maritime safety in the Bay of Finland , that is to say on precisely those issues referred to by , for example , Mr Purvis .
You can appreciate my feelings when I then suspected , and was finally able to have it confirmed , where the Prestige actually came from , and understood that the situation could have been precisely the same in the Bay of Finland as off the coast of Galicia .
At the same time , we know that we can presumably expect the amount of traffic through the Baltic to increase tenfold .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has been closely involved in this issue .
We are also trying to improve Parliament 's reputation .
We perhaps had something to hide where the Erika package was concerned .
The opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy also emphasises the importance of neighbouring countries ' subscribing to the same rules because , as Mr Purvis also pointed out , these tankers sail close to our coasts , even if they do not put into EU harbours .
We also support the proposal for having 2010 as the final phasing-out year , a proposal that the Council had come up with and that we are now prepared to agree upon .
We also propose that the inspection requirements be looked at .
We should have liked to have seen the inspection requirements apply irrespective of age .
We are now talking about 15 year-old vessels , but it is important for a vessel , irrespective of age , to be of a good class and standard and to be well maintained .
Our experience shows that what the EU has agreed upon is in fact translated into the rules of the IMO .
We saw this most recently in connection with the oil fund .
What worries me is why we have not at this stage been able to adopt the proposal by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy that there be a paragraph stating that we must demand ice-strengthening .
I want to ask the Commissioner why the Commission has set its face against our adding a paragraph introducing ice-strengthening requirements , in addition to the requirements for single hull vessels to be phased out and double hull vessels phased in .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mrs Loyola de Palacio for her excellent work , and my colleague , Mr Piecyk , who , in a very short space of time , has produced a well-thought out and , in my opinion , very high quality piece of work seeking to improve the text of the proposal .
I would like to focus on two points , firstly legislation .
It is true that Europe has adopted a large number of measures , but it is equally true that public opinion is currently increasingly doubtful that they are being implemented .
Over and above this report on double hulls - we must not , in any case , allow the examples it quotes by way of illustration to mislead us as to the impact , for we know very well that double hulls will not remove all maritime risks and that there is no such thing as zero risk - we believe that it is extremely important that the European Union ensures that the Erika I and Erika II packages are actually being enforced .
In this regard , I have to say to the Commissioner that I compiled a detailed account for the port of Bordeaux last year , after the Prestige disaster , that is .
Eight old tubs featuring on the European blacklist entered the port without the French maritime authorities being able to confirm that they had been properly controlled .
I suppose that what happened on a small scale in this minor port is representative of a much larger scale situation across Europe and , in my view , what our citizens now want is for Europe to make the Member States directly responsible , as directly responsible as possible , for we know that they are not all progressing at the same rate and that some are more willing to cooperate than others
My second point concerns reparation for damage linked to disasters such as that of the Prestige .
I have to tell you , Commissioner , that there is great disillusionment in France .
The IOPCF is providing no more than 15 % and the Structural Funds will not contribute any more than what is provided for under the FIFG .
In my opinion , this will do a great deal of harm to the image of the European Union as a whole and to the image of the Commission , in particular .
Lastly , again with regard to reparation for damage , we would like to receive accurate information on the progress made in dealing with the wreck and on what is likely to happen in the future .
Are we facing chronic pollution , which will last for years , or is a solution emerging ?
There has been no response from the authorities for some months now .
We need accurate information and we must , if possible , reassure our fellow citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to thank the rapporteur and the Commission for making haste and bringing this proposal about so quickly , and also , in particular , for the soundness of the proposal on the accelerated phasing out of single hull tankers in European waters .
It is sad that the Prestige accident proved necessary for us to take action once more , and to finally convince the Council that we have to make policy together and that it was necessary to strengthen the Erika packages with the present measures .
I myself have another two amendments , which concern the Annex to this proposal .
Firstly , as a liberal , I do not like to see a discussion on State aid to the shipping sector in an important proposal such as this .
I recognise that action is badly needed , preferably through the WTO , to put an end to the dumping of ships on the world market by countries in the Far East .
I hope that the European Commission also appreciates the necessity of this .
I firmly believe in the strength of the European shipbuilding sector , however .
Short-term aid does not seem to me to be efficient .
I think that my own amendment concerning recital 7a is a good supplement to the otherwise excellent report .
My second amendment expresses the great responsibility that I feel regarding the consequences of the accelerated phasing out of single hull tankers by this EU policy .
I firmly believe that this must be accompanied by binding rules requiring all EU shipowners and all EU flag State ships to actively scrap phased-out tankers in a responsible manner .
In the case of cars we have an end-of-life vehicle directive .
I think that something like that must also apply here .
In short , see recital 5a .
Storing surplus oil tankers on the coast of Bangladesh and India causes greater disasters and has greater consequences than the Prestige disaster , and that was terrible enough .
There are already initiatives enabling the commercial scrapping , on market terms , of ships in Europe in an environmentally responsible manner .
This is waste management .
The practice of disposing of ships out at sea and the rotten scrapping of these in poor regions must be a thing of the past .
I hope , therefore , that double hull tankers will in future really be safer , partly also as a result of port State controls .
I personally endorse , as does my Group , the Commission 's aim in introducing this regulatory measure , which , in any event , we support .
We have to say , however , that it has been a long time in coming , since we have already endured the Prestige disaster , which happened when the ship should no longer have been at sea according to the terms of the Commission 's initial proposals .
The measure is overdue and falls well short of what is required .
The Union should adopt political and legislative measures to ban single hull ships carrying dangerous goods such as petroleum derivatives from sailing anywhere in waters under European Union economic control , and not just ban such ships from entering Community ports and using Community anchorages , as the Regulation does .
We would like , furthermore , to see ' sensitive coastal areas ' defined in this Regulation , and entry to them restricted for oil tankers posing a particular risk .
In any case , we must be aware - and the blame lies with certain Member States of the European Union and with this House - that , over and above the proposals for double hulls , which we support , there are no political and legislative measures either in place or envisaged capable of preventing a fresh disaster if a new Prestige case were to occur .
We Galicians are vividly and painfully aware of this fact .
After this Regulation , and even in spite of it , a new Prestige may once again sail off the shores of Galicia and other affected countries ; there is no law to prevent it .
Mr President , in its Resolution of November 2002 and following the sinking of the Prestige oil tanker off the Galician coast , Parliament called for the Council and the Member States to speed up the application of the measures adopted within the context of the Erika I and Erika II packages , such as the introduction of double hull vessels .
We therefore welcome the draft Regulation presented to us by the Commissioner , but we still feel that the gradual introduction of double hull vessels by the Union is an insufficient , if necessary , measure .
So far nobody has explained to us the percentage reduction in maritime accidents depending on whether the vessel is single or double hulled .
Nor has anyone explained what percentage of vessels involved in serious maritime accidents recently had double hulls .
We believe this is a good thing and we are prepared to support the Commissioner in her personal crusade , but we do not want to fail to see the wood for the trees and we do not believe that double hulls are the solution .
If only they were , Commissioner .
Although they are not the solution , we do feel they offer advantages which , in our opinion , have not been emphasised enough .
Two such advantages are that double hulls force us to assess the condition of our fleet and also force us to renew it .
Increasing maritime safety involves financial costs .
That is another matter that we feel is somewhat lacking in the Commission proposal - a little more clarity with regard to funding .
We still think , however , that , although age affects the general condition of a vessel , all the experts emphasise that maintenance is a better determining factor than age .
Like so many European citizens who have approached us , therefore , we believe that double hulls will only be effective if accompanied by the corresponding investment in improving the current system of inspections and penalties , which obliges vessels ' owners to invest in their maintenance and in improving the social aspect in this sector , as we sometimes have the impression that the Commission would like to tiptoe around this issue .
In this regard I would pass on to the Commissioner the question on everyone 's lips : why , in disasters relating to the maritime transport of fuel , are the regions worst struck by this kind of tragedy those that are most closely linked to the sea , relying on commercial , fishing and naval construction ports ?
In both Brittany and Galicia the shipyards have all but vanished , leading to industrial desertification of entire areas , and yet , the way things are , it does not seem as though these shipyards are going to benefit most from this Regulation .
Korean shipyards , which are more competitive and have no problems regarding compatibility and State aid , will benefit most .
This means that public opinion has the impression that the Commission is being inconsistent .
Yes to double hulls , therefore , but only if the requirements and quality of renovated vessels comply with European construction quality standards , environmental standards , social standards and quality standards .
I would also ask whether Korea meets these requirements , which are increasingly compulsory for our European citizens .
What is a dirty vessel ?
Will we find , due to the application of this Regulation , some recently built dirty vessels with double hulls ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly and most importantly I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on the efficient , proper way in which he has proceeded with this report .
When it comes to this problem of marine oil pollution , the citizens of Europe , as well as the environment and the maritime sector , expect a Europe that takes strong action .
I think that we have succeeded in this .
I think that the proposals on the table here are the most attainable .
In the longer term , I should also like to see the other proposals my group has presented return in the form of a directive .
They are as follows : redefining heavy fuel oil as waste , establishing a European coastguard service , and an obligatory percentage of ship inspections per port and not per Member State : otherwise , in 15 years ' time , we shall have the same problems with the double hull tankers .
I have two further remarks .
The first of these relates to shipbuilding .
The European shipbuilding sector is doing particularly badly .
Tightening up the Erika package has the potential to breathe new life into the sector .
The Commission can present proposals on this .
Secondly , I share the concern of my fellow Member Mr Vermeer regarding the worldwide measures .
There is the danger of this leading to Europe exporting oil slick disasters .
I therefore advocate banging our fist on the table at the International Maritime Organisation to press for single hull tankers to be phased out for good worldwide , ahead of schedule .
.
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Piecyk , once again for his wonderful work and also for his speed .
There is no question that we have all pooled our efforts , because we are all aware that it was urgent for us to do so .
We rather have the feeling that the Erika I and Erika II packages have unfortunately come late , and that we must try to prevent being too late for a new Erika , a new Prestige or a new disaster .
We must do everything we can to prevent this happening again .
In this regard , I would like once again to thank the rapporteur .
I must reply and make it clear that we are prepared to accept all the amendments proposed by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , though with some modifications to the wording .
Amendment No 3 requires the Council and the Member States to issue the Commission with a mandate to negotiate with the International Maritime Organisation ; the honourable Members are aware that , although we do not formally have full powers within the international Maritime Organisation , we are coordinating the latest actions .
I would remind you that we have had considerable success recently , multiplying the FIPOL fund by 5 .
A moment ago Mr Savary told us how clearly insufficient it was in relation to the damage caused by the Prestige accident , and it was also insufficient in relation to the damage caused by the Erika , but in the latter case Totalfina took a responsible attitude and contributed to some of the costs , something which the people responsible for or owners of the cargo are clearly not going to do in the case of the Prestige .
That is now crystal clear .
But , in the end , within the International Maritime Organisation , we have managed to increase the FIPOL funds by 5 , to some EUR 950 million ( more than a billion dollars at the current exchange rate ) compared to 170-180 million dollars previously .
That is a good result .
We are in agreement with Amendment No 3 , although there will have to be some modification of the wording .
Amendment No 6 requires the Commission to present a new proposal , in as short a time as possible , in relation to the fuel all ships carry for their own propulsion .
This requires an agreement within the International Maritime Organisation , which we are prepared to promote for newly built ships .
This amendment therefore also needs some correction of its wording .
Amendment No 7 refers to the shipbuilding industry .
Several of the honourable Members have referred to it and are well aware - and my colleague Mr Lamy is here , and it is he who is handling the negotiations - that we have the problem of the clearly unfair behaviour on the part of Korea .
We are implementing a series of measures to try to prevent the disappearance of European shipbuilders at a time when Korean shipbuilding and shipbuilding in certain other countries is growing as a result of the substantial state subsidies they receive , leading to entirely unfair competition .
This support for our shipbuilders must clearly be provided by means of the World Trade Organisation and by means of certain types of specific action , but always guaranteeing compliance with the rules on state aid laid down in the Treaty .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to take up some of the issues raised here today .
Firstly , Mr Piecyk said that this is not a panacea , a point which has been repeated by Mr Purvis and other speakers .
Unfortunately , replacing single hull oil tankers with double hull oil tankers will not guarantee that we do not have another sea disaster , either in Europe or anywhere else in the world .
But it is one more measure which will allow us to increase safety .
Safety depends on a range of measures , all aspects of which must be applied coherently .
In this regard , Mr Savary was absolutely right when he said that the first thing we have to demand is that the Erika I and Erika II packages be applied .
As the honourable Members know , the Maritime Safety Agency is operational , with a provisional headquarters , but operational nonetheless , and one of its functions is to guarantee that , in all ports of the European Union , appropriate controls are carried out ; that the classification societies carry out their appropriate control obligations .
These are elements which must be implemented with all the new requirements and standards we have demanded of both the port authorities and of the classification societies .
The implementation of the Erika I and II packages and the Regulation we are discussing today is simply going to guarantee us a level of safety equivalent to that of the United States .
Let us not allow a situation such as the one we have been in for many years , for too many years , which I believe to be inconceivable : that the citizens of the European Union have enjoyed less safety on their coastlines than the citizens of the United States .
Following the Exxon Valdez the United States took quick decisions , while in the European Union we have been dragging our feet and not because there had not been other disasters before the Prestige or the Erika .
We had the Aegean Sea , the Amoco Cadiz and many others .
So what we are doing here is creating equivalent levels of safety .
But that is not enough , and Mr Purvis and Mrs Thors were right about this .
We must negotiate with Russia , in particular , but also with our Mediterranean neighbours , and persuade them to introduce systems which are equivalent to ours .
I have faith in the crusade referred to by Mrs Miguélez Ramos , and I believe that I am not alone , but that I am accompanied by all the honourable Members and many people outside who have the same concerns as me .
We must therefore promote the participation of our neighbours , of Russia firstly , but also of all the Mediterranean countries .
The other day at the Euro-Mediterranean meeting of energy ministers the issues of the double hull , of port controls and of maritime safety were raised and there was support for this issue .
And this weekend at the European Union Summit with Russia , Russia has committed itself to supporting the case for double hulls , not only in its own territory , but also , like the Mediterranean countries , in the International Maritime Organisation , because it is of little use if the disaster is caused by a ship in transit .
Finally , the International Maritime Organisation must take steps in relation to the responsibility of the flag state , preventing flags of convenience , which unfortunately often disguise a complete lack of controls and guarantees .
We must make progress on the human factor , which is always key and essential - in shipping , in the maritime sector , as in any other sector - and this means , as Mrs Miguélez said a moment ago , and there are proposals on the table , that the issue of the qualifications and abilities of crews is essential , not only within the Community , but also within the International Maritime Organisation and the International Labour Organisation .
Eventually , legislation will have to be modified at international level , at the level of United Nations maritime law , so that the rights of coastal states and coastal populations are better safeguarded and taken into account in a more balanced fashion .
We cannot allow freedom of the seas to become simply uncontrolled freedom to sail genuine ecological time bombs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we are taking a very important step forward , but it is not enough ; we must continue to move forward and a key element is the application of what we have already approved .
Commissioner , you pointed out that a range of measures is required .
As we have heard in this House , ice-strengthening is also required in certain marine areas .
Is the Commission prepared to support this regulation 's introducing a binding condition concerning this matter ?
Or what other measures is the Commission prepared to take ?
. ( ES ) Mr President , at the request of the Finnish delegation , account has been taken of oil tankers in areas of ice formation in the Baltic .
We have not only raised the issue of ice strengthening , in other words , specific safety measures for oil tankers in areas of ice formation , particularly , amongst others , the Baltic sea , with regard to a specific regulation in the European Union , but also within the International Maritime Organisation .
We have also raised the issue of sensitive areas within this forum , as requested by some of the ladies and gentlemen here present , as well as the issue of prohibiting the carriage of heavy oils in any single-hull ship , not simply , as is currently the case , with regard to our ports and anchorage areas , but also with regard to any other international port .
Thank you very much , Commissioner de Palacio .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0115 / 2003 ) by Mrs Erika Mann , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on regional free trade areas and trade strategy in the European Union ( 2002 / 2044 ( INI ) ) .
. ( FR ) Mr President , this own-initiative report by Mrs Mann on regional free trade areas addresses two central aspects of the Union 's trade policy .
The first is the issue of trade policy being used as a strategic tool within external relations , particularly where development policy is concerned .
The second concerns the relationship between the multilateral approach and the bilateral approach .
Before addressing these specific points , I should like to thank Mrs Mann for her excellent report and for the spirit of cooperation in which she has worked , which has made it possible for us to exchange ideas and information over a considerable period of time now , something which I believe has enabled us both , Parliament and the Commission , to move forward in our thinking .
As Mrs Mann has just said , our approach continues to be based on the Amsterdam Conclusions of June 1997 .
The Union 's trade policy works on two complementary levels : the multilateral level first , that of the World Trade Organisation , and the bilateral level next , which is now increasingly regional .
These two levels are justified , firstly by the fact that unilateralism is not an option for the European Union , and this is something that we have known for a long time .
Secondly , since our priority is multilateralism , regionalism - or our bilateral agreements - complement this multilateral choice , the second level being as it were subordinate to the first .
Seen in this light , regionalism is not a kind of ersatz multilateralism , but complements a fundamental choice , which is that of the World Trade Organisation .
We actually believe that the globalised markets need common rules and global institutions to regulate them .
The Union 's faith in the multilateral approach , which it had ten years ago , is even stronger today .
We want to manage globalisation ; we want to reduce the destabilising effect of a number of factors .
That is why an approach based on a multilateral trading system is our priority , as moreover is reflected by the agenda that was adopted in Doha .
On this basis , I think that there is a very broad consensus between the position expressed by Mrs Mann and that of the Commission .
For the time being then it is the multilateral approach that is our number one priority , and that is why we have postponed any decision to launch new negotiations on free trade areas until the round that we began in Doha is completed .
In addition to this time constraint , we think that any new initiative in this field should be duly justified and meet a number of conditions .
Firstly , it must be compatible with the WTO , and Mrs Mann reminded us of the rules in this respect .
Secondly , a bilateral agreement should provide added value compared with the WTO , and when I say that I am thinking of the value of the WTO at the end of the Doha round .
Thirdly , and finally , a new initiative should not distract us from our multilateral priority .
Does this mean that we are neglecting free trade areas ?
No .
The Union has been a major user of these regional negotiations .
Moreover , we are working very actively on a number of them , with Mercosur and with the Gulf Cooperation Council , and we recently concluded agreements with Chile and Egypt , amongst others .
These agreements , both the ones that we have concluded most recently and those that we are in the process of negotiating , have some characteristics that are rather new compared with the traditional concept of a free trade area .
We have as it were moved on a generation .
Moves to liberalise trade in goods and services now increasingly go hand in hand with the adoption of new bilateral rules that go beyond multilateral rules .
A second characteristic of this new generation of agreements is that the Union is increasingly seeking to develop region-to-region relations .
Examples are Mercosur and the Gulf Cooperation Council , but also the Andean Community , Central America and South-East Asia - I will come back to this in a moment - or even the regional negotiations that will shortly be getting underway in Africa .
We actually think today that it is this regional approach , bringing together several of our partners , that may bring greater economic benefits , since as it were the regional integration of our partners increases the market potential and makes the regulatory work more cost-effective .
This is what Mrs Mann a moment ago called deep integration and it is initiatives of this kind that we are in the process of launching , including with South-East Asia in the form of the very recent cross-regional EU-ASEAN initiative launched just over a month ago in Laos , in Luang Prabang .
Our intention is to start an action programme focusing on the main regulatory priorities of the two sides .
This is also the approach that we have adopted in our relations with Canada and it underpins our work with the Andean Community and Latin America .
To summarise the Commission 's position on this point , I will say that the fact that President Prodi has not launched any new initiatives for free trade areas is not a sign of passivity but a deliberate choice .
This is clearly explained by the priority that we have accorded to Doha , but also by our conviction that free trade areas in the traditional sense of the word are not really the right instrument for opening up trade in the twenty-first century and that we now need to modify this format .
This , by the way , is also what guides us in our relations with developing countries , something to which Mrs Mann devotes considerable space in her report .
We think , like her , that although there are advantages to opening up trade , these advantages only become a reality if several conditions are met .
Firstly , market access is necessary for developing countries , but it is clearly not enough on its own to bring direct benefits in terms of growth and employment .
A decisive ingredient needs to be added , which is aid to strengthen trade capacities .
That is what we are providing at multilateral level .
We are also providing it in the preparations for the negotiation of regional economic partnership agreements with our ACP partners .
Are we entirely in agreement then ?
Not quite .
And since we do need to identify a few areas where we differ , I have looked very hard and will mention two before concluding .
The first concerns the idea mentioned by Mrs Mann of opening negotiations with Singapore with a view to creating a free trade area .
We are not convinced at this stage that such an initiative would indeed boost momentum in the region .
For the reasons that I have just given , Mrs Mann , our preference is therefore still for a joint approach with the ASEAN countries .
We are also hesitant about the idea that you put forward in your report that the Union should undertake to fill the gap in the budgets of developing countries caused by the reduction in customs duties .
For the time being there is no proof of customs duties being lost , especially if the volume of trade were to increase as we hope it will , both in a South-South direction and in a North-South one .
We are not ruling out this idea , but in the light of the data that is currently available it does seem premature .
These are the two minor reservations that I should like to voice on behalf of the Commission .
Nevertheless , it is clear that our reaction to your report is dominated to a very large extent by areas where our views converge .
I would add that it is a great advantage for the Commission to have its strategy and positions supported by the European Parliament in international negotiations .
For all of these reasons , I see this report as confirming the high quality of our working relations and would like to thank Mrs Mann once again for her excellent report .
Mr President , first of all I would also like to congratulate Mrs Mann on her report .
We are all aware of the fact that trade relations are a factor in economic growth , but it is equally true that not all countries have been able to integrate into the world trade system and take advantage of the opportunities it offers to improve their development , which has increased inequality between rich and poor countries .
There is therefore a clear need to manage globalisation by means of multilateral standards drawn up from a policy perspective in order to make trade relations at world level a beneficial force for all , which contributes to the objective of eradicating poverty and achieving fair , sustainable development .
It is therefore important for the European Union to define a trade strategy that places the specific needs of less developed countries at the heart of trade negotiations , in order to make possible the gradual incorporation of these countries into the multilateral trade system .
In fact , the right of access - including non-reciprocal access - of poorer countries to the markets of developed countries is vastly insufficient for guaranteeing genuine development of trade flow if - as you yourself pointed out , Commissioner - we do not simultaneously strengthen their capacity for industrial and agricultural development , respect for the rules in force in the importing countries and familiarity with trade circuits , as well as their administrative capacities and their financial institutions .
For precisely this reason , the Committee on Development and Cooperation fully supports the incorporation of the development aspect into the Doha agenda and welcomes the impetus provided to this end by the European Union , and specifically yourself , Commissioner Lamy , in order to promote this development aspect .
At the same time , however , it considers that it is vital to ensure coherence between multilateralism and regionalism , between the rules established by the World Trade Organisation on the liberalisation of regional trade and the development of areas of free trade , including the proliferation of agreements between countries and regions with very different levels of development , because it believes that only this way , with this coherence , will we be able to make trade relations a genuine factor in development for all peoples and finally eradicate poverty .
Mr President , Commissioner Lamy , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express the firm support of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats for Mrs Mann 's report on regional free trade areas and trade strategy in the European Union .
Let me add a few observations .
By means of this report , we are setting out the principles by which we trade and cooperate commercially with the world 's regions .
Of course , it also gives direction and a specific character to the many possibilities open to us there , which we also have at regional level .
Our group works on the fundamental assumption that we are thereby able to build up free and fair global trade , and that those countries that have not so far had sufficient opportunity to engage in trade , have the chance , through the establishment of their own free trade areas , to share in this development .
I see this - not only in view of what Commissioner Lamy said - as an important guide to the timeframe within which , in the aftermath of Doha , a renaissance of regional trade agreements around the world may perhaps come about .
I get the impression the cooperation with certain countries - such as Singapore - can also be the key to regional free trade agreements with regions that are themselves not yet in a position , or not sufficiently advanced , to take partnership further .
That is why we should be using the idea of cooperation with Singapore as the prelude to greater cooperation with ASEAN .
The specific characteristics of the region present us with a broad spectrum of diverse possibilities , which must of course remain subject to the World Trade Organisation .
The development of , for example , the West African market also requires , not only that we open our own market , but that West Africa should be put in a position to do better business with Central Africa and Southern Africa , as Mrs Mann pointed out in her report on South-South trade .
Mr President , the own-initiative report by our fellow Member Mrs Mann makes a particularly interesting contribution to the fascinating debate on the relationship between regionalism and multilateralism .
I am very much in favour of the multilateral approach , but I also remain convinced that regionalism and multilateralism can strengthen and supplement each other in many respects .
I agree with the rapporteur when she says that the European Union must also continue to support and promote regional cooperation and integration in the future , therefore .
In addition , the idea of using the establishment of free trade areas as instruments of development seems to me to be a very interesting train of thought , provided that they form part of a general package of reform measures .
I should like to point out , however , that , for the benefit of the developing countries , we have to beware of ending up in an inextricable tangle of regional and multilateral initiatives .
In my view , today the multilateral approach still deserves to take priority over regional initiatives .
In other words , the top priority of the European Union must at this moment be the successful conclusion of the Doha Development Agenda .
The discussion on regionalism and multilateralism , as important as it is , must be postponed until then .
In any case , Mrs Mann 's report constitutes an interesting contribution to this , and for this I thank her .
Mr President , the motion for a resolution that is proposed to us in Mrs Mann 's report includes , in paragraph 21 , a call for European trade policy to be brought fully within the Community system as such , with exclusive competence for the Community , majority voting in the Council and codecision with the European Parliament .
We cannot go along with this Community fundamentalism , which is based on the idea that only supranational mechanisms are appropriate for this policy , so as to foster greater openness at global level and to sideline the nation states .
But opening up world markets , as useful as it may be , is not everything .
We also have to recognise that the Member States have societal models and fundamental interests to protect .
We therefore need to leave them the means to do so and strike a fair balance between European policy and national interests , between supervision by the European Parliament and supervision by the national parliaments .
In our opinion , Mrs Mann 's report does not strike this balance .
In particular , there is a need to recognise that taking decisions by a qualified majority in the Council may not always have the desired effect .
Let us take a topical example : the Convention on the Future of Europe is reflecting on the possibility of making our entire trade policy subject to the majority rule , thus doing away with the derogations recognised by the Treaty of Nice for certain essential services , in particular cultural services , that this Treaty states continue to require unanimity .
The French Government has protested and requested that unanimity be maintained because it provides greater protection .
We approve .
But as an aside , why accept this here and not elsewhere ?
At the same time , an association of large , mainly American , companies , the International Communications Round Table , is obligingly writing to the Convention and to the Commission to sing the praises of the majority rule .
This illustrates the fact that in practice this rule would make it possible to ignore opposition from individual nations in specific areas and thus bring down our defences .
That is why we are asking the Convention to look at the bigger picture and to take a more balanced view .
First , we need to increase the involvement of national parliaments .
Secondly , the majority procedure should only be used for adopting safeguard measures .
On the contrary , whenever it is a question of reducing our protection , decisions should be taken by unanimity so as not to damage anyone 's interests .
.
( FR ) Mr President , I had not intended to respond as , until Mr Berthu 's speech , all of the speakers had essentially confirmed our deep-seated agreement on the principles .
I should just like to say a few words in reply to Mr Berthu on the subject of whether trade policy should be decided by unanimity or a qualified majority .
Today , Mr Berthu - and this will probably be increasingly true in the future - we live in a world of elephants and in this world power struggles , particularly over trade matters , are largely determined by the weight of the participants .
If the Union wishes to bring its full weight to bear then unanimity is not the way to do so .
Experience has shown this .
The situation is very simple : in this field either we want to carry weight in the world in which we live and will continue to live , and in that case in a Europe of 25 we need qualified majority voting , or we do not want to - and I certainly understand that this might well be Mr Berthu 's point of view ; it would not surprise me in the least - in which case we should indeed maintain unanimity .

The idea that unanimity is the best guarantee of sovereignty is something that Mr Berthu has just reiterated .
I am not surprised by this and I wanted to draw your attention to it .
It is true today where cultural matters are concerned , as it is in other areas .
Mr President , just a few words to say to Mr Lamy that I am not a self-appointed advocate of unanimity in all cases .
I did say that majority voting could be useful when safeguard measures were being taken , because in such cases all of the countries have to show solidarity .
But when it is a question of reducing our protection , unanimity is , I believe , useful , because it is not right that a majority should be able to impose measures that damage the interests of a minority of Member States .
The next item is the report ( A5-0192 / 2003 ) by Bastiaan Belder , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the implementation of macro-financial assistance to third countries .
Mr President , the own-initiative report that Mr Belder has just presented is both exhaustive and forward-looking .
It will certainly give the Commission food for thought where macro-financial assistance to third countries is concerned .
We share the view that Mr Belder has just expressed that we are currently suffering from a genuine lack of flexibility and from the fact that all aspects of the decision-making process in the field of macro-financial assistance to third countries are extremely cumbersome .
He is right to stress that these cumbersome procedures and this lack of flexibility are due to there being no specific legal base or framework regulation setting out the criteria and conditions for granting macro-financial assistance to third countries and that this gap forces us to have recourse to Article 308 of the Treaty on a case-by-case basis .
Clearly this is a serious disadvantage , even if in practice the instrument itself has proved - once the decisions have been taken - to be an effective tool for supporting adjustment and reform in those countries that have benefited from this macro-financial assistance : this is confirmed by the recent Court of Auditors report on macro-financial assistance .
On several occasions we have explored the possibility of putting in place a framework regulation , as the report suggests , which would define the conditions for granting macro-financial assistance and as it were put this instrument on the same footing as other instruments for providing financial assistance to third countries .
Unfortunately , so far these attempts have failed because for this type of assistance - no doubt because it also implies having recourse to borrowing and lending - the vast majority of Member States wish to retain a decision-making process that requires unanimity on a case-by-case basis , which all sounds very familiar .
The Commission therefore shares Mr Belder 's view on this issue of the legal base .
Unfortunately the same cannot be said of the Council of Ministers , which , in this case , has the last word .
That explains the current situation .
We do not think , to be perfectly frank , that it will be possible to bring about any change in the situation before the conclusion of the Convention 's work and the next intergovernmental conference .
As far as voting by unanimity or by a qualified majority are concerned , our hopes are therefore in the hands of the Members of the Convention , once again .
In the meantime , we will have to continue to manage this instrument , taking into account its inherent constraints , in as flexible a way as possible .
To do so we will need Parliament 's cooperation : sometimes we feel a little tempted to insist on this absolutely correct legal view and we do not wish this to be to the detriment of this instrument or to complicate it further when we have already said that it is too cumbersome .
A difference of opinion over how this macro-financial assistance is decided on - which is certainly justified - should be no reason for us to deprive the partner countries of the benefit of this tool when they need our assistance and are striving to create stability and implement reforms .
Its legal base is no good ; it is too cumbersome and too complicated , but the aid reaches those for whom it is intended and we would not want these countries , bearing in mind the hopes that they put in the Union 's ability to offer them this assistance , to be disappointed by these quarrels , which are admittedly justified , but which are so petty compared with their own hopes .
We are therefore counting on Parliament , in its wisdom , to share this difficulty that we both have to live with , of an instrument that can only evolve if majority voting replaces unanimity in the decision-making process .
Mr President , we on the Committee on Budgets have been drawing people 's attention to how the use of the Guarantee Fund mechanism is a very cheap way for the EU to provide external financial assistance .
The guarantees allow countries in difficulties to acquire credit on the international markets more cheaply than they would at normal market rates .
As the guarantee has meant that the EU has not suffered any losses owing to defaults in recent years , it shows the criteria for assistance have been working .
The forms of financial assistance provided under the Guarantee Fund have in recent years been macro-financial assistance and blanket loan guarantees given to the European Investment Bank .
A ceiling is set for their use , the Guarantee Fund ceiling , which is provided for in the financial perspective .
The Committee on Budgets has been surprised to note that the Commission and the EIB did not take full advantage of the potential of the Guarantee Fund last year .
The resources used were wasted and poor countries were not helped .
The use of this aid instrument could be added to the guarantee clauses with small technical amendments that will not in practice cause any problems for the Union 's budget .
All the institutions are prepared to reduce the provisioning rate of credit from the present level of 9 % to 8 % .
That way we could lower the amount that has to be covered by a corresponding Guarantee Fund transfer for each credit transaction .
We could likewise reduce the blanket guarantee given for EIB loans from 65 % to 50 % of the amount of the loan .
This measure would have the same impact on the use of the Guarantee Fund as reducing the provisioning rate .
These changes would mean there would be more to distribute out of the same allocation of funds defined in terms of its ceiling .
The Commission should promptly propose such measures .
Mr President , it is mainly in the detail that madness - political madness in particular - becomes apparent .
Today sees the start of the Public Prosecutor 's investigations .
Five years in jail is the threatened penalty , and the scrutiny is rigorous , for the case has a basis in law .
I am talking about Mannheim and the arena for World Cup football that is being built there .
It appears that , two years ago , work was started on it illicitly , thus - or so those who have brought the case are arguing - putting field hamsters at risk .
Although there is no evidence of any single field hamster having died , the machinery of a functioning state under the rule of law is in motion , in a way that you might describe as over the top .
The Lord Mayor , against whom the case has been brought , fears for his political future .
Taking up Mr Belder 's interesting report , I do not have to quote all the things he lists in it .
It mentions money , although none gets spent , and we can quite soberly describe this as inefficient , ineffective , and devoid of any solid legal basis .
What is going on ?
This is a blatantly typical example of how this Europe of ours does not yet fit together .
Reforms are urgently needed , or else how many more dentists , how many more Eurostats , are there going to be for the Commission to stumble over ?
The next item is the report ( A5-0114 / 2003 ) by Yves Piétrasanta , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the annual report on the MEDA 2000 programme ( COM ( 2001 ) 806 - C5-0524 / 2002 - 2002 / 2235 ( INI ) ) .
. ( FR ) Mr President , I should first like to thank my colleagues who have worked so hard on this report , in particular Mrs De Keyser for her work on behalf of the AFET Committee and also Mrs Zrihen .
I should also like to thank the European Commission and Mrs Gonzalo , who gave us all of the information that we needed .
I would remind you that the MEDA programme is the tool through which our Mediterranean policy , as formulated in the Barcelona process in 1995 , is implemented .
The first phase was carried out by the MEDA I programme ( 1995-1999 ) and the second by the current MEDA II programme , which was shaped by my and Mr Valdivielso 's reports in the year 2000 .
This new regulation entered into force on 15 December 2000 and we have been able to analyse how it has worked up to the end of 2002 .
The conclusions on MEDA I had given rise to numerous concerns , the overall payment-to-commitment ratio between 1995 and 1999 being only 26 % .
The main causes of this relative failure were identified as the length of the negotiations , the complexity of the programme 's procedures , the multi-annual nature of some projects and the limited administrative capacity of the MEDA countries , together - it has to be said - with a lack of administrative resources in the committee in charge of managing this programme , obliging it to delegate work to Technical Assistance Offices , whose involvement proved to be ineffective .
MEDA II is not restricted to fostering the creation of a free trade area in the Mediterranean by 2010 , but enhances the previous economic cooperation in the Mediterranean with a social , cultural and environmental strand .
For the period from 2000 to 2006 this programme has an overall budget of EUR 12.75 billion , made up of European Union funds and loans from the European Investment Bank .
In summary , having analysed the situation in the documents that we have tabled , we would draw the following conclusions .
Firstly , we note that MEDA II represents a marked improvement on MEDA I , thanks to the creation of the EuropeAid Cooperation Office in the External Relations DG .
Thus , we have moved from an overall payment-to-commitment ratio of 26 % in MEDA I to 37.4 % in 2000 , 53 % in 2001 and 92.9 % in 2002 , an overall ratio for MEDA II of 59 % .
To achieve this , the Technical Assistance Offices have been dismantled and eight delegations have been set up ( in Algeria , Tunisia , Morocco , Egypt , Jordan , Syria , Lebanon and the West Bank ) , with a representation only in Gaza .
These delegations can take action more readily , as they have Commission representatives and clearly identified resource centres in each country .
Secondly , the comitology has been simplified .
A methodological guide was published in March 2002 .
Thirdly , as we have recommended several times , Parliament is very mindful of the links that need to be established between the granting of aid and the respect of human rights by the various countries , and we ask for an annual report on this .
Fourthly , we want there to be regular monitoring of the observance of democratic principles when projects are chosen , not just through the bilateral negotiations between the Union and the countries concerned , but also involving civil society and NGOs in this process and ensuring that the gender criteria , in particular regarding the participation of women , are respected .
Fifthly , we stress the need to further develop South-South relations and not just bilateral relations , which even today absorb more than 85 % of funds .
Sixthly , we take into account the work underway in the European Convention seeking to meet the five challenges for the MEDA countries : demography , employment and migration , globalisation , diminishing natural resources and the environment and human rights .
Seventhly , we suggest that the sixth framework programme of research should be used for carrying out research in the fields of the environment , agriculture - with the aim of ensuring food sovereignty - and in particular water management , and suggest that more emphasis be put on renewable energies .
We recall that the Mediterranean Basin has the greatest variety of agricultural specimens and seeds of all temperate areas : these must be preserved .
We want more attention to be paid to agrodiversity and to implementing projects involving farmers , tradesmen , consumers and SMEs .
Finally , we want all of the opportunities afforded by the information and communication society to be developed , in particular electronic communication .
Finally , let us note that all of this work under MEDA is currently being done against the difficult background of the post-war situation in Iraq , the resolution of difficult problems in the Middle East , the peace process , in particular between Israel and Palestine , and the new balance established by the Treaty of Nice with enlargement to 25 , and here we need to continue our efforts to ensure that this is not a pretext for sidelining Mediterranean cooperation .
That is why we support the creation of a Euro-Mediterranean foundation for dialogue between cultures and civilisations , as well as a monitoring centre for migratory flows , a Euro-Mediterranean investment bank and a Euro-Mediterranean parliamentary assembly , which would play a decisive role in formulating a properly implemented and well-integrated Euro-Mediterranean cooperation policy .
.
( FR ) Mr President , I should first like to thank Mr Piétrasanta for the important work he has done in drafting this report , which mainly concerns the year 2000 , a year of transition for the MEDA programme , as he has just pointed out himself .
Generally speaking , we agree with the remarks that he has just made on the substance of the report .
I will first make two comments on the political issues he has just mentioned before moving on to more operational considerations .
On the political points , and in particular the link between this type of programme and improving the situation in terms of political reform , we agree that we need to continue our efforts along the lines that he has just indicated , and that is why the Commission has just adopted a communication that seeks to give fresh impetus to the work being done in the field of human rights and democratisation in cooperation with our Mediterranean partners .
Moreover , this communication also constitutes a partial response to the comments made in the Arab Human Development Report - a document that UNDP was brave enough to table last year - and proposes strengthening the political dialogue on this subject and drafting action plans on human rights and democratisation with our Mediterranean partners , the initiative as a whole being supported by the MEDA programme .
We also agree with a second political point that was mentioned by Mr Piétrasanta : the objective of greater participation by civil society in MEDA .
We have , for instance , extended the Tempus programme to our Mediterranean partners , encouraging exchanges in the field of higher education , and we wish to support the efforts being made by non-governmental organisations to formalise the contribution of what we call civil forums to the Euro-Mediterranean partnership as a whole .
So much for the political issues .
As far as implementation is concerned , the Commission is pleased with the progress that Mr Piétrasanta has just emphasised .
The MEDA programme at issue , MEDA II , has indeed greatly benefited from the reform begun by the Commission in 2000 in the external aid sector with the aim of improving the quality of our projects , their financing and the speed with which they are implemented .
Testimony to this - as Mr Piétrasanta has just said - are the efforts that have been made to devolve power and dismantle the Technical Assistance Offices , in which we are aware that this Parliament has for many years taken a keen interest .
In fact the devolution process in the Mediterranean area is now almost complete , with the exception of the West Bank and Gaza , for reasons which are , alas , obvious .
In any case , in Egypt , Morocco , Tunisia , Algeria , Jordan , Lebanon and Syria , work to devolve power will be complete at the end of this year .
Another notable effect is the progress that has been made on implementing the budget , be it the utilisation rate for commitment and payment appropriations - in 2002 , 100 % of the available funds were used - or the payment-to-commitment ratio , which increased to 75 % in 2002 compared with 25 % over the period from 1995 to 1999 .
Finally , concerning past commitments and amounts still to be paid , they had been reduced to EUR 200 million by the end of 2001 .
At the end of 2002 , the amount still to be paid had been reduced by a further 50 % .
Clearly then the efforts that have been made have paid off and Parliament 's support , which contributed to the Commission gaining increased administrative and human resources in this sector , has not been in vain .
You have been able to see , and Mr Piétrasanta quoted similar figures to mine , that the investment you have made , that the Community taxpayer has made through you , has paid off .
That is a good thing .
It is a great encouragement to the Commission to continue to pursue this policy , as it is to the departments that have worked to implement it , and we do not doubt that the European Parliament will be able to see further progress when it scrutinises the results for 2001 and 2002 .
.
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Piétrasanta and I worked together in perfect cooperation : you will not therefore be surprised to hear the same points stressed again in the few comments that I would like to make .
Of the various points made by the AFET Committee in its opinion , two seemed to us to be particularly important .
The first - and you have reassured us , Commissioner - was the need to ensure that the democracy clause in the association agreements is respected and the need to carry out regular and transparent checks on the impact of the MEDA programme on human rights , and this on the basis of an annual report provided by the Commission in accordance with clear criteria , a precise agenda and training in this field for European officials .
The second point was the importance of establishing an open and tolerant civil society in these Mediterranean countries , in particular by supporting the independence of small NGOs , and in this respect the AFET Committee regrets the fact that so few Mediterranean countries have been selected in the horizontal democracy programmes under the EIDHR and that , for example , neither Morocco nor Egypt , where civil society is active yet still fragile , will benefit .

This was and still is Europe 's vision of a transition towards more democracy in the countries of the Mediterranean , a transition supported by MEDA funding , by various different instruments , but also by a dialogue , in the form of a forum today and perhaps a Euro-Mediterranean parliamentary assembly tomorrow .
The report was presented in March 2003 .
A few days later war broke out in Iraq : it represented another vision of the democratic transition , a brutal and tragic vision that many people do not share .
The Euromed dialogue is struggling to recover from this war .
It will take more than a MEDA programme to get it back on track .
Let us hope that the adoption of the Middle East roadmap by the Quartet will be the first step towards doing so and a genuine sign of hope .
Commissioner , we would like to thank you for drawing attention to two political points .
Mr Piétrasanta 's report on the MEDA programme is widely supported and a joint effort : we really do have the same aims .
The two political points on which you based your speech are , firstly , the importance of the role of the Mediterranean as a European border and also as an area which is the focus of a substantial chunk of our Union 's foreign policy , and , secondly , the fact that the Commission certainly made its measures very tangible and more timely in the transition from MEDA I to MEDA II .
Indeed , in our meetings with the countries on the southern shore of the Mediterranean , we have been constantly reminded of the need for different administration timetables .
In this connection , we note that the Commission is making a considerable effort .
I will not , of course , list the points already mentioned by the rapporteur .
I would like to focus on a number of political requirements which go hand in hand with the action programme .
We certainly need to identify new social action programmes and , above all , we need to concentrate on protecting people with disabilities as well as new forms of cooperation concerning the protection of children .
In the context of the situations on which you , Commissioner , are focusing , we would point out the need , with a view precisely to foreign policy and the role of the European Union , to insist on the conclusion of the Syria / EU negotiations in order to complete the network of Euro-Mediterranean association agreements , just as we must proceed as soon as possible with the selection of the funding programme planning projects which is at present suspended in Israel and Palestine , for they could play a very important role in this part of the Mediterranean region .
I will end by stressing the need for a parliamentary assembly , for that is the political forum in which a solution could well be found to many of the processes currently in progress .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , seven years after the Barcelona Conference that launched the Euromed partnership , the European Parliament has an opportunity , through Mr Piétrasanta 's report , to take stock of MEDA , this policy 's financing instrument .
I would like to take the opportunity to underline the excellent cooperation that we have enjoyed in the drafting of this report .
The tense international situation provides further evidence every day that the economies and societies in the Mediterranean Basin need to evolve to become more prosperous , more socially cohesive and more democratic .
This is in fact the only way , we are convinced , that we can work effectively to increase the stability of these regions and combat terrorism in the long term .
The twofold reform that has taken place , that of MEDA - now MEDA II - and the structural reform of external aid management , has been the source of many new and very promising initiatives , including the creation of the EuropeAid Cooperation Office .
Similarly , we have high expectations of the various strategic documents , multi-annual programming exercises and new shortened and simplified procedures .
Nevertheless , we would stress the importance of assessing how the resources allocated to the programmes are managed , something which should be guided by a principle that is simple and yet , it would seem , so difficult : the amounts budgeted should actually be spent and spent well .
The Barcelona process is also a project to create a vast free trade area .
The new situation gives rise to new questions .
Will the momentum behind the European Union 's Mediterranean policy survive enlargement ?
What is happening about South-South cooperation or interregional cooperation ?
Finally , we should not forget that it is in our interests for the funds to be distributed in such a way that they target in particular priority areas , such as social cohesion , the development of democracy , human rights , support for civil society , the specific situation of women , culture , youth and sustainable development .
Over the next few years we will therefore continue to assess progress along these lines under the Commission 's attentive gaze .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Piétrasanta , and the Commission itself , because of all the MEDA programmes that have been presented on this subject , of all the proposals , this is perhaps the most realistic and practical and , to a large extent , the one which demonstrates that it is dealing with reality .
In this regard , for example , I believe that for the first time we have distinguished terrorism as such , as an act that is distinct from government responses - which should also be condemned .
Terrorism has been identified as a phenomenon that should be condemned in its own right and eradicated .
It is very interesting that the road map and other measures to support Iraqi integrity have been raised .
However , I would like to say , and in this I agree with Mr Piétrasanta , that our Mediterranean policy has a number of black holes or black spots and is essentially unbalanced .
I feel we need to make an effort to render it more coherent .
For example , like Mr Piétrasanta , I feel there has been very little investment in capacity building and the structure of certain administrative bodies that could achieve democracy .
Given the structure of the countries , and of many of their economic administration services , amongst others , it is very difficult , because democracy does not consist of holding elections , but of building an entire system , which needs to be far more visible and systematic .
Furthermore , we need to help the Mediterranean countries with which we are going to cooperate , and which receive a great deal of aid , to understand that the aid must go hand in hand with a deep sense of responsibility , within game rules that do not allow maximum , but minimum tolerance .
I am referring , for example , to the administration of the funds received , just as other funds might often also be misused or used to finance oppression .
I believe we need to show that democracy means a consolidated , transparent State .
Without this there can be no democracy , let us not delude ourselves .
I would say the same for the Assembly we are trying to create .
We must be demanding and set democratic conditions that must be fulfilled . Otherwise we will only achieve unbalanced representation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 10.20 p.m. )
Guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States
. Mr President , it is a pleasure to participate in this debate on behalf of the Commission and , above all , on behalf of Mrs Diamantopoulou , who regrets that she cannot be here today because she is attending a meeting of the Social Affairs Council in Luxembourg .
We have now reached the final stage in our joint effort to reform the European employment strategy .
All the institutions have worked together to reach a good compromise that is now fully in line with the European Council 's conclusions , that takes on board most of the European Parliament 's views and that is , whilst less ambitious , close to the Commission 's initial proposal .
Our ambitions should reflect the scale of the challenges we face .
Firstly , full employment : to deliver full employment we need to create up to 22 million jobs if the Union of 25 Member States is to reach the 2010 Lisbon target .
As far as quality and productivity is concerned , this means ensuring not just more jobs but also better jobs .
We must take a positive approach to managing economic restructuring and we must reverse the slowdown in productivity growth .
As regards cohesion and inclusion , we must tackle increasing social inequalities and persistent regional disparities .
This , of course , will be an even more challenging ambition within an enlarged Union .
These challenges can only be met if we ensure that all relevant players are closely involved in the employment strategy and that they all work together .
What are the main elements of reform ?
Firstly , stability .
Through this reform we have to respond to the short-term challenges of the slowdown in our economies , and face up to the longer-term challenges of reform .
A more stable set of guidelines covering the period up to 2010 , with a mid-term review in 2006 , should help us to respond to both short- and longer-term challenges .
In principle , these guidelines should remain unaltered for at least three years .
We have also been successful in presenting more focused , simpler and results-oriented guidelines that concentrate on a limited number of major priorities and set out clearly the results we are aiming for .
The focus on results rather than process means more emphasis on the use of targets and indicators to benchmark progress .
We have received considerable support from Parliament in this respect .
Whilst we could have gone further , I welcome the fact that a reasonable number of well-focused targets remain .
Emphasis on results also demands that more importance is placed on the recommendations to the Member States .
In streamlining the employment guidelines and the broad economic policy guidelines it is also important to recall the advantages of this new streamlining of the employment policy coordination and the broad economic policy guidelines .
We have to make sure that the simultaneous timetable for the two sets of guidelines fosters complementarity and creates a more coherent policy coordination at European level .
I now turn to the new priorities .
I am not going to refer to all the specific guidelines , but I would like to refer to the three main challenges they address .
Firstly , the adaptability of people and enterprises must be promoted .
Adaptability requires a good balance between flexibility and security in the labour market .
It also requires investment in entrepreneurship and in helping people and enterprises to cope better with the effects of economic restructuring .
Secondly , in order to achieve full employment , we must see how we can increase the labour supply further .
We must better exploit the potential of all groups of the population .
We must increase the participation of women and older workers on the labour market .
We must fully integrate immigrants into the labour market .
We must transform undeclared work into regular employment .
Parliament 's support was extremely important in securing an agreement on this specific issue .
We now send out a clear signal that we want not just more employment but also better employment .
Thirdly , investment in human capital is increasingly at the heart of the issue of creating more and better jobs .
It is crucial for more employment , more productivity and also more inclusion .
This calls for redirecting resources in favour of investment in human capital .
Let me now address the views of this Parliament .
I regret the timetable difficulties which Parliament has had to face .
I understand your concerns and I know that both the Council and the Commission have done their utmost to take account of your views .
Despite those difficulties , the revised guidelines I am presenting today strongly reflect the views of Parliament .
Indeed , your views have provided significant added value in a number of notable areas .
First of all , a reference to reducing unemployment .
Parliament fought hard to include a reference on the need to reduce unemployment .
I agree that it is vital to illustrate to Europe 's citizens that these reforms aim to tackle directly the areas of most concern to them .
I am happy to report that we now have such a reference in the opening paragraphs of the guidelines , even though Parliament 's request went further in suggesting a new target relating to full employment .
The second area concerned is that of a fourth over-arching objective on equal opportunities .
As a result of Parliament 's opinion we now have a stronger set of guidelines giving a higher profile to gender issues .
The revised text does not go as far as including a fourth over-arching objective , but in two important areas the guidelines have been strengthened : firstly , the introductory text makes it clear that equal opportunities and gender equality are vital for making progress towards all three objectives ; secondly , we now have a more complete specific guideline addressing gender equality as such .
Concerning a higher profile for the entrepreneurship priority , the Commission very much welcomes Parliament 's comments that the scope of the entrepreneurship guidelines should be widened to cover support for all SMEs , rather than just new start-ups .
This proposal has been taken on board .
As regards a more visible role for local and regional actors , the new proposals better reflect the importance of ensuring the close involvement of local and regional actors in the employment strategy .
In line with Parliament 's request , we now have a specific guideline on regional disparities that recognises the crucial role played by local and regional actors in addressing those disparities .
The discussions on governance were rather difficult .
It is obvious that this is a very sensitive issue for Member States .
However , it is important to stress that the success of the new European employment strategy ultimately relies on improved delivery and better governance .
This is even more vital when we account for the needs of the new Member States , who have openly recognised the crucial importance of the issue .
This is yet another area in which we very much welcome the strong support of the Parliament .
The guidelines now clearly express the important contribution of parliamentary bodies for improving the governance of the employment strategy .
Despite the fact that this falls short of your proposal that national parliaments should adopt the national action plans , it does however reflect important progress in ensuring a better governance strategy .
I believe that in taking on board many of your expectations , these revisions now reflect the shared views of all parties .
The revised guidelines present concrete objectives , priorities and targets and strengthen the delivery and governance of the strategy as a whole .
As such , they are an excellent basis to support national employment and labour market policies for the years ahead .
Thank you , Commissioner Vitorino .
Mr President , it was gratifying to listen to Commissioner Vitorino .
Our work can have practical results , something which is needed .
We have economic stagnation and growing problems in the labour markets in the EU .
The resulting antagonisms concerning ' the right policy ' are increasing , something we have noticed in this Parliament too .
It has been my great ambition throughout my work as rapporteur to try , despite the difficulties , to unite Parliament behind a common policy .
The basis for this policy was the Lisbon strategy , according to which economic and technological development should be combined with a concentration on work of good quality , cooperation between the parties , production and , especially , solidarity with weak groups .
We have therefore put forward a range of proposals .
I am able to summarise them very briefly now , because Commissioner Vitorino has already commented on some of them .
Firstly , we have proposed increased attention to unemployment .
That is important , for it is not enough just to increase levels of employment , as is done in periods of prosperity .
That is not the same as combating unemployment .
There can be access to the labour market at the same time as the long-term unemployed remain long-term unemployed .
There is therefore a need for attention to be paid to this area as an important measure of renewal .
Secondly , we have placed considerable emphasis on the fact that , in an economic situation like the present one , new jobs and new businesses are needed , something that certainly also requires political initiatives .
We are now presenting a programme for entrepreneurship and new jobs that is much more comprehensive than the one contained in the Commission 's guidelines .
At the same time , we are maintaining and emphasising our demand for quality , sustainability and a perspective upon the future .
Thirdly , we focus much more intently upon the equality perspective than the Commission 's proposal does .
Above all , we propose that equality be made into an overarching objective alongside the three objectives proposed by the Commission .
The Council is clearly not ready to adopt this as yet , but we should no doubt continue to exercise pressure .
It is not the last time we shall have that opportunity .
Fourthly , we have put forward clear demands for regional and local employment strategies .
I am pleased that there are clear responses to these demands , for it looked rather bad for a time when this feature had disappeared from what was the last guideline .
Now , it has been reintroduced , which is important , because there is a need to be able to mobilise people and businesses from below if we are to be able to create the 22 million jobs talked about by Mr Vitorino .
Finally , we have agreed to recommend that the Member States ' parliaments adopt positions on the national action plans .
They can then be more firmly rooted and combined with national employment policies .
The problem has been that European employment policy has not been linked up with , or integrated into , the national policies .
There has therefore been a considerable lack of efficiency .
I appreciate that the Council is not ready for this , either .
Perhaps we ought to go via the Member States and ask certain Member States at some point to raise this issue in the Council .
They will then have Parliament 's support .
We have also agreed about other issues , a fact I think we can be proud of .
We made no less than 16 compromises in the committee and reduced more than 160 amendments to a relatively manageable number .
I should naturally be disappointed if , after all these compromises , it emerged that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats were still not completely satisfied .
There therefore remains a certain lack of agreement , something upon which I wish to comment shortly .
Firstly , the PPE-DE Group wishes to strengthen the Commission 's wording on immigration and immigrant labour and does not want this matter to be addressed in the guidelines .
Yes , this is a ' hot potato ' in a number of Member States , but that cannot be helped .
Irrespective of whether they border upon the EU or are in a particularly exposed position , all European countries face a common global reality whereby we are seeing increased immigration across our borders , something we must deal with in a document on employment policy .
I am therefore opposed to Amendment No 62 .
Another disagreement concerns tax policy .
There are quite a few amendments about this .
I think that tax systems are very national in character .
If we are to come up with views on this , we must express ourselves in very general terms .
It is impossible to produce practical proposals on tax policy for 25 countries .
I am therefore opposed to Amendment No 66 by the PPE-DE Group , which is very radical and demands a general reduction in tax for both individuals and businesses in all the Member States but says nothing about how the financial position is to be regarded .
In my own country , Sweden , reducing the tax burden is not at all the thing to do , but I appreciate that matters are different in Germany and other countries .
In conclusion , I just want briefly to say that the Liberals ' amendments on tax issues are of a quite different character .
They are interesting , but very drastic .
It is a question of shifting the tax burden from personal taxation to environmental taxation and taxation of consumer goods .
That is something I consider to be worthwhile , but it is not something we can probably decide in this type of document .
In conclusion , I want to say that we have , in general , reached agreement .
It is very important for us to be able to agree upon a document so that we have an answer to give to the Council that is sitting and waiting and will listen to what we are to say today .
Mr President , there are too many states in the European Union in which the economy is stagnating , and many areas in which reforms have not been implemented .
The coming year 's enlargement from fifteen to an expected twenty-five Member States presents us with an additional challenge .
The Lisbon strategy is an ambitious one , and its implementation must take account of these realities .
It follows that we need to set other priorities for the European employment policy guidelines .
As Commissioner Vitorino has already mentioned , this is about increasing the employment rate .
It is also about increasing the value of products and raising the level of productivity .
It is about reforms to the various systems of taxation and social security benefits - which , Mr Schmid , are in fact matters for the Member States - where a balance is to be maintained between flexibility and security .
It is about activating those who are willing to work and capable of work , and about better involvement of the local and regional stakeholders . Finally , it is about mounting a more determined attack upon the black economy .
Mr Schmid was prepared to take on board many of my group 's amendments .
As shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I thank you for your good cooperation .
Our proposals are reflected in what are now sixteen workable compromises , including on the use of educational and training methods to create workplaces of high quality , on increasing the level of investment in enterprises , on strategies for lifelong learning in accordance with the requirements and abilities of those involved , on the abolition of subsidies to industries which have no viable future , and on job creation in regions with a high level of unemployment .
Despite this , a number of our core points are absent from the areas of the setting up of new enterprises , monetary policy and taxation .
Firstly , one of the essential aspects of the European Employment Strategy 's approach is the practical support for the setting up of enterprises , which goes beyond simplified administrative procedures and involves the extension of information networks for those starting new businesses .
If these - and as a result , new jobs - are to be created , there needs to be easier access to credit on favourable terms , so we need more dependable equity capital finance - an area where the European Union differs to a marked degree from the United States .
If there is sufficient liquidity , then competitiveness is ensured .
Secondly , we cannot accept the renewed attempt at marginalising the Stability Pact , on which , in the eurozone , the confidence of economic decision-makers and consumers depends .
It cannot be put to one side , even if , in certain Member States , ministers make so bold as to negotiate exemptions for their portfolios .
The logical consequence of undermining the Stability Pact , which is so important , would be the loss of public confidence and the weakening of the euro , which is , thank God , a strong currency .
Thirdly , there must be incentives in law to make employment more attractive to workers and employers .
This should involve reducing the tax burden on work to such an extent that the creation of new jobs ends up being less costly , which will make it possible to combat more effectively the black economy , which is booming .
Overall , we should be working towards reducing the tax burdens in the Member States - for it is at that level that they are imposed - to such an extent that the public can again afford more and enterprises can at last get back to being more entrepreneurial .
I very much hope that these amendments from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , which we again discussed last night , will be approved by the plenary at noon today .
Only then , Mr Schmid , will I be able to recommend to my colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats that they should endorse this report - only then !
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to begin by thanking Mr Herman Schmid for the unusually constructive cooperation that went into preparing this proposal , which I think is important .
Employment policy is important on the whole .
We now have a new framework to operate within , concerned with tighter coordination with the economic guidelines , more long-term thinking and more concentration upon the result of implementation in the Member States .
We fully agree with this strategy .
I wish to emphasise how important it is for the employment strategy to be put on the same footing as the economic guidelines so that they carry the same weight in this process .
Allow me to say something about the overarching objectives .
We have abandoned the pillar structure .
The fact that we now have full employment as an objective is particularly important .
It is also important , as Mr Herman Schmid says , to supplement the employment objective with an objective relating to unemployment .
Even if these are two aspects that run approximately in tandem , they do not do so one hundred per cent .
It may be the case that employment is increasing but that there still remains a high degree of unemployment .
Another objective is work of good quality .
In the future , Europe will not compete through cheap labour but through the quality of the products and services we are able to produce .
For this , we need a properly educated labour force .
Educating the labour force to make Europe competitive is clearly linked to lifelong learning .
A third important issue is integration .
It is not only a question of integration between regions , leading to a high level of employment - or full employment - throughout Europe , but also of there at present being groups that are , to a large extent , outside the labour market , for example people with disabilities and people from other countries .
That is important .
The equality aspects have already been talked about , and it is important that we highlight them .
They had a pillar of their own in the previous strategy .
It is also important that the national parliaments be involved and that it be possible to supplement the overarching common objectives by national objectives .
Allow me briefly to say something about the disagreement .
We need to resolve this in the committee .
We have slightly different views of flexibility and security , but we shall succeed in agreeing on this point and saying that we need a balance .
When it comes to the tax issue , I do not share Mr Mann 's view . You only have to look around in the European Union .
Some of those countries that have the lowest unemployment and the highest levels of people in work do in actual fact also have the heaviest tax burden .
This suggests to me that the tax issue is somewhat more complicated than appears from Mr Mann 's amendment .
The level of employment is determined by a large number of factors .
It is an over-simplification to say that , generally speaking , a reduction in tax is also good for employment .
The fact is , it is not .
I wish , however , to say that I shall vote in such a way that we preserve unity in this House .
What would be worst of all is if we in Parliament were not to express our view , now that we have an opportunity to do so .
I shall be guided by that consideration in the vote .
Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Schmid for his hard work and for the way that he has succeeded in forging compromises across the political groups .
His report has our broad support .
That said , we have some concerns .
First , we feel that too much detail may have crept both into the main report and certain amendments before plenary .
Second , we wonder about some of the provisions on childcare and the reconciliation of work and family life .
Are they fully compatible with sound public finance ?
In specifying the public sector , do they not ignore other means of delivering the same objectives as , for example , through the social partners ?
On plenary amendments , we think that Amendment Nos 65 and 66 may send the wrong messages , respectively by implying a reduction in wages and by suggesting a one-size-fits-all approach .
We prefer our own Amendment No 58 .
On the positive side , we applaud the references to people with disabilities and hope that a proposal for a horizontal directive will soon be forthcoming .
We endorse the objective of gender equality and recognise particularly the need for special support for women returning to work .
I add my own particular concern about the continuing gender pay gap and call for a concerted effort to close it .
Finally , we fully agree with the need for all stakeholders to be involved , including the parliaments within the Member States .
Some are , and we welcome the initiative of others , such as the European Committee of the Scottish Parliament , to become so .
But this should simply be the norm .
The drive for more and better jobs is something in which we should all be directly engaged .
Mr President , social and employment policies are affected by economic policies .
For this reason , a debate distanced from the economic guidelines is meaningless , as is unfortunately the case with the debate now taking place , despite all the rapporteur 's efforts to the contrary .
The Commission 's spring forecast predicts that GDP growth in 2003 will not rise above 1 % in the Euro area . This will have negative effects on employment , which will fall by 0.1 % , causing a rise in unemployment , which will reach an average of 8.8 % .
This situation should alert us to the need to change the Community 's monetarist policies , and in particular to review the Stability Pact , in order to give the highest priority to public investment and other means of promoting employment and social inclusion .
The only problem is that , instead of this , the same old solutions are being put forward yet again . This makes it difficult to draw up credible employment strategies and targets for social inclusion .
Consequently , although I still entertain the gravest doubts over the feasibility of the targets and goals proposed in this report , given the well-known positions of the Council , the Commission and the governments of most of the Member States on the possibility of changing the economic guidelines or of any revision of the Stability Pact to prioritise growth in high-quality employment giving the right to social inclusion , I would underline the positive ( though inadequate ) proposals which aim to improve employment strategy .
I would also emphasise the point that all Member States must define quantifiable national targets to be included in the first national employment plan that they draw up in accordance with the new guidelines ; the need for these targets to be debated in national parliaments ; and the need for them to contribute to achieving better results , in terms not only of creating employment , but also of reducing unemployment , of equal opportunities and social inclusion .
The present situation , however , demanded much more .
We must check the rapid growth of unemployment stemming from fundamental public sector liberalisation and privatisation , from the restructuring and relocating of multinationals , from the increasing difficulties facing micro- , small and medium-sized businesses and the lack of support they receive , from insistence on the supremacy of monetarist policies as well as restrictive ones which limit public investment and hinder the growth of workers ' , retired people 's and pensioners ' buying power , and finally from an insistence on raising the retirement age , which punishes workers and does not create more jobs for young people .
The only problem is that neither the majority in this Parliament nor the Council accept such proposals .
On the contrary , they insist for the most part on policies which worsen the current situation , as we saw in the last part-session during the debate on economic policy guidelines , and as is happening again here , whenever anyone tries to go a little further , as Herman Schmid , the rapporteur , has done .
Of course , advocating improved working conditions is a positive step , but proposing an overall reduction in the incidence rate of accidents at work of only 15 % ( 25 % in high risk sectors ) throughout the Member States by 2010 does not mean a great deal , especially for a country like Portugal , which has the highest rate of accidents at work in the European Union , with an average of one death every working day .
Attaining these aims , however , requires not only political commitment but also substantial changes to economic and monetary policy , which we have unfortunately not achieved up to now .
Mr President , I wish to add my group 's congratulations to the rapporteur on the great amount of work that he has done on this report in an extremely short space of time .
However , we regret the lack of proper coordination within this Parliament with the broad economic policy guidelines and hope that we can rectify that in the future .
We welcome the general thrust of the report and the Commission 's proposals about the coordination with other strategies of the European Union , for example social inclusion .
However , there is still a great underestimation of the importance of the sustainability strategy within this overall package as well .
We also welcome , however , the increased emphasis on the role of women in the report , and indeed the Commission 's response to that , but we regret its removal as an overarching goal .
We also welcome the increasing emphasis on the work-life balance .
However , men will not achieve that until women have truly equal treatment in the workplace , and that includes equal pay .
We have a degree of sympathy with some of the remarks made about the cost of employment in terms of the costs to employers .
However , the level of wages is also important and we are well aware that in certain Member States and some of the accession countries even the national minimum wage is effectively a poverty wage .
Employers need to be looking at that dimension and not just the costs of employment .
To return to the issue of coordination with other polices , another one which should be included is our trade policies .
We are working for a trading system which effectively drives production costs down and which encourages companies to relocate in search of competitive advantage .
Therefore , we also need to examine the goals of our trade policy and the way they work with our employment policy because we are not convinced they are travelling in the same direction at all .
Mr President , the proposed guidelines for employment policies presented by the Commission for Parliament 's consideration are rich in pious generalisations : improving overall employment rates , improving employment rates among women and the elderly , improving quality and productivity of work , strengthening social cohesion and integration into the job market - all of these are generalisations which we have already heard a hundred times , which teach us nothing and which will surely teach the governments of the Member States nothing either .

Nevertheless , the coordinated employment strategy might have been useful , if it had gone into more detail , spoken of more precise problems and compared countries - if it had been pointed out , for example , that the unemployment rate in the countries of the euro area is approaching 9 % , while in ' non-euro ' countries it is in the region of 5 % .
Are there really no conclusions to be drawn from this fact ?
Even within the euro area , the disparities are very great .
Leaving Luxembourg , an exceptional case , to one side , we see Austria on 4.2 % and Ireland on 4.5 % , at one end of the scale , with France on 9.3 % and Spain on 11.9 % at the other end .
Faced with such differences , can we really extrapolate universally applicable guidelines without regressing into abstraction and even artificiality ?
For my part , I would rather see more respect for the spirit of open coordination - of diversity , of the exchange of good practice - and talk in concrete terms of successful experiments , which should be passed on .
Mr President , I also wish to thank the rapporteur for the tremendous work he has done under very difficult circumstances to bring this report to us today .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner for what he said and for the effort which the Commission has made to accept amendments from Parliament .
I know the Council is doing the same and is standing by waiting for us to adopt our opinion today , so that it can go ahead and adopt the employment guideline package .
That presupposes , however , that we will adopt this report today .
In that respect , I would like to make an appeal to the PPE-DE Group , because that group has a tendency to seek revenge for the rejection of the Thomas Mann report on the spring summit some two months ago .
That group has made it known that certain amendments are regarded as key amendments and if they are rejected in the House today then that group will vote to reject the whole employment guideline package .
That would be a tremendously damaging blow .
We have already dislocated the streamlined coordinated process , involving the employment and economic policy guidelines .
I hope we can get the whole exercise back on track and I hope that group will pull back from this brinkmanship .
The amendments its members regard as key amendments are causing us some difficulties .
For example , Amendment No 64 concerns the stability pact .
They are placing considerable emphasis on that point .
That is strange because not even Mr García-Margallo y Marfil from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs places such emphasis on this point in his report on the broad economic policy guidelines .
Amendment No 66 calls for a reduction in the overall tax burden on individuals and companies .
A number of Members have made reference to this amendment already .
This is a fundamental ideological point and is causing some difficulty for a number of my members .
The emphasis that the PPE-DE Group members are placing upon this suggests that they have a determination not to seek consensus and to look rather to create problems for the adoption of this package .
This amendment on the overall reduction in the tax burden is incompatible with the one they have tabled on the stability pact and it also concerns an area of responsibility that is reserved for the Member States themselves .
I cannot believe that if that amendment were rejected the PPE-DE Group would reject the whole package but I am assured by Mr Mann that would be the case .
I hope the group will pull back .
Reluctantly I am urging my members to abstain on Amendment No 66 in the hope that it will get through - although I disagree with it .
If I fail and they lose that amendment , I again would appeal to the PPE-DE Group to pull back and not reject this package .
It is simply not worth it .
My final point , which is very important , is on Amendment No 23 on the social economy .
Last month I mentioned in the debate on the Cooperative Statute that the social economy had disappeared from the employment guideline package .
I hope we can bring it back in as a result of this amendment .
Mr President , quite a few speakers have already today pointed out that , in many countries , unemployment has taken a turn for the worse and is rising .
That is due to the generally poor economic situation , but also to the fact that insufficient efforts are being made to promote adaptability in the labour market . Moreover , the demands for adaptability will not lessen over the next few years .
Training has an important role to play in this process , and I should like today to call for employment policy also to be seen in the context of the initiatives launched jointly by the EU 's education ministers with a view to improving the quality of training schemes through their open coordination .
This will be of great importance to our longer-term competitiveness . A report , summarising the situation , will of course be produced by the autumn and debated at the Spring Summit in 2004 .
We are all agreed that the objective is full employment and that this objective cannot be achieved without a basically sound economy , healthy public finances , a promising investment climate and keen competitiveness - all key elements when the idea is to create jobs .
There is nothing contradictory about this , as parts of this Parliament perhaps appear to believe .
I think that the Council has done a good piece of work in simplifying the employment guidelines .
There was a need for this .
Many of the guidelines were cobbled together without a thought for what they really needed to contain , which simply means that , in the case of many of the guidelines , the whole process has become less comprehensible and more perfunctory .
I should therefore like to have seen Parliament be more sparing with the welter of amendments , even though our rapporteur has made great efforts to boil matters down to something comprehensible .
The more guidelines that are crammed into employment policy , the greater the risk of their being viewed as immaterial .
We need to focus on the objective : more employment and more jobs in Europe .
Mr President , I should like to make a few short remarks in connection to what Mrs Lambert said .

The fact that Commissioner Vitorino is here rather than Commissioner Diamantopoulou is due to the fact that Commissioner Diamantopoulou is attending a meeting of the Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs Council .
That is a good thing , too , as we are voting today , and it is very good to hear that the things which we have already decided in the Committee , and which we hope to have adopted today and here I back the appeal by Mr Hughes to the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats are being discussed there so that we can reach further decisions .
I should like to call for a number of things .
First of all , I think that the general mainstreaming we are calling for is very important , and that this could in fact be extended still further , because I think that the whole equality arm , as it appeared previously in the European Employment Strategy , should still be formulated as a kind of objective .
I would also call for the development of two action plans .
The first is an action plan against unemployment .
Everyone knows what the problem is : unemployment is on the increase , and the recession is growing rapidly and is also set to last a long time - and something must be done about this .
There is no balance between the long-term strategy of increasing employment participation , for example , and the short-term strategy in a number of other spheres .
The second action plan is an action plan for improving quality at work and increasing productivity .
Modernisation of work organisation , in particular , is urgently required .
By way of conclusion , I think that it is important that we take the local and regional approaches and the involvement of national parliaments very seriously .
Mr President , I confess that I have little faith in the usefulness of this kind of document and I feel that the situation which is developing with regard to the Lisbon objectives is cause for thought .
It is easy to agree on the principle of significantly reducing unemployment by 2010 : I would challenge anyone to find a single European citizen - whether right-wing , left-wing or centre - who would vote against that principle .
It is easy to agree on the principle that policies should contribute to reducing poverty by 50 % by 2010 - we could have said ' eliminate ' poverty while we were about it .
I feel it is too easy to reach agreement on objectives of this kind .
The problem arises - and it is a problem which we are failing to address - when it comes to defining options , taking decisions or calling for specific decisions to be taken .
It has already been observed that employment increases with the growth of the economy - as is shown by a number of recommendations which I fully endorse on the quality of employment , equal rights for men and women , jobs and so forth .
Since the labour market and policies relating thereto can encourage economic and employment growth in Europe , we need to introduce flexibility and liberalisation into the employment and employment agencies sector wholesale .
With regard to the tax burden , we need to take into consideration the burden of contributions for pensions systems .
Young workers - Germans , Italians and Europeans in general - are paying through unemployment for excessively large pensions to be provided for workers retiring too early .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the employment policies of the Member States should focus on clear priorities , taking into account the current economic climate , the requirements of an enlarged European Union and better implementation of the Lisbon strategy .
Lifelong learning , employment for the elderly and combating undeclared work are all priorities which must be emphasised , as the rapporteur , of course , rightly states .
Although it outlines the importance of common priorities , this report approaches certain areas less successfully . These areas are :
Firstly , the Stability Pact : applying the employment strategy is the responsibility of the Member States , who should ensure that sufficient financial resources are made available , bearing in mind the need for sound public finances in accordance with the broad economic policy guidelines and the Stability Pact .
The Stability Pact is an essential instrument for guaranteeing good public finance management on the part of the Member States and for ensuring sustainable growth and the smooth functioning of Economic and Monetary Union .
Reference to the Pact and compliance with its provisions is thus crucial to European employment strategy .
Secondly , immigration as a response to the overall job creation strategy should be strictly regulated .
Recruitment of immigrant workers should be done selectively .
Checks must be carried out to see if the conditions for entry , residence and employment prescribed by the relevant legislation have been fulfilled , in order to avoid uncontrolled immigration .
Illegal immigration into the Member States is the object of extremely uneven national legislation and has been on the increase in recent years , bolstered by the traffic in human beings and the activities of facilitators .
It should be left to the discretion of each Member State to define the type of qualifications needed , as well as the number of workers it intends to recruit , based on the needs of its labour market , its population trends and its ability to integrate immigrants .
Furthermore , the battle against undeclared work should be joined with renewed vigour , reducing labour costs and making the creation of new jobs less burdensome .
Thirdly , the definition of targets such as , for example , reducing unemployment or increasing the participation of women in the labour market , should be challenging but realistic , and the different starting points of the various Member States should be taken into account .
These aims should be thought of as progressive steps to take rather than as levels to attain .
Otherwise , we run the risk of their becoming unacceptable and badly implemented in national employment plans .
Finally , I would like to congratulate Commissioner Vitorino , who expressed very well the need for a balance between security and flexibility as essential factors for competitiveness and productivity in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , I too would like to thank the Commission for its proposal for guidelines and the Commissioner for his words .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur , for I feel that he has endeavoured in a short space of time to take into account all the different viewpoints in the House , without compromising on quality objectives .
I would like to focus on a number of considerations .
If we take into account the economic climate and the experience we have gained in recent years on the European employment strategy , it would appear that the Commission has already endeavoured in its proposals to define specific objectives which I consider to be particularly important because they are in line with the recommendations made by the Commission on the basis of the evaluation of national employment plans .
I therefore believe that this strategy is becoming increasingly specific .
If the Community institutions are to foster this tendency towards specific measures , we need firmer support from many Member States .
In this regard , I would like to focus on a number of points .
The Commission , the rapporteur and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs have defined precisely a number of aspects of the Commission 's communication , such as the need to invest in quality and services to make female employment a reality . In all the countries , some of them in particular , this aspect of the employment situation is distressing , in that there is both a high inactivity rate and a high unemployment rate .
Matters can be improved by providing training for women and the services necessary to make the market favourable to female employment .
The amendments adopted in committee are along these lines .
Then we need a more effective partnership at Member State level involving governments , national Parliaments and local authorities in their respective roles .
I feel these are tangible goals .
This is a point on which we all agree but which is incompatible with cutting taxes across the board , for we cannot have it both ways : either we have investment resources or we reduce taxation .
Mr President , the Treaty states that there must be guidelines concerning the Member States ' employment policy .
Even though I am very dubious about the value of EU guidelines , there is no point in discussing the whys and wherefores of them right now .
I shall therefore concentrate on the Commission 's proposed guidelines and , above all , comment on Mr Herman Schmid 's report , as it appears following the vote in committee .
There is much that is good in the Commission 's proposal , although even that is too detailed .
The debate in committee has led to further detailed requirements and measures having been added .
If guidelines are to be of any value , they must be firmly established in the relevant Member State .
It does not make sense to cite , as now in this proposal , an ever-increasing quantity of measures and detailed objectives .
At present , it is a question of 15 Member States ; tomorrow , of 25 .
Offering at least 33 % of children under three years of age childcare is , in my view , an issue that EU guidelines should have no bearing upon whatsoever .
Apart from the general defect of being too detailed , the report before us has the fault of containing points that I very much doubt could do any thing at all to help increase employment .
The rapporteur writes that responsibility for implementing a successful employment policy lies with the Member States .
That is quite true for , as long as the governments of the Member States are not themselves prepared to take the necessary measures to reform the labour market , employment will not significantly increase .
I am thinking mainly of reforms aimed at making it easier to employ staff , but also at reducing staff numbers .
It is unfortunately the case that , for a small company to venture to employ one further person , its managers must know that , if it were to become necessary , they could reduce the number of staff .
Germany is an example of what happens if a rigid labour market is not reformed .
Unemployment has increased very considerably , partly because of rigid labour law .
The fact is , too , that the longer the delay in reforming the labour markets , the more difficult the situation becomes .
It perhaps seems odd that , as a Swedish Moderate in this Chamber , I am going to refer to something said recently by the British Chancellor of the Exchequer , but what he said is worth quoting .
He said that structural reforms are needed if the European economy is to be given new impetus , that more trade liberalisation is required and , above all , a liberalisation of labour markets by means of fewer regulations and healthier levels of labour protection .
There are at present 13 million people within the EU who do not have any work to go to .
Chancellor Gordon Brown thought that flexibility was not a threat to full employment but the prerequisite for increased employment .
The guidelines should therefore be more overarching and concentrate on measures that , together with the economic policy guidelines , genuinely lead to economic growth and consequently to more people employed and thus to the provision of resources for things like education and health care .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur at the outset on his tremendous work on this report .
Given the short deadline , he has made a very reasonable and consensus-based approach towards getting an opinion from this Parliament that can be presented to the Council meeting .
Of course , we have a right to be consulted under the Treaty obligations and we should always utilise such opportunities to put forward the ideas that we as representatives of the citizens of the European Union wish to see promoted .
I have difficulty with some aspects of the report , in particular regarding the introduction of issues related to the Stability and Growth Pact .
I do not believe that we need to expand further on what the Commission has already said on this matter .
Ultimately our role and our aim should be to try and create more and better jobs for people and to ensure that the guidelines as laid down are more focused ; that they are flexible in the sense that they can respond to new opportunities which arise ; and that they are based on competitiveness to ensure that companies are encouraged to take on more people and not to move their production abroad or outside of the European Union .
One of the key areas with regard to creating more jobs , if you look at the empirical evidence , has been sound public finances with a proper tax regime , to ensure that people are rewarded more for their work and entitled to keep more of their money in their pockets , rather than being penalised for working .
This does not just apply to workers , it also applies to companies that employ those workers .
We have to ensure that the social partnership model , which has been so successful in creating industrial harmony , is maintained and strengthened .
We must also in this year , the European Year of Disabilities , take account of people with disabilities , some 70 % of whom are unemployed .
New innovative measures and research must be promoted to integrate people with disabilities into the labour market .
I commend this report to the House and also thank it for supporting my amendments to it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank the rapporteur for his proposals , which are supported by our group as well .
In our view , there is a need to put forward ambitious objectives and pragmatic specific measures , with new and innovative approaches and more local and regional initiatives - all of which you have included in your report .
For a long time , we have been passing resolutions demanding that the national parliaments be more involved - not only Denmark 's and Scotland 's , but those right across the European Union .
However , the fact that the European Employment Policy allows national objectives and decision-making leeway is another indicator of how astute it is .
What I would like to tell the honourable lady Member from Sweden is that the German labour market might well be in need of reform , but there is not one Member State of the European Union in which the removal of protection against dismissal has helped to create jobs .
I want to say , though , that there are two points on which we are critical of the Christian Democrats .
One , which has already been referred to , is Amendment No 62 .
The Commission has proposed the use of immigration policy to govern the way in which the potential labour becoming available through immigration is used .
I think there is a need for the Christian Democrats to face up to this fact and for this not to be taken , as it were , ad absurdum by means of special bilateral arrangements between the Member States , with conservatives remaining silent in the face of this practice .
We cannot support tax cuts across the board , and I find it regrettable that this amendment is being treated as the most important .
Europe 's entrepreneurs expect something different : their expectations are for the security that makes it possible to plan for the long term , for qualified workers , the best possible infrastructure , promotion of science and research , the weeding-out of rules and regulations , and investment .
There is a need for such measures , and they cannot be brought about by tax cuts across the board .
Mr President , the adoption of the guidelines on employment is of particular importance to Parliament , especially today with the Commission presenting a revised proposal with a limited number of objectives , which constitute the pillars of the European social model in the new economy .
In this light , the adoption of the rapporteur 's report by a broad majority in Plenary is not just the only way forward , but is also an obligation towards the European citizens whose interests we represent .
The initiative taken by the Commission appears to confirm the priority of quality competition , which is bound up with the quality of employment and the quality of public services .
The policy of promoting not just cheap labour but cheaper and cheaper labour , which the amendments by the PPE-DE will bring about , is a non starter because , while it brings about a gradual reduction in the standard of living , it also facilitates the survival of companies with low productivity and little growth capacity , as the rapporteur also rightly underlines .
So instead of insisting on the link with the stability pact , which restricts initiatives for interventions in the labour market and measures to modernise public services , without which they will be handed over to the private sector on a plate , we should be calling consistently for other guidelines .
Thus , we should be calling for maximum coordination with the European Charter for Small Enterprises , which places emphasis on promoting enterprises based on knowledge and innovation , and urging a rapprochement between industrial policy and the demands of the European social model .
Industrial policy to date , instead of following this direction , marginalises employment-related matters .
It would be a pity if the PPE-DE stood by its initial choices which , instead of resulting in the exploitation of the competitiveness of quality , which is the advantage of the European economy , insist on more and more exploitation of cheap labour .
Finally , I should like to congratulate the Commission , which is placing particular emphasis on very close , more active participation by the national parliaments and on the mobilisation of local societies , with corresponding , specific commitments to increase employment , an idea which I too have supported in the past .
In this way , we shall achieve not only a broadening of responsibilities on employment issues , but also the development of healthy competition between the individual regions of a country .


Mr President , I am going to use the time allocated to Mr Andria and Mr Mantovani too , who have asked me to express their regret because they have been detained in Italy by strikes and other such serious matters .
I shall briefly summarise their views too , insofar as I am able .
The task of the European ruling class , and the European Parliament in particular , is to rewrite the model of the social market economy , to modernise it , to revise it without reducing the social undertaking .
Job security must no longer be sought on the basis of acquired rights but through skills , hard work and lifelong learning .
Wage differentiation , which has consistently been advocated in theory but has often been disregarded in practice , must become a genuine goal for Parliament , which must specify clearly and resolutely the process to be followed to achieve it .
This commitment to reform must be upheld first and foremost by the active parties , in other words by all the social elements who will have to make responsible commitments to promoting training , innovation and flexibility , without , however , subsequently going back on them when the time comes to implement them .
The dialogue on the bargaining structure will have to reinforce both the company level and wage differentiation ; where the company level is reinforced , productivity is enhanced and individual contributions are appraised .
Clearly , in order to achieve these goals , it is necessary to match bargaining at national level with bargaining at company level .
In order to provide secure jobs , we need , however , above all , as has already been said , to boost investment , the real spearhead , especially in future initiatives targeting the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
Joint ventures are another way of boosting SMEs , which , we must not forget , provide over 90 % of jobs in Europe .
When applying flexibility , care must be taken to ensure that it does not become an easy option for certain companies which would like to exploit this solution by creating atypical jobs such as collaboration contracts , which do not represent a secure future , especially for young people .
If we abuse this instrument , we will be in danger of creating future generations of precarious , insecure workers , but also , above all , of creating low-income future pensioners , in other words poor future pensioners .
We must therefore avoid giving way to populism in these major reforms and endeavour to take resolute , practical , achievable steps forward .
Mr President , I too wish to thank Mr Herman Schmid for his constructive work on this report .
For the benefit of Commissioner Vitorino , I wish to mention a couple of amendments that we Christian Democrats , including myself , have been involved in wording .
It is a question of the demographic challenge which , in Stockholm in March 2001 , was identified as one of the Union 's most important issues for the future .
It is estimated that , by 2050 , the European Union will have 40 million more pensioners than at present and , thus , 40 million fewer people of working age .
This is stated in Amendment No 1 , as an important part of Mr Herman Schmid 's report .
I want to ask Mr Vitorino how he regards the crisis in the pensions system in relation to economic development and the survival of whole districts within the European Union against the background of the serious demographic trend .
It is encouraging that a number of amendments , including Amendments Nos 28 and 38 concerned with the reconciliation of family and professional life , are now part of Mr Herman Schmid 's report .
This is an incredibly important issue , but it is not good that Amendment No 43 states that work and family life will be reconciled notably through commitments to develop childcare services .
It should be more a question of children having the right to more time with their parents than of our necessarily having to develop a form of childcare that gives children less time with their parents .
Amendment No 9 is also important .
It is about the need to strengthen the taxpaying ethic , about competition on equal terms between companies and about stepping up the fight against undeclared working .
Allow me in conclusion to put in a good word for Amendment No 60 , which emphasises the value of families , family enterprises and the transition from one generation to the next .
If we are to do anything towards creating long-term jobs , the issue of how such transitions are carried out needs to be resolved .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.30 a.m.
The next item is the report ( A5-0172 / 2003 ) by Mr Hernández Mollar on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on the proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the EU-USA agreements on judicial cooperation in criminal matters and extradition ( ( INI ) 2003 / 2003 ) .
.
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Parliament , in particular Mr Hernández Mollar , the chairman of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , for this report on such an important and sensitive issue .
I welcome the fact that the draft agreements have been declassified and that the opportunity has been given to the European Parliament to examine them in parallel with the examination by national parliaments in the Member States .
One must recognise that these agreements under Articles 24 and 38 are negotiated by the Council .
The Commission is not the negotiator of these agreements in the external arena .
Therefore , in this debate the Commission participates as it is associated to the negotiating process , but the Council of Ministers has the final word .
We would like to recognise the efforts made by the Belgian , Spanish , Danish and now the Greek presidencies to launch these agreements following the decision taken by the European Council after the events of 11 September 2001 .
On the basis of this authorisation , and the directives for negotiations that were adopted by the Justice and Home Affairs Council , the Commission welcomes the fact that this consultation procedure should be concluded in time to allow for signature by the European Union and the United States of America during the summit at the end of this month .
Pursuant to the authorisation given by the Council to the presidency to negotiate the agreements with the United States in April last year , the Commission assisted in the negotiations from the beginning , so it is particularly well-placed to appreciate the real difficulties experienced therein .
We understood that the Commission 's role was to help to reach a positive result .
Like Parliament , in its draft recommendation , the Commission is of the opinion that stronger solutions would have been preferable on a number of points covered by these agreements .
I had the opportunity to have a constructive discussion on a number of the concerns raised by Parliament in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , together with the Greek Minister of Justice .
The Greek minister also discussed a number of these concerns in the debate that took place in plenary last month on the EU-US agreements .
Let me stress that the United States side did not get satisfaction on a number of points of major importance to them and which were strongly opposed by the Union , such as the extradition of European Union nationals and the limitations of the political offence exception to extradition .
We now need to make an overall assessment of the result of the negotiations .
One of the criteria for this assessment is the added value of a Union agreement compared with the situation that currently exists on the basis of bilateral agreements between Member States and the United States of America .
This assessment has to be made taking due account of the fact that this is , as the President mentioned , the very first Union agreement in the field of Justice and Home Affairs , and it will be a historical precedent .
In addition to the incontestable advantages that the agreements on extradition and mutual legal assistance with the United States will bring in terms of concrete judicial cooperation in criminal matters and the fight against organised crime and terrorism , I would focus on the following , trying to address some of the major concerns raised by this Parliament .
Regarding protection against the death penalty , the draft extradition agreement compares with the strongest anti-death penalty clauses that can be found in existing bilateral treaties , whether an agreement with a Member State or one with a candidate country .
This means that as far as all the other bilateral agreements are concerned , this anti-death penalty provision is stronger in the current European Union agreement than in the vast majority of others .
In addition it allows the invoking of all grounds for refusal available pursuant to a bilateral extradition treaty between a Member State and the United States , and will open the possibility of consultation in the event that constitutional principles or final judicial decisions binding upon a requested state may impede the fulfilment of an extradition .
This provision , combined with specific references in the recitals to individual rights , fair trial and an impartial tribunal , offers significant guarantees .
I would insist that Member States be bound by the European Convention on Human Rights and its protocols .
Nothing in these draft agreements should lead to decreased compliance with these international obligations .
It is also my deep conviction that the European Convention will conclude positively on the inclusion of the Charter of Fundamental Rights in the future constitution , thus giving it a legally binding and constitutional status .
As regards Article 10 of the draft extradition agreement , and in particular the situation of an extradition request that conflicts with a European arrest warrant , a Member State confronted with such a situation of conflicting requests shall take into account a number of criteria in order to take a decision that widely corresponds to the lists of such competing requests already provided by the framework decision creating the European arrest warrant .
The designation of the competent authority is left to the requested Member State .
This can be a judicial authority unless the existing bilateral treaty between the Member State in question and the United States foresees an executive authority .
In addition , the final wording of the agreement drafted very recently at the last negotiation session has improved in the sense that it better underlines the fact that the framework decision on the European arrest warrant could be amended in the global context of further European Union integration .
This might in turn lead to the adaptation of the agreement with the United States in line with the natural evolution of the legislation on the European arrest warrant .
Finally , regarding data protection provisions , the relevant provision in the draft mutual legal assistance agreement with the United States is modelled on the two most recent European texts : the European Union 's Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters of 2000 and the Council of Europe 's Convention on Cybercrime .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the agreements under discussion today are important and positive , as already pointed out by both the Commissioner and Mr Hernández Mollar , who has produced an excellent report on this matter on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
As has already been mentioned , this is the first time that extradition and legal cooperation agreements have been concluded between the European Union and a third country .
Closer cooperation between the United States and the European Union is also to be welcomed , since this will make the fight against international crime more effective , as well as providing appropriate protection for our democratic societies , our common values and our citizens .
I add my voice to those critical of the secrecy surrounding the negotiations , and of the Council 's attempt to classify the text of the agreements as confidential , thus excluding Parliament .
This attitude is incomprehensible , since we are dealing with something which is going to have a direct impact on the fundamental rights of our citizens .
Fortunately , the Council reconsidered this absurd and unacceptable classification .
Overall , we support the two agreements before us , but there are certain aspects which it is essential to safeguard .
Firstly , the treatment received by the United States in relation to the European arrest warrant must never be the same as the treatment given to Member States of the European Union , since the US is subject neither to Community law , nor to the Convention on Human Rights , nor even to European data protection legislation .
Secondly , any request for execution of a European arrest warrant or for attendance at the International Criminal Court should take precedence over requests for extradition to the United States .
Thirdly , there should be a guarantee that extradition to the United States cannot take place if the defendant could be sentenced to death , or tried in exceptional or military tribunals .
Fourthly , there should be an explicit reference to Article 6 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on European Union , as well as to the European Charter on Fundamental Rights .
Fifthly , a demand for effective and proportionate data protection provisions , to guarantee , at the very least , the same level of protection as that provided by the Council of Europe Convention .
I hope the necessary guarantees will be made in these areas when the agreements are signed at the European Union-United States Summit on 25 June .
Mr President , it obviously makes sense to smooth out the difficulties involved in making two sets of legal systems work together to catch criminals and terrorists .
Often in the field of law enforcement and intelligence different agencies are jealous of their patches and prerogatives , reluctant to share information because knowledge is power , and bureaucratic requirements must be examined critically .
However , it is another matter altogether to justify brushing aside legal safeguards , defendants ' rights and privacy concerns in the name of the war against terrorism .
We have objections to these agreements on grounds of both procedure and content .
As others have said , the degree of unwarranted secrecy imposed by the Council has been utterly scandalous .
I am sorry to see that the Council is not here today .
No adequate explanation has been given .
The only possible explanation is the wish to avoid accountability to Parliament .
The failure to consult the European Parliament formerly is a disgrace , and the justification for this democratic deficit - that the agreements fall under foreign rather than justice policy - is thin in the extreme .
I very much hope the new EU Constitution will stop this ever happening again because we will have future agreements of this kind .
I wish the European public could understand - and one day they will - that the real threat to their rights comes not from this Parliament or the Commission - the Community institutions - but from the arrogant , executive powers wielded in intergovernmental cabal by the Council .
I just hope Commissioner Vitorino is right that the preamble and the text will ensure that no extradited European citizen or resident will face the death penalty , and that no European will end up in Guantánamo Bay without charge or without trial or will face a military tribunal which has the power to impose a death penalty without appeal .
I also hope time will prove that the Member States ' obligations to the International Court are not compromised , because otherwise there really will be outrage in the European public .
We must solve the disgrace of Europeans in Guantánamo Bay before ratifying this agreement .
I do not have the confidence in the Council that I have in Commissioner Vitorino .
I am sorry the Council is not here today to hear our objections .
Mr President , my group has grave concerns about the agreement that the Council wishes to conclude with the United States .
Problems arising as a result of greater police and judicial cooperation are being glossed over for political reasons .
Greater cooperation does of course enable us to catch wrongdoers more effectively , and that is a good thing .
However , this cooperation has to be subject to strict conditions regarding the rights of suspects , because , otherwise , people 's trust in the authorities is undermined .
We must make sure that we do not shoot great holes in our rule of law in order to please the Wild West .
My concerns regarding the legal system of the United States extend beyond excrescences such as the death penalty and Guantánamo Bay .
My concerns go to the heart of the US system .
Upwards of 92 % of all convictions are based on plea bargains .
This means that , in more than 92 % of cases , evidence is not examined , but , rather , punishments are negotiated with suspects driven by the fear of absurdly severe sentences .
That is not a fair process , and indeed I welcome the reference in the resolution to the European Convention on Human Rights , because that prescribes a fair process .
Another positive aspect of the report by Mr Hernández Mollar is that it emphasises that there are alternatives to the extradition of European nationals to the United States , particularly with regard to crimes committed on European soil .
The United States just passes the evidence against a suspect on to the competent EU Member State , then we can try our citizens according to our own traditions , with our own guarantees , and people can serve their time close to home .
That is what I would call a testament to constructive cooperation between equal partners .

Mr President , Mr Hernández Mollar 's report is full of good intentions and we will no doubt approve it . It also , however , suffers from a most curious naivety .
How can we conclude legal agreements - or even discuss the law - with a state , the United States , which has no concept of or respect for the law , for the very notion of the law ?
How can we contemplate extraditing our nationals to a country , a state , which does not obey the same legal conventions as us , or does so less and less ?
That is the question asked by this report .
For , in the final analysis , we are negotiating with a state which enforces the death penalty , and to which we are thinking of extraditing our nationals ; a state which does not respect fundamental human rights , particularly in relation to anti-terrorist legislation ; a state which submits ever more cases to its military tribunals , so that we may perhaps see our own nationals judged by a US military tribunal ; a state whose personal data transfer legislation is in flagrant contravention of our laws .
Ultimately , we might ask ourselves , in view of all this , why we pass laws on these matters , and on many more besides , if we are then to put ourselves into the hands of a state which deliberately breaks those laws .
Lastly and most importantly , this state behaves like an ancient tribe , kidnapping our nationals , imprisoning them without even taking the trouble to charge them ( I am thinking , of course , of Guantánamo Bay , but I believe there are other examples ) and even , in all probability , indulging in a few acts of torture , sadly far from the prying eyes of any journalists .
In fact , the state in question does not respect the law , and , in my opinion , we do not have to honour any legal ties , or at any rate judicial or penal ones , with it .
I doubt , however , that the European Union will be capable of taking a firm stand , since it has sprung this trap with its own hands and behaves towards the US with a type of passivity which will sooner or later end up by leading us into ruinous situations .
I might add that we are seeing the first signs of some examples of this .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate our chairman , Mr Hernández Mollar , on the contortions he has had to perform in order to bring this text to plenary .
It has not been an easy task .
If we are to understand the importance and , above all , the scope of the agreement , we must remember what prompted this initiative .
It was not the emotion immediately after September 11 so much as the urgent need , following those tragic events , to create a network to monitor and combat the terrorist organisations operating throughout the world .
To quote the resolution adopted by Parliament in December 2001 , any agreement on judicial and police cooperation signed by the European Union must respect the Convention on Human Rights .
The primary concern - as has already been said - is not to permit the extradition of prisoners who would be liable to face the death penalty in the United States .
Now , without prejudice to this principle , I cannot see what other concerns there might be .
We feel it would be excessive in any case to presume to make the implementation of this agreement conditional upon an undertaking to do something about the situation at the Guantánamo base .
We can demand clarity and transparency from the United States with regard to what is happening at that base , but we must not hinder the progress of an agreement whose effect is much wider than that , which is , in other words , in the interests of world security , not just US security .
That is why we voted against the amendment on Guantánamo in committee , seeing it as a separate issue which can , if necessary , be addressed on its own .
As for accusing the United States of being a country which fails to respect human rights , all I can say is I would not want to be the council for the prosecution . We must remember that the United States was the first genuine democracy to be created in the world in the history of civilisation .
My opinion is that some views are to be considered to be decidedly partisan .
The agreement is a major step forward in combating not just terrorism but financial crime , the drug trafficking multinationals , money laundering , cyber crime and the trafficking of human beings too .
These may appear to be unrelated issues , but they are , in actual fact , linked by the urgent need for resolute , timely , unconditional action .
Mr President , Mr Vitorino said at the beginning of this debate that it is important and sensitive legislation .
Nobody would dispute that .
Equally nobody would deny that in today 's climate there is a need for strong international cooperation , sharing ideas , thoughts , data and intelligence .
But I hope that Council will look at the report of this debate and will not use this legislation to ride roughshod over accepted values and practices in the European Union .
Mr Hernández Mollar , the rapporteur , said that we cannot accept standards lower than those we would demand ourselves in the European Union .
Mr Coûteaux a few minutes ago echoed these ideas .
I believe that we are not just talking about Europeans - we are looking at the fundamental rights of people in the United States too .
A number of Members in this House have serious reservations about that , and that is why we are concerned about some elements in this piece of legislation .
President Bush has promised that the United States will always stand firm for equal justice .
If that is true , he and others must call an immediate halt to the practice of executions in the United States .
Over the last 25 years over 840 people have been executed following many of the murders in the United States .
Murders are carried out equally by white people and black people , and yet some 15 times as many black Americans have been executed as white people .
Black people are often tried before all-white juries , so we should have great concern about any Europeans being extradited to the United States and we must question even more the whole American legal system that allows that .
My second point regards Guantánamo Bay , Camp Delta , a kind of US-run gulag for foreign captives held indefinitely without being charged .
Mr Santini says we should leave that to another time .
Mr Santini , your PPE-DE Group voted against this in committee , and you represent the Christian Democrat party .
I have looked at all the details of Guantánamo Bay and I cannot see that it satisfies any Christian or democratic principles .
I am surprised that you voted against it in committee .
I hope you will think again when you come to vote on it in this vote today .
Mr President , there are three fundamental questions to be answered : does this agreement make the fight against crime any more effective , will it strengthen the European Judicial Area , and is there any added value with regard to guarantees for the accused ?


These questions cannot yet be answered in the affirmative , in my opinion .
That is partly due to the procedure followed .
Commissioner Vitorino said that this is the first Union agreement .
It is a milestone , but milestones require a different procedure .
Back-room discussions , confidential documents and a lack of appreciation of the European Parliament and the national parliaments - that is not the stuff milestones are made of .
The fault for this lies entirely with Europe .
The Justice and Home Affairs Council deserves to be graded an emphatic ' unsatisfactory ' .
It beggars belief that here in Europe we have to fight for fundamental democratic rights such as parliamentary scrutiny .
The subject matter of the agreement also raises a lot of questions .
In itself there is nothing unusual about this , but , that being the case , one has to be able to discuss them .
For example , who ultimately takes the decision on extradition : the judges or the Ministries of Foreign Affairs ?
Who is extradited ?
How do we deal with the system of plea bargains ?
Mrs Buitenweg went into detail about that .
For example , an in-depth analysis of the impact of the recent Homeland Security Act on data provided by the Union or its agencies is lacking .
There is a risk of undermining the International Criminal Court .
There is still no clarity as regards legal aid or the use of data for other purposes .
Then there is the point about Guantánamo .
Various speakers - Mr Hernández Mollar , Chairman of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , in particular - have spoken wise words on this subject .
Something really has to be done about this .
In short , this is an agreement that cannot just be rushed through .
The Council started in plenty of time , but has systematically had its back turned to both the national parliaments and the European Parliament , in contrast to the United States , which at least still consults its Congress .
Is this a milestone , then ?
Not yet .
The agreements between the United States and the EU are , of course , really about integrating the EU countries ' and the United States 's criminal law and rules of criminal procedure or , at any rate , essential aspects of these .
The agreements should provoke protests from any serious politician specialising in the law .
These agreements represent the current low point in the development of the EU 's legal policy .
In the Nordic countries , specialists in the field thought that the low point had been reached with the two framework decisions concerning the European arrest warrant and measures for combating terrorism , but matters are now still worse .
Note that the only professional investigation implemented by the institutions of the EU concerning these crucial issues of legal policy are open to serious criticism on the grounds of principle due to the fact that , in the context of the rights that are a crucial part of our democratic basis of values , the EU 's acts violate a range of basic principles in the fields of criminal law and procedure .
We are concerned here with what is termed the EU network of independent experts in basic rights which , on 31 March of this year , issued a comprehensive report on , as they put it , the balance between freedom and security .
Has anyone within the EU system attended to the criticism by the group of experts that the acts compromise legal certainty ?
Definitely not .
As I say , these agreements make matters still worse .
The EU system and the Member States will now , in the first place , accept the extradition of citizens of the Member States for criminal prosecution and imprisonment in the United States , which is a banana republic in terms of legal policy .
Quite a few speakers have referred to the scandal in Guantánamo Bay , where EU citizens are being detained and mistreated under circumstances that decisively violate international law and basic legal principles .
It is incomprehensible that an agreement can be entered into with a juridico-political banana republic .
The American investigation services will , moreover , subsequently be permitted to operate within the Member States .
A year 's secret negotiations were conducted in advance and , as the Council put it , protecting the Council 's negotiations was a more important interest than democratic scrutiny .
Can we sink any deeper ?
I also refer to the minority opinion on the report , which I have been a party to issuing on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left .
Mr President , Commissioner , I regret that the Council is not present , because the Council is the one that does the negotiating , and it could at least listen to what Parliament has to say .
Clearly there is reason to go on the offensive against internationally organised terrorism and internationally organised crime by means of cooperation .
However , the question facing this Parliament at this moment is : have the conditions under which this cooperation is to take place been satisfactorily fulfilled ?
I think that Parliament - through the voices of the Chairman of the Committee , Mr Hernández Mollar , and very large numbers of fellow Members - has indicated the minimum conditions which are required by Parliament and which really must be fulfilled .
For example , there must be no cooperation with exceptional or military courts , and no extradition if this could lead to the death penalty .
Parliaments must be consulted on the procedure for concluding the agreement and regarding the scrutiny of its implementation .
I have heard quite a few questions , and I concur fully with these , for example regarding the unilateralism which is displayed by the United States in its foreign policy and which may result in extraditions , too , displaying a unilateral aspect , and in European countries having very little to expect in return .
Mr President , the Hernández Mollar report provides an excellent commentary on the content of the extradition and readmission agreements between the US and the EU .
The report rightly supports the two agreements , but the tone of the resolution with regard to the United States is too critical .
It is true that the legal systems of the EU Member States and the US are different , but the US , too , is a democratic nation that safeguards human rights .
The sense of moral superiority exuded by the resolution and this debate , too , is therefore inappropriate .
Finally , I should like to say a few words about democratic scrutiny , another target of criticism in the resolution .
The agreements have to be approved by all the national parliaments before they can be ratified .
If , say , their content contravenes the existing bilateral treaties between individual Member States and the US or the human rights conventions , I am confident that the national parliaments will be capable of exercising their democratic rights .
There certainly will be scrutiny , therefore .
Mr President , the present text of the resolution leaves nothing to be desired as regards clarity .
The European Parliament 's message is : the draft agreements must not be concluded unless the Council removes some fundamental objections on the part of Parliament .
I continue to hope that the Presidency will duly take these objections into account , as , after all , it is obliged to do on the basis of the European Convention .
It is the first time that the EU as such is concluding an agreement with a third country regarding judicial cooperation in criminal matters , but it is setting a bad example .
In future , the Council should involve the elected representative bodies of the Member States and the European Parliament in the negotiations at an earlier stage .
The texts of the draft agreements have been kept secret for too long .
That is inadmissible , especially as fundamental civil rights seem to be squandered under the pretext of the United States 's fight against crime .
Stating this fact has nothing to do with a sense of moral superiority or anti-American sentiment .
The administration of justice in the United States does not provide sufficient guarantees for the rights of suspects .
The negotiated procedures common in criminal proceedings mean that it is not precluded that suspects may be convicted although innocent , or convicted on insufficient evidence .
This situation is exacerbated by the new legislation and practices in the United States since 11 September .
If the European Union wishes to take its own legal protection seriously , it must only conclude the two agreements with the United States once the guarantees called for by the vast majority in Parliament have been incorporated into them .
The Council has to redo its homework , and it is an illustration of the weakness of the democratic system in Europe that the Council has up to now been able to take the liberty of ignoring the views of the elected representative body - but of course we are not stupid .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although these agreements on judicial and police cooperation are extremely important , our values must still be respected .
I would like to ask two questions .
Given that the death penalty still exists in the USA , even if we conclude an agreement that would prevent it from being carried out , the problem remains : the death penalty is counter to our values .
Given that , if crimes are committed , there is a hierarchy between US citizens , who cannot be tried before the International Criminal Court , and European citizens , who can be extradited to the USA in order to be tried before the US judiciary , such discrimination is also counter to our principles .
The case of the Guantánamo Bay prisoners is the most flagrant illustration of the fact that the USA does not respect fundamental rights , insofar as it has brought these men before special courts and completely violated their right to defence .
They are suffering degrading , inhumane treatment , counter to international law and to the universal declaration of human rights .
In these conditions , do you truly think it possible for the Union to accept extradition to the USA of any individual , regardless of their nationality ?
In conclusion , what guarantees do we have that the USA will in fact respect an agreement signed with the Union , when it does not respect its international obligations , ignores international law , and considers itself above the law and entitled to take unilateral decisions as shown in its attack on Iraq ?
Mr President , the events of 11 September were tragic and deeply unforgivable .
No one wishes to see them repeated , but it would be almost as tragic to see them exploited for the purposes of violating fundamental human rights and guarantees of legal certainty by which , as EU citizens , we are normally protected .
As the minority opinion rightly points out , the agreements between the EU and the United States do not merely contain dubious measures for combating terrorism ; the agreements are a slippery slope towards extradition and legal cooperation on criminal matters generally .
According to the agreements , European citizens who are alleged to have committed a crime carrying a sentence of at least one year may be extradited to the United States - a country that , as many have pointed out , practises the death penalty .
In no way can I support the thinking behind these international agreements , and I am therefore voting against the report , but I should like to call for support for the amendments tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left .
Mr President , I wish to say that it is indeed infuriating that the Council is absent from a debate such as this , especially when the European Parliament had already given the Council advance warning during the previous Plenary .
It would be good if the Commission and the Council were to pay attention when the European Parliament gives advance warning , especially on such important issues .
Perhaps the Council 's only justification for not being here would be if its President-in-Office were locked away somewhere reading the Amnesty International report for 2003 , which tells us that the big threat to rights today are the measures being taken by the United States at global level on the pretext of 11 September in the aim of undermining and withdrawing citizens ' democratic and other rights .
The case we are examining now in connection with the agreements on judicial cooperation and extradition is an export from the United States of restrictions on rights , notably on the question of the death penalty .
The United States are exporting them to us and we , with no shame whatsoever and , unfortunately , with a Greek Presidency , are importing them under these agreements .
I should like to ask Commissioner Vitorino to give us his opinion .
Commissioner , as long as you are here and are not yet Secretary General of ? ? ? ? , why in your opinion in Article 13 , which refers to the question of a request for a person who may face the death penalty to be extradited , does the agreement read : ' the request for extradition may be denied ' by the European Union to the United States of America rather than ' will be denied ' ?
Why ?
Please explain it to us in terms we can understand .
. Mr President , in this debate the Commission acted like an amicus curiae because it was not the negotiator , it assisted the successive Council presidencies in their negotiations .
Therefore , I will just try to clarify some of the points raised and give the Commission 's opinion on those points .
I shall begin with Article 13 .
I shall try to make myself clear .
The US-EU agreement is a bilateral agreement that regulates the relationship between the European Union and the United States of America .
It does not regulate the relationship between the Member States of the European Union among themselves or the obligations that Member States have under other international legal instruments .
All the Member States have subscribed to the European Convention on Human Rights and to the specific protocol that forbids the death penalty .
This means that , acting in accordance with their international obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights , Member States will refuse extradition where the death penalty is concerned .
That does not derive from an obligation between the European Union and the United States of America .
It derives directly from the obligation of the Member States to be in line with the European Convention on Human Rights , with the protocol and , I hope , with the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union that will have constitutional status and be legally binding after its inclusion in the new Constitutional Treaty .
When it comes to the International Criminal Court , I would draw your attention to the fact that Article 10 of the agreement does not apply to the International Criminal Court because that court is not a state and Article 10 only regulates the criteria to be used when there is simultaneously , in regard to a same person , a conflicting request by a third state - like the United States of America - and by a European Union Member State .
It does not deal with requests from the International Criminal Court .
Therefore , nothing prevents the Member States from deciding what they want to do as far as a request from the International Criminal Court is concerned , irrespective of any bilateral agreement with the United States of America .
When it comes to the European arrest warrant as such , I can even agree with Parliament .
However , unfortunately , the Council did not adopt the Commission 's proposal on the primacy of the European arrest warrant .
Therein lies the problem .
We are not talking today about a fully comprehensive primacy of the European arrest warrant over any other request for extradition .
It does not exist .
The framework decision on the European arrest warrant already recognises that when there is a demand under a European arrest warrant and a simultaneous demand for extradition by a third country , there are a number of criteria that will have to be taken into consideration in order to decide which demand has primacy .
So we are not changing the legal system of the European Union .
The Commission regrets that this primacy was not recognised in the past when the Council adopted the European arrest warrant .
However , today this primacy does not exist and therefore cannot be affected by the terms of a bilateral agreement with the United States .
What we were careful to say was that the possibility of recognising in the future the primacy of the European arrest warrant could not be undermined or limited by this kind of bilateral agreement .
There is a specific provision on the revision of this kind of bilateral agreement with the United States in case we decide to recognise the primacy of the European arrest warrant in the future .
I hope that sooner or later we will do that .
Finally , on the matter of special courts . It must be said that the key issue for me - and I have always said this to Parliament - is not the nature of the court , it is not the question of special courts as such - even some Member States have special courts in the European Union .
The question is one of due and fair process and guarantees , so that extradition is only granted where there are guarantees that the requesting Member State will follow a due and fair process .
There are two recitals in the agreements that address this issue .
The first one concerns due regard for the rights of individuals and the rule of law ; the second one concerns the guarantees and the respective legal systems which provide for the right to a fair trial of an extradited person .

Above all , there is Article 16a on non-derogation , which in paragraph 1 maintains all grounds for refusal relating to a matter not governed by this agreement available under a bilateral extradition treaty in force and which in paragraph 2 calls for consultation where the constitutional principles of the requested state may pose impediments to the fulfilment of its obligation to extradite .
In my interpretation , everything that might be considered as a demand for extradition to a court where the rule of due process is not respected can give leverage to the application of this Article 16a on non-derogation .
Finally , I sincerely hope that in the future Constitution we will have specific provisions not only on consultation of Parliament concerning these kinds of agreements , which will become more frequent in the future , but also concerning the competence of the European Court of Justice to guarantee the full compliance of these agreements with the future Constitution of the European Union .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.30 a.m.
The next item is the report ( A5-0137 / 2003 ) by Mrs Roure on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on the proposal from the Commission with regard to the adoption of a Council directive ( COM ( 2002 ) 548 C5-0502 / 2002 2002 / 0242 ( CNS ) ) on the conditions of entry and residence of third-country nationals for the purpose of study , vocational training or voluntary service .
Before we embark on the debate , I would like to ask you all to keep strictly to your speaking time , or otherwise we will have difficulties when it comes to the votes .
. ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin , first of all , by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Roure , for the work she has done , and by thanking her for the admirable spirit of cooperation she has shown in preparing this important report .
With this text , which complements the other three proposals , on family reunification , economic immigration , and the status of long-term residents , the Commission brings to a close the legislative work aimed at laying the foundations of a joint legal immigration policy , since we have decided not to table a proposal designed to cover all individuals not included under the previous proposals .
I welcome the fact that Parliament has responded to the Commission by adopting this report so quickly .
This proposal targets migration by third-country nationals for the purpose of studies .
This is a special type of immigration to the extent that it is temporary and lasts no longer , in principle , than the educational course itself . It also brings reciprocal benefits for both the countries of origin and the host countries , not to mention , of course , the migrants themselves , who profit directly from it .
This proposal integrates immigration policy but should also be viewed in the context of Community action in the field of education .
Clearly , our aim is to promote migration for educational purposes , above all by accepting the greatest possible number of third-country students into higher education .
The proposal for a directive was devised in this spirit .
The entry conditions anticipated in it were rendered as objective as possible , in order to guarantee the quick and easy processing of applications . They are also phrased clearly and thoroughly so that the Member States can combat attempts to abuse them .
This is also , I believe , an innovative proposal which fits into the context of the growing internationalisation of education , especially the recognition of students ' right to move to another Member State to continue their studies , after previously being admitted into a first European Union Member State .
The proposal also covers the vocational training sector , setting entry conditions for unremunerated trainees such as those who come to take up a placement with a company .
It is thus designed to complement the proposal for a directive on the admission of workers that covers remunerated traineeships .
Following meetings held with non-governmental organisations , provisions on secondary school pupils and volunteers arriving in the European Community were introduced into our proposal .
The aim is to facilitate exchange programmes for secondary school pupils .
Encouraging the discovery of culture by pupils who will later be tempted to return as higher education students will reap enormous benefits for the Community .
In addition , a provision regulating the admission of volunteers was added to the proposal , protecting such individuals from a potential legal loophole .
It must be obvious that the Commission did not lose sight of public security considerations .
The proposal contains a public order and security clause providing Member States with enough room to manoeuvre for them to take precautions against the terrorist threat , in particular .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , by way of introduction to my speech , I would like to thank most sincerely all the shadow rapporteurs from all the groups .
Thanks to the work we have carried out together , we can send a strong signal in this highly sensitive field .
I would also thank the Commission for its support , which was particularly welcome .
It is vital that our countries offer an appropriate welcome to foreign students , just as it is vital to have a common policy on this welcome .
In this way we can contribute in a positive manner to the training of future executives in third countries and increase cooperation with these countries in terms of education in order to meet the challenge of the internationalisation of teaching .
This proposal for a directive would make it possible to achieve significant progress that we can all support .
We would point out that a legal basis has at last been provided for volunteers . We would also point out that this instrument might enable us to catch up with the United States , where residential study programmes are broadly encouraged and facilitated .
We are entering into a strategy that aims to increase cooperation with third countries in terms of teaching as set out , for example , in the Erasmus World programme .
The votes in committee allowed a few clarifications to be made and I shall now cite some of these .
We would call for the introduction into the directive of researchers , who are no longer students but do not carry out paid work .
We would also emphasise that we wanted to contribute to the fight against brain drain from South to North .
Receiving third-country nationals for study purposes must not lead to an increase in brain drain from these countries .
We would similarly like to see an improvement in procedural guarantees and we therefore propose reducing the deadline for notifying applicants of decisions on applications for admission or renewal from 90 days to 60 days .
We also propose greater flexibility concerning the student residence permit .
Where the study programme is shorter than one year but longer than nine months , like many programmes , it would be a shame not to grant a one-year residence permit to enable students to work during the holidays preceding or following the study programme in order to earn some of the money required for their stay , or to improve their knowledge of their host country for a few weeks .
The proposal for a directive grants students and unpaid researchers the possibility of working for a maximum of 10 to 20 hours per week .
This right is essential in order to allow third-country nationals to boost their income in order to live decently .
Furthermore , with regard to unpaid researchers , I believe it is very important for trade union representatives to be informed of their specific situation in order to be able to monitor compliance with the provisions of the directive .
Withholding the right to work in the first year of residence or withdrawing the right to work if students do not make sufficient progress in their studies is unjustifiable and would tend to encourage illegal employment and exploitation of these nationals .
Where there is insufficient progress in studies , attested to by the teaching establishment , the Member State could possibly have the option of reducing the number of working hours so that the student could devote more time to their studies .
That is why I believe the amendment tabled to that effect to be satisfactory .
We have the concerns of some Member States about the possible effects of the right to mobility and the right to work granted to students .
I understand these concerns , but the proposal for a directive itself contains responses to this , in particular with regard to the mobility of students , which is very clearly defined , with specific conditions , in Article 7 .
Thus , the proposed directive does not apply to the mobility of students wishing to exchange student status for immigrant worker status .
This status , granted by a working residence permit , is the subject of the Terrón i Cusí report that we adopted in plenary last February .
A change in status from student to immigrant worker is of course possible , but is outside the scope of the directive in question .
We would point out that the Commission is simultaneously for an open policy with regard to the admission of students from third countries , in accordance with the wishes of the Member States , and for a policy of firmness with regard to persons or networks which voluntarily abuse the system .
I therefore believe , ladies and gentlemen , that we should seize the opportunity to send a strong message to the Council calling for it swiftly to reach an agreement on this important matter in order to ensure a welcome that is worthy of our Member States .
Mr President , I should first like to thank Mrs Roure , the rapporteur , for her hard work .
In particular , I should like to pay tribute to the great effort she made to reach a consensus across the political groups .
As stated previously , this Commission initiative supplements others regulating immigration for reasons of employment , self-employment or otherwise .
It also supplements the directive on family reunification .
In so doing it contributes to approximation of national legislation in this area , as recognised at the Tampere European Council .
Students enjoy ever-greater mobility .
They are always on the go , and third-country student exchanges certainly contribute to our cultural enrichment .
It would therefore also be beneficial to promote exchange visits by European Union students to third countries , although this is not the aim of this directive .
It is undoubtedly beneficial for Europe if third-country students undertake part of their studies here .
Europe certainly gains , but it is also important to ensure those students receive the best training so that they will be able to make a useful contribution to the development of their countries of origin .
Whenever there is discussion of immigration from developing countries it is always stated that promoting growth and development is the best way of combating illegal immigration .
I therefore share the concern expressed by the rapporteur .
I believe the European Union must grant entry to immigrants wishing to study here .
It is however essential for those students to return to their countries of origin on completion of their studies . They should be able to put the knowledge they have acquired to good use .
We must not be party to creaming off the most able individuals from developing countries .
Turning to the entry requirements we are currently considering , namely specific requirements to regulate immigration for study purposes or for volunteering , we should take account of the circumstances of each Member State .
This is stated in the Commission 's proposal .
A monitoring system is called for , to help combat illegal trafficking networks and exploitation in the workplace .
Consequently , I support the Commission 's proposal to grant Member States authority to order the expulsion of a migrant for reasons of public order , or to refuse to renew a residence permit .
Immigration for study purposes needs to be regulated to prevent ghost centres from springing up .
The latter could then set up illegal immigration networks .
It is important to ascertain that the higher education or vocational training institutions are legally recognised .
In addition , these centres should be in a position to guarantee quality learning for the students .
In the case of apprentices , it is also important to ensure that they can gain practical experience in specialised centres or companies .
Care should be taken to ensure that entry permits for apprentices do not become a cover for illegal employment .
The centres need to be properly equipped too .
Turning to residence permits , it is certainly appropriate to be able to renew a residence permit for student exchanges when all the conditions have been met .
This would allow students to complete more than one academic year in the same institution .
The period of residence granted could even exceed the duration of the studies , though as Mrs Roure stated , a limit must nonetheless be set .
My group tabled an amendment providing for a period of residence of one year if the higher education course was of nine months ' duration .
That is the usual length of an academic year
In addition , safeguards or restrictions applying to students who fail to make satisfactory progress in their studies must also be put in place .
Failure to do so would amount to opening the floodgates to students whose sole intention was to come to work .
There would be little incentive to make good progress on the courses of study .
My group has therefore also tabled an amendment allowing Member States to reduce the period in which students may work if they do not make satisfactory progress in their studies .
The rapporteur has included in the report a number of amendments aimed at ensuring that this directive covers third-country nationals who are unpaid researchers .
I am not opposed to the idea .
It might however be appropriate to have a specific Commission initiative on the subject .
Nonetheless , it is certainly the case that unpaid research and vocational training could be dealt with in a similar way .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Roure for the work she has carried out , and to underline what Mr Oreja Arburúa has just said about ensuring that the measures we are about to approve benefit their intended targets and are not cynically exploited .
I would also like to remind you of the Lisbon strategy , approved at the European Council on 24 March 2000 , in which the challenges facing the Union in the new knowledge-based economy were set out .
In that strategy , mention was already made of emerging teaching , research and training needs , which must not be confined within the Union 's geographical borders . At the same time , it is necessary to ensure that every one of these areas exerts a potential attraction all over the world , as befits Europe 's extraordinary cultural and scientific heritage .
It is thus the responsibility of the European Union and the Member States to implement policies which attract third-country students .
We therefore welcome this proposal , which is another step towards approximating national legislation on admission and residence conditions for third-country nationals , the final goal being to create a comprehensive legal framework regulating admissions on the basis of the reasons for immigrants ' visits .
The internationalisation of education and the increased mobility of students is in line with the aim of developing quality education , as laid out in Article 149 of the Treaty Establishing the European Community . It helps in promoting inter-cultural understanding , energising European educational systems and attaining high-quality teaching standards .
For all these reasons , I think that the Commission 's proposal is quite positive .
It constitutes a forward step in strengthening cooperation with third countries and in developing that quality education .
The admission of third-country nationals for the purposes of studies , vocational training or voluntary service has the peculiar distinction of being temporary and independent of the host State 's labour market .
Mr President , the proposals presented to us aim to encourage further the entry of immigrants into the European Union .
The most obvious example of this is the last report concerning the right to family reunification , the Fourtou report , in which the concept of family had become unrecognisable , such was the extent to which it had been extended and denatured .
In its frenzy to allow needy foreigners from all over the world into a Europe that it would like to be respectful of human rights and to have a humanist , not to say humanitarian , vocation , the Commission is planning the death of nations by drowning and suffocation .
It should be noted , however , that this report , even though it supplements the measures that have already been presented with regard to immigration for the purposes of employment and family reunification , does not take the same approach .
It concerns students and school pupils who would enter the Union in order to study .
In this regard , nonetheless , we need to establish the length of stay , methods of monitoring their studies , and procedures for non-renewal of the student residence permit .
This exchange and this form of cooperation between Europe and third countries is clearly a source of intellectual enrichment between students of the country of origin and the host country .
Should we not , however , devote our efforts more to aid to development in less advantaged countries , in order to allow these countries to train their elite at home and keep them there , in order to prevent brain drain , which , unfortunately for them , is often inevitable ?
Of course , this would require a genuine cooperation policy with disadvantaged third countries and a sea change in immigration policy in Brussels .
Sadly , we are far from achieving this .
Mr President , this is a very timely report .
We know the importance of the entry of third-country nationals for temporary periods of study , which brings enormous benefits and advantages for the host country and the student alike .
The number of students undertaking such international exchanges is greater than ever and demand continues to grow .
This must be welcomed by all sides , apart from the previous speaker .
Indeed we need to put into place measures to ensure that the European Union continues to remain a centre of excellence in this field .
I congratulate the rapporteur on this report .
It sets a broad framework to encourage third-country nationals to enjoy the best educational facilities available in Member States without over-prescribing and over-regulating .
Common practices to facilitate the movement of third-country nationals can only be a good thing .
However , I am afraid certain elements of this proposal are problematic for my country , the United Kingdom .
Colleagues will be aware that the United Kingdom and the English language have a magnetic appeal for huge numbers of students , not just from European Union countries , but from all over the world .
Whilst this is welcomed and understandable , it creates special challenges , not least of which are the proposals here and how they affect the national minimum wage in the United Kingdom .
The national minimum wage is one of the greatest steps forward in the United Kingdom since 1997 .
It requires employers not to take on third-country nationals unless they are paid at least the going rate for the job .
Unfortunately aspects of this report , referring to volunteers , undermine the minimum wage in the United Kingdom , which seeks to protect the rights of both migrants and nationals , ensuring that those engaged on a voluntary basis , without adequate conditions of service , are not there in place of a full- or part-time worker .
The concerns are specific to the United Kingdom .
In general the report is balanced and sensible .
I shall be voting for it in the hope that the UK will be joining later on , as in other cases .
Mr President , Commissioner , I shall adopt a technical approach , but please also allow me to make some more general comments .
The Europe of the future must become a land of exchange , of meetings and mixing .
What could be more important than knowing our neighbours , their culture and their language ?
In any case , that is what we say every morning .
For fifty years , we have been building a multicultural Europe , not a one-sided Europe .
Our Europe , that melting pot of cultures , languages and people , is possible thanks to free movement and study programmes .
Furthermore , we would like to build a Europe based on knowledge and lifelong learning .
However , a knowledge-based Europe can only exist through exchanges , in particular exchanges with third countries .
As the Nobel Prize-winner Octavio Paz so rightly wrote , ' every culture is born of mixing , meeting and confrontation ; quite the opposite , it is isolation that destroys civilisations ' .
Thanks to Mrs Roure 's excellent report , we have the privilege of enabling young people from all over the world to come to this old Europe of ours in order to learn a language , study , or hone and share their knowledge .
As Mrs Roure so clearly pointed out , knowledge-sharing is a source of enrichment both for immigrants and for countries of origin and host countries .
By allowing easier , more homogenous access for students , researchers and volunteers , we are also allowing Europe and our fellow citizens to enrich and share their knowledge and experiences .
We cannot , therefore , close our doors to all these people who wish to learn , share and understand .
All the conditions must be met in order to allow third-country nationals to come to Europe to train or hone their knowledge , because knowledge is the only thing that increases when shared .
. ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I know that we are late for the vote , and will therefore be very brief .
I want to thank Mrs Roure for her excellent report .
I want to express the Commission 's preference for not including rules for researchers in this directive , since Mr Busquin and I intend this autumn to present a general proposal on third-country researchers in the European Union . The Commission will consider further the rapporteur 's proposals on brain drain , the stand-still clause and on reducing the decision period from 90 to 60 days .
Finally , I would encourage Parliament to seek a broad consensus in favour of adopting Amendment No 37 , on conditions of access to work .
Thank you , Commissioner Vitorino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.30 a.m.

Mr President , on a point of order , yesterday in order to come to Strasbourg I left my home at 6 a.m. , flew to Dublin , flew to London , flew to Paris and flew to Strasbourg , arriving at 6 p.m.

My point is that Air France has cancelled direct flights from Britain to Strasbourg which means that it is now enormously difficult for Members from Britain or Ireland to come here unless they take the whole day to do so .
I could go to America and back in the same time !
For that reason the time has come for this Parliament to consider whether or not it can recreate direct access to Strasbourg .
If not , then it will have to relocate to a place where it can do so and be more efficient .
Mr Hume , personally , I very much appreciate your remarks because I come across the same problems myself .
To add insult to injury I was even stopped by the police for speeding on my way here this week .
As far as I am aware the Strasbourg authorities are currently looking into the matter .
I hope that it will be resolved before too long .
I believe that the more pressure that is brought to bear , the better the result will be .
Mr Evans , that message will certainly be passed on to the President of Parliament .
I hope we can look at it within the Bureau .
Mr President , although I feel it is legitimate for Mr Hume to raise a practical issue , the need to improve air connections , and I support his request , I also find it shocking that a Member of Parliament should challenge the right to strike in the countries of the European Union .
I would point out that this case is not specific to France .
On 13 May , Austria experienced its first national strike in fifty years , on the same subject : pension protection . I welcome this .
If we want to remedy the mistrust that currently separates the European institutions from the citizens , therefore , we should not follow Mr Evans ' bad example .
Quite the opposite , we should show solidarity with our fellow citizens .
Mr President , I must ask for an oral amendment to be made that has been negotiated and discussed with the political groups .
Instead of having the quantitative targets found in two of the clauses , that is to say instead of writing 50 % etc , we just want to write ' significant reduction ' .
This is noted also in the voting list .
Mr President , criticism has already been expressed this morning of the ways in which strikes are bringing life in France to a standstill .
Although , along with the criticism , there has also been sympathy , I do not comprehend how it is that strikes in France are a reason for this House 's air conditioning not working .
All morning , it has been quite impossible to do any work in the offices on the side of the building facing the sun .
As far as the current temperature in the Chamber is concerned , the union probably would not allow work to be done under these conditions .
( Applause )
I will ensure that the college of Quaestors is aware of what you have mentioned .
Mr President , I would just like to clarify one point with regard to the voting list .
I would ask that we vote against the Committee 's Amendments Nos 21 and 26 in order to be able to support the compromise amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
Mr President , I just want to clarify something in the German text .
Rather than ' translated ' , it has to read , ' interpreted ' .
The term has to be incorporated in all versions of the original Article 12 .
The services are aware of the problem .
They will make sure that the proper definition is used .
The texts will all be aligned with each other .
Before the vote on Amendment No 10 :
Mr President , the adoption of Amendment No 6 makes it necessary to make a technical correction to Article 33 ( 1 ) and to Article 34 ( 1 ) .
I take it as read that the plenary is happy that this technical correction should be made by the responsible Committee .
The linguistic and legal services will ensure that is done .
Before the vote on Amendment No 23 :
Mr President , my name has been added to Amendment No 23 .
I did not sign that amendment and do not support it .
I shall therefore vote against it .
Mr President , I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur .
We now have a majority .
The House has been divided and different groups have had the opportunity to put on the record their preferred optimum solution amongst the options available .
I came to vote today with my colleagues in the ELDR .
I departed only once from that list : to show support for what was available .
Tomorrow , when we vote in the light of a Commission opinion , I would make the strongest appeal to Members of this House to give the largest possible consensus .
I understand that many people have deep reservations about aspects of what this final statute may contain .
However , I and the rapporteur will need to go to other institutions , and we have to go fortified by the weight of this House .
We can go with a ' yes ' or we can go with a ' no ' , but there is no debate on the basis of ' yes , but ... ' .
I ask people to reflect overnight and when we come tomorrow to vote in the light of the Commission 's opinion , to give to those charged to represent this House the widest , most thorough mandate possible to say : ' This is what is available ; this what we bring forward ; and this commands the support of a great majority of Parliament ' .
That is my appeal - to reflect overnight and tomorrow to put our collective weight behind what is available , for that is what we shall work with .
. ( FR ) The European Parliament has just rejected the proposal for a Council decision which aimed to establish practical measures for the application of the directive on mutual recognition between the Member States of decisions that each one might be led to take in order to expel third-country nationals .
Fortunately , this House was only consulted for an opinion , and this draft can therefore at last undergo the adoption procedure .
We feel that its content is entirely justified , and that Parliament is trying to start an unreasonable quarrel .

Most of the House maintained that Article 63 ( 3 ) of the EC Treaty could not constitute a valid legal base : it does concern the adoption of common measures to repatriate illegal residents , but this provision would authorise measures concerning content rather than procedure .
This is a specious distinction , which even the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market could not support .
Here , in fact , Parliament is showing its normal pro-immigration bias : what it does not like about this draft is that it might facilitate the repatriation of illegal immigrants .
Of course , we did not support it .
. ( PT ) Due to the need for consistency with the position previously adopted by the European Parliament in plenary session on 11 December 2000 , when the French initiative - which lacked any legal basis - proposing the adoption of a directive on mutual recognition of decisions concerning expulsion of third-country nationals , was rejected , I do not feel able to adopt any other stance on this initiative than a similar rejection .
As was already the case with the Directive itself , the issue is not the proposal 's substance or its actual political content , which in fact I consider quite positive , since it seeks to introduce rules and suitable practical methods for correcting any possible financial imbalances resulting from the implementation of the Directive in question .
In other words , the Member State responsible for the expulsion decision must reimburse the Member State which enforces that decision , on the basis of the real costs of the operation , up to a maximum level , which should be reasonable , comparable and balanced , and should cover transport , administration and accommodation .
Nevertheless , since we have before us an initiative on the application of Directive 2001 / 40 / EC , which was rejected due to its lack of a legal basis , we are once again unable , by the same logic , to adopt any stance other than a rejection of this initiative .
. ( PT ) I concur with the position of the rapporteur , who , while substantially in agreement with the proposal 's content , advocated its rejection due to its legal basis .
Fundamentally , the draft directive does not in fact seek to establish substantive conditions for expulsion , but only deals with the mutual recognition of expulsion decisions already in force .
In other words , it does not specifically cover Community expulsion decisions on the basis of a rule adopted according to the terms of Article 63 of the European Community Treaty .
Rather , it covers expulsion decisions taken on the basis of national law .
This directive , then , concerns the applicability of decisions ; it does not define the substantive law on expulsion .
Article 63 ( 3 ) of the EC Treaty , however , only provides for the latter and says nothing about the mutual recognition of decisions taken on the basis of national law .
.
( PT ) I voted against this report , because I believe that it says nothing new . It simply synthesises a vision of Community law , in an obviously tendentious manner , and gives voice to expansionist desires which , though not new either , are no less surprising for the clarity with which they are declared .
In her argumentation , the rapporteur completely forgets the basic principle of Community legal intervention ( whether from above or from below ) : the principle of subsidiarity .
In doing so , she provides national legal legislators with proof of their own subordination .
The rapporteur 's vision is centralist rather than federalist .
She reduces national legislations and legal ordinances to an unacceptable level of subordination , in the belief that blanket application of Community law is the panacea which will solve all Europe 's problems .
This is not to mention the subordinate role which the rapporteur unfortunately confers on national parliaments .
I am profoundly doubtful of the usefulness and benefits of this type of interpretation of the application of Community law . It merely serves to turn the application of the principle of subsidiarity on its head .
Mr President , last night , I dreamed that the Italian , French , German and Portuguese Ministers for Finance and the Finance Ministers of other countries said to me : ' You see , Mr Fatuzzo ?
Mr Belder 's report on macro-financial assistance provides for aid to be given to states which need money for their budgets .
Can it be a good thing to have a budget deficit , then ?
Why do we not do the same here in Europe - we can reward those who have a deficit and launch an infringement procedure against the states which manage to balance their books ? '
I put the question to the House .
. ( PT ) I supported this report , which reviews the logic hitherto underlying European Union Macro-financial Assistance ( MFA ) to third countries , with a view to proposing a more structured approach and , in particular , guaranteeing democratic legitimacy and a fundamental principle of accountability .
The fact is that we often know nothing about how MFA is handled once it is transferred directly into the budget of the beneficiary country 's central bank .
Above and beyond that , moreover , given the exceptional character of MFA , it should be an occasional , short-term and one-off subsidy , in contrast to current practice in several beneficiary countries .
I also think that it would be a positive step to make MFA exceptional by definition , for example , and to transform it , through suitable inspection provisions , into a crisis prevention system . Additionally , like the rapporteur , whose approach I warmly applaud , I think that the decision-making process , follow-up and assessment should be carried out with the greatest openness .
Mr President , I voted for Mr Schmid 's report on employment but , as representative of the Pensioners ' Party and all pensioners , I would stress before the House - which listens equally carefully to the explanations of vote of all the Members and , in particular , as we know and as we can see , to my own - that it is possible to both balance states ' books and increase pensions if we can only manage to administer better the money handed over to the state by workers and citizens during their working lives which is to be restored to them subsequently when they grow old .
There is too much wastage , too many people interested in receiving money who do not deserve it .
If we put our finances in order we will be able to have lower taxes and duties , smaller contributions and larger pensions .
. ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats support the proposal for the employment strategy .
It is important for the European Parliament to give its support to this strategy .
The proposal contains many positive features . For example , the aspects relating to equality are emphasised , improvements demanded for disabled people in the labour market and full employment declared to be an overarching objective .
A proposal by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is based on the view that a general reduction in taxes is beneficial to employment .
We do not share this view .
The facts show that there is no connection between tax levels and employment .
We choose , however , not to vote against this proposal , but to abstain .
The reason is that if the PPE-DE Group does not get this proposal through , that group will vote against the whole report .
If the whole report were to fall by the wayside , that would be far more serious than this individual proposal going through .
That is why we are abstaining on this point .
. I have voted for the Schmid report because I believe it supports and makes a contribution to the achievement of the three main goals of the ' European Employment Strategy ' , namely full employment , increased productivity and greater social inclusion within society of marginalised and disadvantaged groups .
I believe that the report 's addition of a fourth goal , namely , mainstreaming of male-female equality is laudable .
The implementation of the guidelines on the ' open coordination method ' is the correct way forward , as it involves national parliaments fully in the discussions and adoption of national employment plans .
This will make the report meaningful in constituencies like mine where unemployment is concentrated in small pockets of poverty in London despite the low unemployment nationally of the UK .
. ( EL ) The spread of flexibility and atypical forms of work , in order to share out unemployment , entrepreneurship , the extension of working life on the pretext of the ageing of the population and sustainable pensions and lifelong learning are the basic Commission guidelines on employment .
At the same time , by making not only relative but also absolute cuts in wages and linking them to productivity , cutbacks in the welfare state and social protection and the non-application of what are inadequate safety regulations in the workplace are being promoted .
Unemployment is rising constantly and exceeds 10 % , not counting hidden unemployment .
This situation , especially the large number of long-term unemployed and unemployment among the young and women , who are unable to enter the labour market , is giving rise to acute manifestations of poverty and social exclusion .
The term employment policy is completely misleading .
The proposed measures are essentially measures to reinforce the unaccountability of big business by granting it new privileges .
This policy represents an escalation of the attack on workers ' rights , the objective being the further promotion of plans for a cheap workforce , with no employment , insurance , wage or trade union rights , and increased profits .
The workers are not only rejecting these measures , but are also reacting proactively and en masse against pro-monopoly choices by stepping up their fight .
. ( SV ) We believe in the principle of subsidiarity whereby decisions should be taken as close as possible to those they affect .
That is why we are actively pushing the issue of a constitution for the European Union in which the distribution of responsibilities is clear to everyone .
It must be perfectly clear to everyone that the EU must only deal with those issues it is best placed to tackle , namely cross-border issues .
All other issues should be dealt with at local , regional or national levels .
Social policy is an example of an area in which the EU should only have limited competence , except where freedom of movement for people within the EU is concerned .
Every Member State should have full responsibility for determining its own social security systems , together with the right to do so .
Health care , childcare and care of the elderly are clear examples of areas that are not directly cross-border .
The same applies to labour market policy .
That does not , however , prevent the Member States from cooperating and exchanging ideas in the social sphere .
At the same time , we wish to emphasise that we fully share our fellow MEP 's , Mr Schmid 's , commitment to social cohesion , integration and , especially , equality .
. ( FR ) Lifelong learning , work and the elderly are all highly important subjects that are highlighted in this report , and employment strategies are vital .
We want more jobs , but also better-adapted jobs .
The fight against poverty is key .
We cannot accept that families should still be living below the poverty line today .
It is a matter of solidarity .
The objectives we set must be accessible .
We need to invest in high-quality services so that women can reconcile employment with family obligations .
We need a more effective partnership between the Member States .
In order to foster the participation of women in social life and the labour market , we need to define a series of specific actions aiming to provide services that correspond to childcare needs , but which also enable us to provide assistance for families with other dependents .
It is essential to invest in public services in order to respond to the needs of families and society as a whole and it is vital for all the actors concerned to be involved in implementing employment strategy .
Furthermore , the existence of high-quality public services requires appropriate taxation .
. ( FR ) The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs proposes that we ratify the draft Council directive laying down a global employment policy for the European Union for completion by 2010 .
This policy falls within the context of the Lisbon strategy which aims to make Europe the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world , capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion .
The amendments made to this legislative resolution improve the initial text in certain aspects , in particular with regard to gender equality objectives and taking account of qualifications and vocational training .
The amendments , however , do not challenge the liberal idea of reducing company taxation and flexibility in the labour market .
What is even more important is that the resolution retains the objective of increasing the average age at retirement by five years at Community level by 2010 , while millions of people are demonstrating in France and in other European countries against this idea and to protect their pension systems .
For this reason , I did not vote for the report .
. ( PT ) Whilst not playing down the significance of the report 's more contentious aspects , I agree with the Commission 's view , supported by the rapporteur , according to which this form of immigration is a source of mutual enrichment , both for the migrants directly concerned and for the country of origin and the host country .
It contributes to promoting intercultural understanding , to the dynamism of training in Europe and to the quest for high standards in education .
Information sharing and ' best practices ' must become a reality beyond the Union 's territory .
The training of students and researchers is a key sphere of action for increasing well-being , information and the quality of life , to which the Union is committed , in particular through the various association agreements and development funds .
In fact , because of the special contribution it makes to personal development , which will hopefully also benefit the countries of origin , this proposal should be carefully studied by the Member States in the context of their individual immigration policies .
What is particularly interesting is the Union 's commitment to finding jobs for nationals in their country of origin and to regulating the system of voluntary work .
In the end , I voted in favour of this report , because Amendments Nos 36 and 37 have been adopted , adding considerable balance to the arrangements laid down in Articles 11 ( 1 ) and 18 ( 2 ) ...

( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Article 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to point out , on behalf of all my colleagues in the French Socialist delegation and on my own behalf , our position on the report on the adoption of a Statute for Members .
The Statute needs to be adopted as a matter of urgency due to the imminent completion of the current enlargement process .
We are in favour of the principles underlying this step , even though we disagree with certain provisions concerning the sum and taxation of remuneration for Members .
The compensation system for Members did need to be rendered more comprehensible , but the text proposed does not seem to us to respond fully to this need .
That is why the French Socialist delegation wished to amend the text by voting for Amendment No 8 to Article 7 of the draft Statute , which it tabled alongside other political groups .
We feel that intelligent implementation of this principle means that remuneration would be adapted to different standards of living in the various Member States , even if certain inequalities would have to be corrected .
We are sorry that this amendment was not adopted .
In the current context , increasing remuneration for Members of the European Parliament would run the risk of causing an unfavourable reaction , at a time when the legitimacy of differences in remuneration between the economic and political elite and the rest of the population is in question .
When I woke up this morning , Mr President , I thought I was Mr Rothley and , on my way to Parliament in the car with which we are provided , I thought , ' I want to table an amendment to my report ' - speaking as Mr Rothley - ' which gives Members of the European Parliament a salary which is twice as large as that paid to judges ' .
When I got to Parliament , however , I looked in the mirror and saw that I was Mr Fatuzzo .
I had no hope of succeeding and so I had to resign myself to voting for the motion : it is better to be half a judge than to be a nobody .
Mr President , I would like , first of all , to ask you to take note of the following correction .
I actually wanted to vote in favour of Amendment No 8 to Article 16 , rather than against it , as I am of course in favour of differential weighting of living expenses .

Now , by way of an actual explanation of how I voted , let me say that I have always been in favour of a Statute for Members of the European Parliament , but the reasons why I voted against the Rothley Report were as follows : I cannot understand why , today , we have not managed to make the actual costs of travel transparent and take them into account .
Before now , the Statute always had to serve as a pretext for such a rule not existing .
Now , we want a Statute , but we are rejecting transparency and the accounting for the real costs .
I find that dishonest ; we cannot explain it to the public , who , when they travel on business , can of course claim only the actual costs .
Nor do I think it right that we have not substantially raised the pensionable age .
( Applause ) In Germany , we have just had a debate on increasing the retirement age for people at large , and I think the same should obviously apply to us .
Apart from that , I am also in favour of us paying the same taxes as those who elected us , so as not to give the impression that we are establishing special rights for Members of this House .
That is why I had to go against my original intention and vote against the Statute .
I think that Parliament ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can , fundamentally , do no other than agree with Mrs Breyer .
For years already , we have been wrestling with a solution to the issue of MEPs ' salaries , and opinions can differ very widely , particularly when it comes to whether the current national system is preferable to one applicable right across the EU .
The one thing , though , that the creation of a new Statute must not do under any circumstances is to create privileges and new rules that cannot be got across to the public .
In view of the ongoing debate about how best to secure Europe 's pension schemes , people will see the idea , contained in the Statute and in an amendment , of pensioning MEPs off as early as 60 or 63 , as a provocation .
It is not only in my own country that people are , at present , being told that they will have to work for longer ; in the European Parliament , on the other hand , the intention is obviously to guarantee politicians early retirement , which is not what social policy demands .
Neither can I , nor will I , vote for a Statute for the Members of the European Parliament in this form .
The same goes for the rule on lump sums for expenses .
In future , the reimbursement of expenses - of whatever kind - must relate only to those actually incurred , and it must no longer be possible to draw additional expenses under any circumstances .
It is imperative that rules for travel costs should be transparent and comprehensible .
Mr President , I want to offer an explanation of vote on behalf of the ELDR Group for our final vote on Mr Rothley 's report on the Members ' Statute on which we mainly abstained .
We have the greatest respect for President Cox , and this group , under his leadership , and subsequently , has always fought for reform .
We have been able to compromise on some matters but there are others of principle on which we will not compromise .
We , therefore , abstained on the following issues : we wanted reform now , not reform later at an uncertain date ; we wanted equality for our colleagues from the acceding states .
If we want to be treated equally here ourselves , why should we offer them a worse deal ?
We wanted the option of national tax so we could be treated with equality with the citizens we represent ; we wanted a clear message that expenses should be transparent .
Those items did not find favour with the majority in this House .
Whilst Parliament has given its decision , it pains me as a parliamentarian to say that I hope the Council makes a better fist of it than we have .
. Members of the European Parliament are elected as representatives of the Member States and they should receive salaries and pay taxes similar to members of the national parliaments ( MNP ) .
Attempts to differentiate between MEPs and MNPs will not strengthen any links between the two and extreme salary increases combined with EU taxation will alienate voters further .
We strongly support any efforts to make the remuneration and allowance system more transparent and in accordance with prudent accounting standards .
At the same time , we believe it is hypocritical to legislate on corporate governance while not being able to apply the same standards to an institution ultimately funded by taxpayers ' money .
We have voted against the Rothley report as a consequence of the attempt to establish the idea of MEPs simply being ' European ' and completely removed from their national settings as well as increase salaries substantially , but without a thorough ' cleaning-up ' of the allowance system , cf . Article 27 .
. ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats wish to account for our reasons for voting against the draft decision in the report on the Statute for Members of the European Parliament .
We cannot support the draft Statute , since our Amendment No 30 on national taxation has been rejected .
For ourselves as Swedish Social Democrats , it is extremely important for us to be able to retain national tax , since that is the system to which we adhere and of which we make use .
Joint funding via income tax is required for funding our common welfare policy .
We therefore believe that Members of the European Parliament should pay national tax in their own countries .
Elected political representatives should follow the same rules as everyone else .
Another key issue has been the way in which travel allowances are accounted for .
We have demanded that the new rules be based upon open accounts that are easily accessible to public scrutiny .
That is why we have worked for an open and fair system where allowances are concerned .
At present , travel and other expenses are paid out on a flat-rate basis .
We want to see a system in which refunds are made on the basis of actual costs .
We believe that salary levels too cause offence , since the new levels are very high .
.
( FR ) Under the aegis of the new Article 190 ( 5 ) of the EC Treaty , introduced by the Treaty of Nice , this House has just drawn up a draft unified Statute for Members of the European Parliament , which should be submitted to the Council for its decision - no longer to be reached unanimously , but by a qualified majority .
The text addresses a number of technical issues that needed to be resolved in any case within the context of the recognised autonomy of the European Parliament to organise its correct internal functioning .
It also goes much further , however , by presenting a statute that standardises at European level all aspects of the situation of members of parliament and cuts essential links with their countries of origin , in particular remuneration .
As we have said a hundred times , Members of the European Parliament need to be paid - as they are today - by the citizens of their country , who elected them and whom they are supposed to represent .
Parliament 's current actions correspond implicitly to the objective of establishing a super-State , where Members would represent the Union as a whole , rather than the country that elected them .
This is a fundamental , if surreptitious , change , of which , once again , our voters are unaware .
Out of honesty towards them , we refused to vote for this draft .
. ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to make a couple of points by way of explanation of how I voted on the Members ' Statute .
First of all , I believe that our salaries should be the same as the salaries of the members of the national parliaments .
I consider myself to be a Dutch politician , not a European official .
This is why I voted in favour of Amendment No 8 as well as Amendment No 5 .
Secondly , I disagree with a net increase in our salary of at least EUR 2 800 per month .
This amount is set to increase even more if a decision is made in favour of imposing European taxes .
Such a substantial increase is unacceptable - especially since we hear it stressed on every side how necessary pay restraint is in order to maintain employment .
Taking advantage of the fact that , as a result of the Nice Treaty , the Council 's decision on the ' Statute for Members of the European Parliament ' must now be taken under qualified majority voting rather than unanimity , the EP is once again insisting on a proposal that contains aspects with which we disagree .
One such aspect concerns setting a monthly parliamentary allowance that is the same for all Members , regardless of which country they represent .
Members of the EP are elected in national constituencies . Consequently , they are , and must remain , bound to these constituencies .
Establishing a single monthly allowance fits in with a federalist view of the mandate of an EP Member , by seeking to transform today 's national Members of the EP into future ' European MPs ' . This is a vision that we do not share .
Furthermore , as we have emphasised , the social realities in the countries of the EU differ greatly , making it inevitable that if this measure is implemented , in various countries , including Portugal , there will be enormous inequalities and disparities between the pay of workers and that of representatives and holders of public office , which would be quite incomprehensible .
In other words , the salary of Members of the EP must be based on the salary of the Members of the national parliament of the country in which they are elected .
Hence our vote against the report .
. ( NL ) The Statute for Members of the European Parliament has for years been the subject of two debates along completely opposite lines .
One , in which I have joined , is about the way in which we can call a halt to the financial privileges that cause the electorate to regard MEPs in a suspicious light .
The other is about the way in which membership of this House can be made more attractive by higher salaries , lower taxes and the highest level of Member protection against legal cases .
I have always been in favour of a uniform salary for all MEPs , provided that this salary is significantly lower than that in France , England and particularly Germany and Italy .
This uniform salary must remain subject to the national , regional and local taxes in the Member State of residence , as is the case for uniform salaries received by people working for international companies in different countries .
Guaranteeing the same net income by extremely low European taxes is a completely superfluous privilege for MEPs .
In addition , immunity must only protect freedom of speech of those elected and not lead to impunity in other matters .
The EU 's enlargement must not affect political diversity .
The allocation of ever fewer seats in this House to each Member State prevents smaller movements from being represented .
Unlike some other Dutch people , I have only ever seen a statute as a means to an end , never the main aim .
Since the final document serves the opposite from what I have upheld , I am unable to give it my support .
. The EPLP is concerned about a number of points in the report as it currently stands : -
On tax we are of the view that Member States should be allowed to level tax at national rates .
On salaries the wise persons ' report produced a formula that was acceptable to the majority of Member States and MEPs and we see no reason for the unjustified change to a salary which is 50 % of that of a European Court Judge .
On expenses we firmly believe that the European Parliament has an opportunity to rectify the longstanding anomalies by introducing a system of travel at cost .
The report 's stance on immunities would require changes to primary law and we feel that this is not the appropriate report in which this should be included .
Finally , on the question of the implementation date , the EPLP cannot accept under any circumstances a possible post 2004 implementation date .
The EPLP wants to go into the 2004 election campaign with this issue clearly resolved .
As the European Parliament has just voted for a date beyond that period we cannot support the final vote on this report .
. ( FR ) At a time when the peoples of Europe are facing so many difficulties ( unemployment , social breakdown , insecurity , etc . ) , I am not convinced that they will truly appreciate Parliament 's determination to get its uniform statute for Members of the European Parliament adopted .
I believe it to be an entirely secondary concern and that it is being pursued for material and ideological reasons .
So far as the material aspect is concerned , there is no point in going on about it at length , but I think it is obscene to take advantage of the occasion to give MEPs a whole series of excessive sinecures and privileges .
Regarding the ideological aspect , no one is taken in : this statute 's primary objective is to detach the elected representative from his State of origin completely .
Even though , in legal terms , we sit in this Parliament as the representatives of our respective peoples , they want to make us out to be the representatives of some mythical European people , in other words rootless .
It all follows on logically from Parliament 's earlier vote in favour of a uniform electoral procedure , the principle of transnational constituencies or European political parties .
This report proves once again that Eurofederalism is divorced from the reality of the man in the street .
For years now , we have been wrestling with a solution to the issue of MEPs ' salaries , and this is something on which opinions can differ . They certainly can when it comes to whether the current national system is preferable to one applicable right across the EU .
The one thing , though , that the creation of a new Statute must not do under any circumstances is to create privileges and new rules that cannot be got across to the public .
In view of the ongoing debate about how best to secure Europe 's pension schemes , the popular view will be that the idea , contained in the Statute and in an amendment , of pensioning MEPs off as early as 60 or 63 , is a provocation .
It is not only in my own country that people are , at the present time , being told that they will have to work for longer ; in the European Parliament , on the other hand , the intention is obviously to guarantee politicians early retirement , which is not what social policy demands .
Neither can I , nor will I , vote for a Statute for the Members of the European Parliament in this form .
The same goes for the rule on lump sums for expenses .
In future , the reimbursement of expenses - of whatever kind - must relate only to those actually incurred , and it must no longer be possible to draw additional expenses under any circumstances .
It is imperative that rules for travel costs should be transparent and comprehensible .
. ( PT ) The grounds for establishing a statute for Members of the European Parliament appear , at first sight , to be quite uncontroversial : to meet the need for equality amongst Members and to provide the public with greater transparency .
Such aims could be achieved , according to the rapporteur , by applying the same legal and financial arrangements to all Members , which would result in there being a single level of allowance and to this being subject to Community tax .
Adopting the Statute will , however , have significant consequences for the concept of the parliamentary mandate itself , specifically with regard to the nationals of the State in which those Members are elected - an aspect which only the rapporteur appears not to have fully understood .
A single European system would mean : subjecting Members to tax arrangements different to those applied to the citizens who voted for them ; establishing Members as representatives of a hypothetical ' European people ' ; detracting from their standing as representatives of their own peoples , whereas they are genuine equals of the members of national parliaments , and disengaging them a little further from national and popular ties of belonging to a Member State .
Consequently , despite having voted in favour of some specific aspects , I have in the end voted against the report , because I wish once again to adopt a position of principle at a time when institutional reform , by autocratic methods , with the Convention at the very centre , appears to wish to develop in a very negative way and balance in the context ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Article 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( SV ) We have today voted against the European Parliament 's report on a new Statute for Members , which was however approved by 294 votes , with 171 against and 59 abstentions .
Without a system of travel allowances in which refunds are made on the basis of actual costs instead of , at present , on a flat-rate basis , the new Statute will not lead to increased openness .
Certainly , Parliament 's Praesidium determined on 29 May 2003 to investigate a new system of travel allowances , but that still does not solve the problems .
A decision to refund actual costs should come into force automatically at the same time as a new Statute for Members is implemented .
In future , we should ideally like to see MEPs ' salary levels set in relation to salary levels in the national parliaments .
Because MEPs live in , and represent , their Member States , tax should , in the future too , be deducted on a national basis in order to take account of the cost of living and of social insurance systems in different countries .
. ( DE ) I hereby declare that I have voted in favour of the Rothley report on the Statute for Members of the European Parliament , as I believe it to be essential that there should be , as soon as possible , a uniform statute with the same conditions applying to all Members of the European Parliament .
This also means that major differences between the salaries of Members from the different Member States are unacceptable .
In the European Parliament , as elsewhere , there must , in the medium term , be equal pay for equal work .
I am , moreover , of the opinion that salaries must , as a matter of urgency , be made transparent - it is not acceptable that MEPs should have to use the reimbursement of travel expenses as a way of topping up their incomes .
I will , nonetheless , not be availing myself of the rule 's provisions .
I took my seat under the conditions that have prevailed to date , and I will , for my own part , continue to be subject to them .
Mr President , this morning , on my way to Parliament , I dreamed that I met the Prime Minister of Brazil , Mr Inácio Lula , who said to me : ' Mr Fatuzzo , this European Parliament is amazing , these regional free trade areas on which Mrs Mann has tabled a draft are amazing , and I urge you to vote for the motion .
The extension of this free trade process which you Europeans were the first to implement is so important for us and for the whole world that I dream of becoming the Romano Prodi of Mercursor . '
I immediately started to wonder whether Romano Prodi , the President of the Commission , is really Romano Prodi or whether he is Inácio Lula pretending to be Mr Prodi ? '
However , Mr President , as you know , it was a dream .
.
( FR ) We voted against the Mann report because it calls for the complete ' communitisation ' of the European Union 's trade policy , which would be harmful , as I said in yesterday 's debate .
But we also reject this report because of the trade strategy it advocates , which is in our view mistaken on at least two important points .
Firstly , it says quite clearly that the objective of opening up to international trade is world integration , including ' regulatory convergence ' .
But while it is possible to support the idea of increasing trade to the benefit of all , it should also be added - which the report fails to do - that every country , or every region , has the right to protect its model of society .
Secondly , it is much too indulgent towards the European Union 's trade policy , in particular its all-out adoption of free trade areas .
Such areas are useful if they reflect a desire for controlled opening .
But in reality Europe has so many of them and they overlap so much that no one knows what their real effects are and they are causing us to lose control over our trade relations .
.
( FR ) A trade strategy reflects a particular view of the world : a pure liberalisation of trade exacerbating inequality or a fight for real development ?
As the Mann report again shows , the chief aim of creating regional free trade areas ( FTAs ) is to ensure the EU has political and economic stability in its relations with the countries concerned ( the ' strategic geo-political interests ' ) so that nothing can get in the way of the sacrosanct free movement of goods , services and capital .
But what of peoples ' access to basic rights ?
What about an assessment of the social , environmental , cultural and economic consequences of such liberalisation ?
What about genuine cooperation on equal terms and respecting the distinctive nature of each partner ?
WTO rules must not be allowed to interfere with the EU 's - still privileged - relations with its partners .
The EU cannot reduce its policy towards countries and whole regions to free trade areas alone ; there is too much of that in the Mediterranean , for example , while what is urgently needed is real political dialogue and economic and social cooperation built without any concept of domination .
. ( PT ) The main aim of this report by the Committee on Industry is to use free trade areas ( FTAs ) and bilateral agreements as a ' Trojan horse ' to ensure the liberalisation of world trade under the control of the WTO and the ' Doha Agenda ' , and perhaps even to exceed the ambitions of these by including political aims .
We read in the report that ' ... the constraint placed by the need to obtain consensus among WTO members complicates and slows down multilateral negotiations .
By moving faster than the global trading system and sharing its goals , FTAs serve as catalysts for change .
While FTAs undermine the non-discriminatory principle of multilateralism , as long as they are WTO-compliant and WTO-Plus , they are incentives and complementary models for new global trade initiatives ... ' , putting the EU forward as a model to follow .
What is the point of these words ?
The report also claims that the EU institutions should have exclusive competence ' for all areas of trade ' , and that ' QMV and co-decision should apply to all trade matters ' , which would clearly make it hard for Portugal to protect its national interests .
Hence my vote against the report .
. The subject of this report is an extremely important one .
That is why the Green / EFA Group was one of the instigators of an ITRE own-initiative report on the subject of regional integration , particularly with respect to its potential effects on multilateralism and on efforts to achieve sustainable development .
However , the final title and scope of this report was much less precise than we had anticipated , and its conclusions are at significant variance from our own .
Although some amendments that capture a number of our concerns were adopted , many others were not , and much of the report continues to give very uncritical support to ever greater economic integration .
One of our most important amendments would make the implementation of Free Trade Areas ( FTAs ) conditional on a prior in-depth sustainability impact assessment , to ensure that the FTA does not exacerbate inequalities among partners , and to establish mandatory rules to promote social justice and sustainability .
Since this - and amendments in a similar vein - were not adopted , we have been forced to abstain on this report .
. ( PT ) Recalling what could be called the ' relevance ' of trade agreements concluded in recent years , the rapporteur emphasises that these are also driven by the desire to promote political stability , which consequently makes them an integral part of the Union 's external policy .
Although the benefits of these free trade areas are undeniable , because the WTO has not clarified the situation , these areas are developing in a framework which lacks legal certainty . Furthermore , we must bear in mind the potentially damaging consequences of a ' harmonising ' strategy in the least-developed countries , whose ability to participate in trade negotiations is sometimes limited and cannot be overstretched , if we really want to see fair results .
Consequently , although I broadly agree , I feel that more prudent and gradualist guidelines needed to be defined and this is why I was inclining towards abstaining from the final vote .
The result of the vote on paragraph 21 of the proposal , however , has persuaded me to vote against the report .
In this field , which is so sensitive , it is crucial to uphold the decision-making procedure that was agreed on by consensus in Nice , as proposed in Amendment No 12 .
By once again imposing the original wording , however , the majority is causing Parliament once again to persist with an approach that I believe to be unrealistic and unacceptable .
I therefore voted against the report .
. ( EL ) The report on Euro-Mediterranean cooperation once again conceals the EU 's arrogance towards the Mediterranean countries .
' Civilized ' Europe is prepared to teach democracy and the free market to its ' uncivilised ' neighbours .
It is becoming the appraiser of everything , especially when it comes to human rights , at a time when a huge network of dictatorship , repression and police states is unfolding in the EU itself .
It is disseminating its own version of terrorism , it is imposing special clauses in association agreements , while it has not a single word to say about Israeli state terrorism .
It is taking advantage of its economic supremacy not to assist in the development of the countries of north Africa and the Middle East , but to impose its terms on trade and on their internal affairs .
The report goes as far as to call on partner countries to implement policies for convergence with the euro , while pressing for the development of the private sector .
Despite pronouncements to the contrary , Euro-Mediterranean relations were and remain unequally priced .
They were and are a vehicle for intervention in the internal affairs of Mediterranean countries , in the aim of supporting the economic , military and political interests of the ? U. This policy will be stepped up given that , following enlargement , the ? U 's attention is turning towards the Mediterranean .
In voting against the report , the Communist Party of Greece is expressing its support for the peoples and their fight , which is the only road to progress .
. ( SV ) We Swedish Moderates are in favour of the report on the annual report on the MEDA 2000 programme .
We believe however that , with its major problems in establishing a fixed budgetary framework , the EU cannot , in the current economic climate , take upon itself the increase in costs involved in this activity .
. ( FR ) With Mr Piétrasanta 's report the European Parliament must express an opinion on the state of relations between Europe and its Mediterranean partners .
This report raises the fundamental questions underlying the partnership and gives pertinent answers which I support , in particular the need to stress the political dimension of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership in order to foster democratisation and peace , support for Mediterranean civil societies , the systematic inclusion of the human rights issue in follow-up , and the establishment of a genuine Euro-Mediterranean parliamentary assembly at the next EuroMed ministerial conference in Naples in December 2003 .
I shall vote in favour of this report in order to give strong backing to the inclusion of these objectives in the MEDA programme .
But this programme alone is today insufficient to cover relations between the EU and its Mediterranean partners .
No additional resources have in fact been provided to this day ( for 2003 the MEDA regional funding plan will have EUR 32 million and the ' Euro-Mediterranean investment and partnership facility ' EUR 25 million ) , and the discrepancy between Europe 's financial effort for the ten new members and its commitment to the Mediterranean is spectacular , not to say scandalous : EUR 185 of aid per capita for the East , half a euro per head for the Mediterranean .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated pursuant to Article 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( PT ) I voted for this excellent report .
As everyone knows , the main aim of MEDA , which , in 1995 simplified and combined a disparate series of instruments , is ' to reform economic and social structures and mitigate any social or environmental consequences which may result from economic development ' in the Mediterranean basin , in three areas : 1 . Strengthening political stability and democracy ; 2 .
Creating a free trade area ; 3 .
Attaching priority to the social and cultural spheres .
The MEDA programme has therefore become the main component of financial cooperation in the Euro-Mediterranean partnership ( through non-refundable aid from the Commission or through other instruments coordinated with the EIB ) .
The results achieved by the MEDA I programme and the first two years of MEDA II , however , are such as to indicate that this model of cooperation should be continued and even stepped up ( as the rapporteur suggests ) , substantially for the same reasons that led in 2000 to this successful programme being extended and relaunched for five more years , as the best possible means of achieving the aims of successive European Councils - Lisbon ( 1992 ) , Corfu ( 1994 ) and Essen ( 1994 ) : to enhance the EU 's Mediterranean policy , to enable the Mediterranean Basin to become an area of cooperation guaranteeing peace , security ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( FR ) The EU-USA agreements on judicial cooperation in criminal matters and extradition are entirely necessary , especially in the fight against terrorism .
However , they raise for the first time the question of the interpretation of Articles 38 and 24 of the EU Treaty , introduced by the Treaty of Nice , concerning the conclusion of international agreements by the European Union in the fields of the second and third pillars .
Those articles were drawn up and adopted with culpable negligence despite the warnings I gave in my counter-report on the Treaty of Nice .
We are seeing the consequences of that today : the national parliaments used to have the right to ratify such international agreements , but they have lost that right today and the European Parliament for its part has gained no equivalent right .
It is true that the States are now trying to find a national power of scrutiny by way of the ' constitutional reservation ' that may enable them to go back to their national parliaments .
But that is far from being a perfect solution .
We see here the consequences of badly negotiated treaties .
The Convention on the future of Europe ought to correct that and bring the national parliaments back into play .
Unfortunately , it seems to want to go in the opposite direction .
. ( PT ) This is a matter of the utmost importance and one which should fundamentally fall within the competence of each individual country .
For this very reason , it is unacceptable that the Council should have declassified the text of the two draft agreements with the USA , only one month before these , the first agreements in this sphere between the EU and a third country , were due to be signed .
These agreements are all the more significant in political terms because they are being signed at a time when ' security ' measures are being implemented that endanger citizens ' rights , guarantees and freedoms and when the US is holding hundreds of people under arrest at its military base in Guantánamo , without having accused them or put them on trial , or when it demands that other States give it total immunity from the International Criminal Court .
The current wording of the agreements raises some fundamental issues , such as extradition to a country which still applies the death penalty and which has legislation that in the name of the ' war on terrorism ' , breaches fundamental rights ; personal data protection , applied retroactively , and a lack of control , specifically of the so-called joint investigation teams .
Whilst criticising some aspects of the agreements ' content , the EP 's recommendation supports their broad thrust , and so we have voted against it .
Even the debate on this issue , just a few days after the criminal invasion of Iraq by the British and American forces , constitutes provocation .
Under this agreement , the ? U can hand the citizens of its Member States and their personal data over , with no strings attached , to the jurisdiction of the USA , the prosecuting authorities of which will do as they please far from any democratic control .
Joint EU / USA investigating teams will operate uncontrolled in the ? U , in violation of national constitutions and domestic law .
This is an agreement at the expense of the citizens of the Member States of the ? U. It does not result in any differentiation in the domestic law of the USA , such as the repeal of the death penalty or the discriminatory provisions in the ' patriotic law ' which deny non-US citizens legal aid , changes to the legislation of states in the USA which are incompatible with European law , or an end to the inhumane detention of prisoners of war , including citizens of Member States of the EU in Guantánamo .
We call on our peoples to organise mass demonstrations against a dangerous agreement which , on the pretext of combating terrorism , will escalate prosecutions against the grass-roots , anti-imperialist movement by extraditing the fighters at its vanguard to the USA , together with anyone in general whom the USA considers suspicious ; to prevent the legalisation of uncontrolled activities by the US prosecuting authorities in the ? U and to stop their governments from ratifying any such agreement .
. ( NL ) In the past , countries did not extradite their own nationals .
These days , the EU functions as a single state , with a number of guarantees in place to prevent people from being punished for something that is allowed in their own countries .
Extraditions from the EU to other countries outside it go even further than that and are downright dangerous .
This is certainly true for countries using a different penal system , such as the United States of America , where prisoners of war are locked up without any rights in camps that do not fall within the scope of American law and where the International Criminal Court is not recognised .
It is a matter of some importance to us Europeans that capital punishment exists over there and that innocent suspects first need to admit their guilt before they can negotiate a reduction of their sentences .
People living in Europe need to be protected from being subjected to that American system .
Anyone who does not travel to that country of their own free will and on their own initiative must have the guarantee that nobody forces them to go there .
This is why I reject the draft agreement on extradition and judicial cooperation , discussed in the Justice and Internal Affairs Council on 8 May .
I support the rapporteur 's attempts to at least take a stand against military courts of justice , against what is going on at Guantánamo , and against discrimination against European citizens , and I fully share his view that any future change to this agreement should not be made outside the normal , parliamentary procedure .
. ( FR ) While this agreement could have been a real step forward in the fight against serious crime and international terrorism , this Parliament believes its support should be made subject to extravagant conditions and to considerations that are humiliating for the United States .
The reservations concerning the lack of democratic control or the requirement for a reference to the Charter of Fundamental Rights seem almost fanciful in view of the serious accusations levelled against the United States .
Is it some kind of joke when the report says that the judicial system of some US States does not offer the same level of guarantees that the European Court of Human Rights and EU measures seek to provide for EU Member States ?
And what are we to make of the remarks about the untimely nature of an agreement with the United States when several European Union citizens are still being held at the US military base at Guantánamo Bay , quite unlawfully and without the slightest guarantee that they will receive a fair trial ?
When otherworldliness reaches such proportions and produces such absurdities - how can terrorists be equated with ordinary prisoners under common law ? - it is bordering on stupidity .
. ( PT ) I have voted against the report because I believe that the rapporteur has exceeded the competences conferred on the European Parliament by the Treaties , and is seeking , through interpretive methods with which I do not agree , to increase the number and the volume of dossiers that will be subject to consultation .
In fact , my interpretation of Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union diverges from the one put forward in this report , and I believe that the words ' ... main aspects and ... basic choices ' of common foreign and security policy must not be understood to be ' practical agreements ' and ' specific countries ' , however wide-ranging the agreements or however important our counterpart might be .
The assumption that the silence of the law lays down a specific obligation for the Council and that this supposed specific obligation results in a general rule laying down the obligation to consult Parliament is an interpretation with which I clearly cannot agree .
I believe that the attempt to impose the State model at Community level does not reflect the current State of the Union .
There is no basis for attempting to give the European Parliament competences similar to those of a national Parliament .
Most particularly , I regret the fact that the original proposal for a recommendation should have been replaced by quite aggressive initiatives , which do nothing to encourage the signing of the EU-US agreements that are the basis for this recommendation .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.30 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A5-0197 / 2003 , by Mr Cunha , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation on establishing common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy and support schemes for producers of certain crops ( COM ( 2003 ) 23 C5-0040 / 2003 2003 / 0006 ( CNS ) ) ;
A5-0182 / 2003 , by Mr Olsson , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1257 / 1999 on support for rural development from the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund ( EAGGF ) and repealing Regulation ( EC ) No 2826 / 2000 ( COM ( 2003 ) 23 C5-0041 / 2003 2003 / 0007 ( CNS ) ) ;

A5-0174 / 2003 , by Mr Souchet , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the market in cereals ( COM ( 2003 ) 23 C5-0042 / 2003 2003 / 0008 ( CNS ) ) ;
A5-0175 / 2003 , by Mr Souchet , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the market in dried fodder for the marketing years 2004 / 05 to 2007 / 08 ( COM ( 2003 ) 23 C5-0044 / 2003 2003 / 0010 ( CNS ) ) ;
A5-0183 / 2003 , by Mr Bautista Ojeda , on behalf of the Committee on and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the market in rice ( COM ( 2003 ) 23 C5-0043 / 2003 2003 / 0009 ( CNS ) ) ;
A5-0177 / 2003 , by Mrs Jeggle , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing a levy in the milk and milk-products sector ( COM ( 2003 ) 23 C5-0046 / 2003 2003 / 0012 ( CNS ) ) ;
A5-0181 / 2003 , by Mrs Jeggle , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1255 / 1999 on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products ( COM ( 2003 ) 23 C5-0045 / 2003 2003 / 0011 ( CNS ) ) ;
A5-0189 / 2003 , by Mrs Rodríguez Ramos , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on multifunctional agriculture and the reform of the CAP ( 2003 / 2048 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , my voice is not making it easy , but I shall try to speak clearly .
In January , the Commission presented its legislative proposals for a new reform of the CAP .
In addition to the significant adjustments proposed for some sectors , the proposal 's main innovations can be seen in what is known as the decoupling and modulation of direct aid paid to producers .
The aim of decoupling is to convert the current form of aid into a single payment per holding , which would be decoupled from the volumes produced .
Farmers would then always receive this amount , regardless of what they might grow in future and they could even grow nothing , provided that they maintain the land in good farming conditions .

Through modulation , the Commission is attempting to apply an aid reduction rate that would amount to 19 % by 2012 ; around two-thirds of the appropriations thereby freed up would fund future reforms and around one-third would be reserved for strengthening the CAP 's second pillar - rural development .
Only farmers receiving less than EUR 5 000 per year would be exempt from this aid reduction .
The proposal that is now being presented here in plenary was adopted by a large majority in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the basis of a compromise proposal tabled by the rapporteur and negotiated with all the political groups .
The essence of this compromise , which I hope will become the position of the European Parliament , is the following :
Firstly , to support only partial and gradual decoupling of direct aid , limited to the arable crop and male bovine sectors .
Consequently , all remaining premiums would continue to be awarded on the basis of the current model ; secondly , to support a much more limited form of modulation , of only 6 % in the less-favoured regions and of 8 % in other regions , since revenue generated in this way will go mainly towards strengthening the second pillar .
Exemptions would also apply to farmers receiving less than EUR 7 500 .
By adopting this position , the European Parliament intends to send certain political messages .
The first is that it unequivocally supports a reform of the CAP that makes it more rational from the economic point of view , that will make it easier to implement in an enlarged European Union and which helps to unblock negotiations in the World Trade Organisation .
The second message is that changes of this nature must be undertaken prudently and realistically .
In fact , our position is that aid totally decoupled from production as proposed by the Commission is an interesting model in theory , but poses risks in its practical application and ignores the reality of European farming , the great instability of the markets , which still need border management and protection instruments , and the extremely heterogeneous nature of European farming , in which there are huge differences in income levels and degrees of competitiveness and , consequently , greatly differing effects on the implementation of a decoupled payment scheme .
The third political message is that the risks of production being abandoned following the introduction of a decoupled aid scheme are particularly serious in the outermost less-favoured regions , which have the lowest levels of productivity and which are therefore the least competitive .
This is why Parliament has proposed a lower rate of modulation for these regions , why no decoupled scheme would apply to the outermost regions and why the particular situation of all of these weaker regions would be taken into account , in order to continue to ensure that farmers have alternative means of production .
Fourthly , Parliament also wishes to state that there is no justification , at this stage , for deciding on such a high rate for reducing aid in order to fund future CAP reforms , since we do not yet know either the costs or the timetable of these reforms .
Fifthly , I also wish to emphasise Parliament 's commitment to playing a role in strengthening the second pillar of the CAP , particularly by funding new actions to guarantee food safety and quality .
Lastly , it is also worth recalling the proposal that , from 2007 , the future decoupled aid scheme will no longer be based on historical reference criteria and will from then be based on two main criteria : the surface area and employment situation of each holding .
To conclude , the European Parliament is thereby making its contribution to adapting the CAP to the new needs and realities that are emerging , but is doing so in a way that avoids or at least minimises the risks of production being abandoned , of increased unemployment and of creating further serious imbalances in some farm schemes , particularly in the less-favoured and outermost regions .
I therefore hope that the Council of Agriculture Ministers , the body responsible for taking the final decision , shares these concerns of Parliament 's and forces the Commission to amend its proposal in the negotiations that are now underway .
. ( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , there are few things that will be as important in the world of the future as sustainable and environmentally friendly agriculture .
From the start , I have supported Mr Fischler 's far-sighted ideas about coming up with proposals as to how we are to reform European agricultural policy .
Unfortunately , these ideas have deteriorated and are still in the process of deteriorating .
I believe it was a deterioration when President Chirac and Chancellor Schröder agreed upon a ceiling which was to have been applied , rather , as a floor for the costs of agricultural policy .
I have to acknowledge , unfortunately , that , in my view , what we have arrived at here in Parliament does not improve the proposal but , instead , exacerbates it .
I am concerned that , when they meet , the ministers too will make it still worse .
Not even European farmers seem to understand what is in their own best interests .
Opposition to the Commission 's proposal for agricultural reform among farmers , among ourselves in the European Parliament and among agricultural ministers must have to do with their not wishing to see the broader context .
I do not intend to talk about the details of any report , but I intend to concentrate precisely on the bigger picture in my speech .
We must remember that most of the world 's food is produced at costs that are not covered by today 's low prices on the world market .
Most farmers in industrialised countries therefore require aid if they are to be able to produce food , and farmers in the developing countries need to be paid more .
Aid for agricultural production in the industrialised countries increases production , and the surpluses are exported with the help of subsidies .
That reduces prices on the world market .
We must change the systems in order to create a healthy world market .
It should be possible for prices on the world market to rise to a level that enables most farmers to produce food , and it is therefore quite obvious that all forms of aid that distort trade must be done away with .
The EU cannot change this situation by itself but , together with the United States , we should be able to do a lot in this area .
The negotiations within the WTO and the Commission 's proposal for agricultural reform are steps in the right direction in this connection .
We must remember , however , that the world is not quite as simple as that .
Even with fair prices on the world market , large areas of small-scale European agriculture would still not be competitive .
We have tough requirements in terms of the environment and animal welfare .
We insist upon food safety and quality .
We demand worker protection .
We wish to conserve the cultivated landscape and natural and cultural environments , and we want to improve social conditions in the countryside .
The market could in theory pay for account to be taken of values such as quality .
Our requirements could be financed through direct aid from society and , more specifically , from the EU when it came , especially , to matters of collective benefit .
The route from high subsidies and collapsed prices on the world market to healthy trade and pricing must , however , be achieved via a change to the way in which aid is at present provided , that is to say through a decoupling of aid from production .
That is where my report on rural development comes in .
Unfortunately , there was too little money when the Commission drafted its proposal .
Thanks to helpful and kind-hearted fellow MEPs in Parliament , I have obtained a little money from Mr Cunha and a certain amount of money from Mrs Jeggle and have thus been able to add a little more for rural development .
That is because the proposed decoupling puts less favoured areas at most risk , and we must deal with the risks as quickly as possible .
I believe that Parliament has come up with an improvement where that matter is concerned .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if , in the EU , we do not in good time modernise our arsenal of aid to agriculture - that is to say , by moving the aid from the Blue to the Green Box , or however one wants to put it - the WTO negotiations may , if they are to lead to any result that is encouraging in a global perspective , forcibly divest us of the weapons we use to protect European agriculture and the European agricultural model .
There would then be nothing for us to have recourse to .
Prevention is better than cure .
That is something we Europeans should also appreciate .
When they meet for negotiations next week , the agricultural ministers will hopefully realise that a poor decision , or no decision at all , may in actual fact lead to a disaster for farmers , the countryside and also consumers who want to see good food in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as I am rapporteur on two counts , I will begin , if I may , by presenting the report on reform of the common organisation of the market in cereals , which our Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development adopted by a very large majority , and I will then go on to present my second report , on reform of the common organisation of the market in dried fodder , which was also adopted by a very large majority .
Let us begin , then , with the common organisation of the market in cereals .
In its proposed reform , the Commission departs completely from the mid-term review of Agenda 2000 , advocating the dismantling of all the vital components of the COM .
What are the Commission 's proposals , in fact ?
First , a reduction , a further reduction I should say , in the intervention price , taking it to a price below the cost of production , an approach that is both uneconomic and unsustainable .
Then , the abolition of monthly increments . Then , the abolition of intervention for rye , the abolition of the minimum price for starch potatoes and the abolition of production refunds for starch .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development considered this dismantling of the oldest and most emblematic of the COMs to be neither timely nor justified .
On the intervention price , as rapporteur I had proposed that account be taken of inflation , which is 25.5 % since the 1992 reform , bringing the effective decline in internal prices for cereals in real terms to 56 % .
I do not need to remind you that the intervention price for cereals is the earnings index for hundreds of thousands of farmers .
Our committee did not want a further reduction , for which there is no justification , not even the trend in world prices , which the Commission itself believes must rise in the years ahead .
The zero price reduction our committee recommends requires no compensation and there is therefore no need for degression .
So far as the monthly increments are concerned , our Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development was anxious to point out that these are intended to cover a real economic and financial cost , namely the cost of storage , including the modernisation of silos and bringing them up to standard , especially in the matter of security , and that their abolition would be equivalent to a further reduction in the intervention price , without compensation .
Consistency therefore required that the Commission 's two proposals , concerning the intervention price and the monthly increments , be treated in the same way .
For rye , where there is a real problem of surpluses , we propose cutting the amounts allocated for intervention so that cultivation of this cereal can in future be concentrated in areas where it is the last resort before leaving the land fallow and where there is no profitable alternative .
As to starch and potato starch , Commissioner , we find the Commission 's determination to abolish the schemes that enable European industry to compete against imports on equal terms hard to understand .
It is a gift to third-country starch producers , with the European Union receiving nothing in return .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development 's proposals therefore differ from the negative measures placed on the table by the Commission , which do not seem to us to give the cereals sector any real prospects of development .
I will turn now , if I may , to the common organisation of the market in dried fodder .
For my part , I had never before seen an explanatory memorandum to a Commission proposal based on so weak an argument .
Relying in fact on an outdated comment in a Court of Auditors report , the executive - the Commission - intended purely and simply to abolish this common organisation of the market from the 2008-2009 marketing year on the grounds that , and I quote the Court of Auditors report , ' production relies on the use of fossil fuel for dehydrating and , in some Member States , on the use of irrigation ' .
How casual and offhand can you be , Commissioner , to threaten the future of an entire industry on such a slender basis ?
And not just any industry , but one which provides 15 % of the fodder protein produced in the Community , an industry of 150 000 producers and 500 000 hectares , an industry whose dehydrating sector consists of 350 fodder processing and packaging units , most of which are farmer-owned cooperatives providing no less than 15 000 jobs .
Have you calculated , Commissioner , the amount of public rural development budgets that would have to be mobilised to preserve the rural activity and jobs that would be destroyed by this industry 's euthanasia ?
Our Committee on Agriculture therefore had no difficulty in realising that , given the Union 's fodder protein deficit , it would be perfectly irresponsible to abolish aid for dried fodder .
If our Parliament adopts the report that its Committee on Agriculture is laying before it , it will be clearly reaffirming the position it previously adopted in the Stevenson report , which called on the Commission to quickly find and put in place the necessary means for reducing this very serious handicap , this strategic dependence , this monstrous vegetable protein deficit , which amounts to more than 75 % of our needs .
I recall that the Americans , for their part , had no compunction or hesitation , after the Blair House Agreements , about introducing direct aid for soya , and the WTO did not object .
So why shouldn 't we do the same ?
Our Committee on Agriculture also considered that the environmental balance in dried fodder could in no way be limited to a vague and unimaginative consideration of fossil fuel consumption .
If all economic activities that consume fossil fuels were banned , you would have come to Brussels on foot , Commissioner .
Alfalfa , on the other hand , which accounts for over 80 % of the Union 's dried fodder production , has exceptional qualities in two vital fields - soil renewal and savings on phytosanitary products .
Moreover , there are no genetically-modified varieties of alfalfa in Europe .
This crop , which ensures that fodder derived from it is fully traceable , can therefore replace imports that raise a host of GMO issues .
As to dehydration , the amount of fossil energy used has already been greatly reduced over the past few years . There is still room for improvement , it is true .
We therefore propose , in agreement with the sector , that ' contracts for progress ' be concluded , whereby dehydration units will be able to commit to improving their efficiency , their yield , their energy balance .
It seems to us to be more constructive to put schemes in place for this sector with environmental conditions attached than to abolish aid to them completely .
Finally , our Committee felt that the sector was capable of making further agronomic and environmental progress .
That is why we are proposing the creation of a research fund financed from a small levy on aids granted to the sector .
These seem to us , Mr President , Commissioner , the positive directions that the executive - the Commission - ought to take in order to offer a particularly sensitive and strategic sector quite a different prospect than the destruction , without more ado , of a common organisation of the market , which up until now has managed to preserve one of the Union 's few sources of vegetable protein .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when , at the beginning of this year , the Commission 's legislative proposals on the mid-term review of Agenda 2000 and the timetable for them were put before us , we were under considerable pressure of time .
Parliament was meant to produce its positions by this week .
The task before us seemed almost beyond our capacities .
Few of us dared to believe that we would manage it .
As the rapporteur responsible for the reports on the dairy sector levy and on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products , I can say , with a great deal of satisfaction , that we have done it , and done it together .
Cooperation at an early stage across group boundaries , which was our experience particularly with the milk sector , has finally paid off .
From the very outset , I was able , in the drafts of my reports , to take into account the concerns of my colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , as well as those of the other groups , which meant that there was a manageable number of amendments in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and that the result that you have before you is coherent and consistent .
Finally , the small number of amendments tabled in the plenary is evidence of general agreement , which was also reflected in the outstanding voting results in the Agriculture Committee .
This is a splendid piece of work , for which I would like to thank most warmly all those Members of this House who have worked with me with this end in mind , showing goodwill , expertise and a willingness to compromise .
I also wish to thank the Committee 's secretariat , which was a valued and ever-reliable support to me in my task as it did its coordinating work behind the scenes .
The Commission has presented a package of legislation on the dairy sector , and it is one that we very much welcome , including as it does such measures as the retention of the milk quota up to 2015 .
In order , though , to achieve its goal of bringing the dairy sector into line with WTO requirements , the Commission is offering instruments which - taken as a whole - are highly problematic : further price reductions , quotas raised still further , and the decoupling of milk production from milk premiums .
What would be the consequences of such a course of action ?
If the massive price reductions were implemented as planned hand in hand with extended quotas , the milk quota system would in fact be nullified .
In particular , small and medium-sized rural dairies in disadvantaged areas would find it practically impossible to cope with the competition , at which point the decoupling of the sector would do the rest , so that milk production would move very rapidly from grassland and disadvantaged areas to what is termed prime land .
The adverse structural , social and environmental consequences in the areas affected could not then be ignored .
In order to make dairy farming in the EU more competitive and more efficient , the Commission is frustrating , by means of its proposals , its own structural and rural development policies .
It makes no sense , though , to destroy today businesses and jobs , especially in disadvantaged , structurally weak areas , whether this be done out of anticipatory obedience to the WTO or , conceivably , for ideological reasons , since we will , tomorrow , have to replace or create anew these jobs , with a great deal of effort and expense to public funds , using rural development programmes to do it ?
The need for a gradual transition if such conflicting objectives are to be avoided in this area is therefore plain to see .
With the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , then , I have taken another approach .
We aim to maintain sustainable and extensive production of milk , especially on grassland .
What is clear is that , if dairy farming dies out on grassland and in disadvantaged areas , a great deal of public effort will be needed to maintain the landscape in the state that we all know today , as a valued place in which to relax and go on holiday .
This makes the retention of the milk quota system until 2015 right and vital , and - as we want to make reliable policies - let there be no bringing forward of what was decided under Agenda 2000 .
The price reductions decided on in Agenda 2000 , some of which have already been implemented , have already given us more room to manoeuvre in the WTO .
This room to manoeuvre was originally to have been made use of in the negotiations .
If the outcome of those negotiations is that further price reductions really are necessary , my reports will give an indication of what further price reductions might be like .
In order to keep the dairy and cereals sectors on a par - at least to some extent - we are calling for a higher level of compensation for price reductions .
The 50 cents proposed are definitely inadequate .
The WTO 's argument is irrelevant to the extension of quotas unless the Commission were to have as its declared objective the use of these measures to exert renewed pressure on prices .
No representative of the Commission , though , has put it to me in these terms , so we urge that we meet the quota-hungry Member States halfway on this by introducing a flexible system .
This means a ' yes ' to increased quotas , but it must be dependent on the market situation .
We propose that a gradual approach be taken to decoupling .
At this point in time , there should be none . The Agriculture Committee proposes that this be reconsidered in 2008 , when experience will have been gained of decoupling , re-coupling , or simplification in other sectors .
We will then be able to have some idea of the likely effects and consequences and fashion the instrument accordingly .
It is important , as regards both the milk reports , that a similarly good voting result should be achieved in the plenary as in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Let us join together in sending a clear signal to the Council and the Commission . Sustainable land use can take the place of much environmental , social and regional policy .
The European Union is committed to extensive and sustainable agriculture , at the heart of which , in many of Europe 's regions , is the dairy industry .
Mr President , Commissioner , last June you presented us with a document on reform of the CAP which established the objectives which this reform should pursue : food quality and safety , the strengthening of rural development and more extensive production methods which are compatible with the environment .
Nobody could oppose these objectives , but today we have to tell you that the instruments you wish to use are not only mistaken , because they are not valid in terms of achieving the proposed objectives , but that , most seriously , they move in the opposite direction .
One of the key elements of your reform - the decoupling of subsidies - may have adverse effects if we do not manage to modify it .
The decoupling proposed to us for certain sectors as an instrument capable of creating a new model for agricultural policy is not viable if you maintain the criterion of historical references in order to set the decoupled aid by farm .
The direct aid , as laid out , corresponds to the logic of the market and is directly linked to quantities produced and the yields allocated .
According to the information that you yourself have provided , in 2001 5 % of European farmers received 50 % of the direct subsidies .
You cannot ask us to accept the validity of this great imbalance in the distribution of aid in order to support the implementation of a new CAP .
In the herbaceous sector , a model in which you propose total decoupling , 3 % of farms receive 40 % of the support .
If we work on that basis , if we allow that situation to continue , Commissioner , we would be changing everything so that everything can stay the same .
Please allow me once again to ask you to change the criteria for allocating decoupled aid ; use multifunctional criteria in order to establish genuine multifunctional aid by farm .
Agricultural multifunctionality means that agriculture contributes to the maintenance of the rural population , creating jobs .
It also helps to preserve the environment , preventing depopulation and desertification of our territory .
You should therefore introduce the criterion of territory , the criterion of agricultural surface area , the criterion of employment generated and of the environmental benefits contributed by the farm and then we will be in a position to talk about genuine multifunctional aid .
Of a genuine decoupling of aid to production , but of a genuine coupling of aid to producers and their farms .
You yourself recognise that this proposed decoupling will create serious problems for many small and medium-sized farms , in less favoured and less productive areas .
If that is the case , change it , Commissioner , because otherwise we will be banishing many of the European Union 's small and medium-sized farms from the agricultural system .
Another key element of this reform is modulation .
In June I applauded and supported it .
Let us reinforce rural development by means of significant modulation , transferring funds from the first pillar to the second pillar .
What is now proposed to us following the budgetary Council in Brussels on 24 and 25 October - where the Community budget was cut - is that just 6 % of the modulation should go to rural development , leaving the rest to fund sectoral reforms in the first pillar .
It is true , as you say , that this is a Council agreement and that the Council therefore has political responsibility for it , as do those people who , like my government , applauded it and who lied to the farmers , telling them that they would guarantee sufficient budget until 2013 .
That is not true .
In 2008 there will be problems , as you have acknowledged .
I would ask you to be a little more rebellious , to make a little more effort , if you really believe that rural development has to be strengthened in order to create a more sustainable and fairer CAP .
I say no to a linear modulation , which would mean that the cut in direct aid would affect all farmers equally in order to fund the budgetary gaps in the Brussels agreement .
And I say no to a modulation which is the same regardless of differences between favoured and less favoured areas , and which does not take account of the farmers ' incomes .
And I say no to dealing with the person who receives EUR 5 000 in the same way as the person who receives EUR 50 000 or more .
That is not fair , Commissioner .
For all these reasons , I would ask you , please , to show flexibility , not to expel the small and medium-sized farms from the market .
Those smaller farms guarantee the viability of a rural framework which take up more than 80 % of European rural territory .
This reform , essentially , does not provide cohesion , it does not contribute more social justice to an agricultural policy which is in great need of it .
I would ask you to reflect and to modify this proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when the Greek Government took over the Council Presidency on 1 January 2003 , the reform of the common agricultural policy was one of its focal points .
Thus , negotiations to close this dossier were one of the main objectives of the Greek Presidency , in cooperation of course with the European Commission and the European Parliament .
Our Council discussed the Commission 's proposals at its meetings in February , March and April on the basis of the Presidency 's questionnaires , which focused on reform issues of particular importance .
The Presidency drew positive conclusions from this procedure and decided to give impetus to the negotiations by creating a High Level Group .
The role of this group was mainly to prepare the crucial summit of Council ministers in June .
The push towards reaching an agreement was reinforced at the Council on 26 and 27 May , when Commissioner Fischler and I met each minister in order to identify basic problems and possible solutions and reach an honest compromise .
Both the Commissioner and I found to our satisfaction that we have the support of the majority of ministers for our timetable .
This majority is convinced that , provided that we achieve the right mixture in the content of the dossier , we shall be able to take decisions before the end of the Greek Presidency , in other words at the June Council .
I should like to point out to Parliament that the Ministers for Agriculture of the 10 new states participated in the tripartite consultations .
The European Parliament is a particularly important factor in the procedure to formulate the future common agricultural policy .
Your resolution in November 2002 on the Commission communication gave the Commission important pointers for the orientation of its legislative proposals .
The opinion of the European Parliament on the Commission 's legislative proposals for the reform of the CAP is exceptionally important and is awaited by all with keen interest .
I should like at this point to thank all the rapporteurs , the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and , of course , all the members of the Committee on Agriculture , who managed in such a short space of time to complete their efforts and vote on the truly interesting reports on the Commission 's package of proposals .
This consistency on the part of the European Parliament , and especially the Agriculture Committee , will allow the House to give its opinion on the European Commission 's proposals in good time , thereby enabling our Council to pursue an honest and sincere compromise .
This compromise will not ignore the European agricultural model based on family holdings or the multifunctionality of agriculture or , of course , the needs of less favoured areas , as confirmed by the European Council in Brussels in October 2002 .
Allow me now to refer to the most important issues in our overall endeavour .
The first is decoupling .
This is without doubt the core of reform . This is what is causing the greatest difficulty in finding a commonly accepted solution .
The approaches to this vary between the Member States , with the consequence that , so far , material reservations have been expressed on a series of individual elements .
One initial issue is the entry into force of the system .
The view expressed by certain members of our Council with so-called partial decoupling is also particularly important .
Although this sort of approach could , in principle , constitute one element of a compromise , we must bear in mind that various interpretations of differing content are given to the term partial decoupling .
There are also Member States who have expressed themselves in favour of the derogation from decoupling for certain products while , on the other hand , other Member States have come out in favour of the integration of more products , in order to avoid competitive phenomena between the productive sectors .
The opinion of the European Parliament on this crucial issue will , I hope , help us find a satisfactory solution .
Second issue : modulation .
Most Member States have expressed reservations as to the franchise level of EUR 5 000 for the derogation from the obligation to gradually reduce support , whereas others wish for an intermediate scale to be provided for , which will allow for the more progressive application of gradual reductions on the larger and more competitive holdings .
Other issues on which the views of the Member States diverge are the need to safeguard small and medium-sized producers , the application of principles of social justice and the wish for more straightforward administration on farm holdings .
We must not forget that the arrangements also aim to save resources , which will be used to fund future reforms of the common organisation of the markets .
In other words , because agricultural resources are specific , any increase in the franchise or any other similar arrangement must not jeopardise either the funding of future reforms in dairy products , sugar or Mediterranean products or the financial ceiling .
The third issue is cross-compliance .
Almost all the Member States take a positive position on this measure in principle .
The problem lies in the fact that this endeavour is considered to involve an excessive administrative and financial cost , which is disproportionately high in relation to the objective pursued .
Consequently , our efforts must tend towards finding ways which will allow demands to be restricted to the absolutely necessary , and making provision for greater flexibility in the Member States , with the possible gradual application of the proposed system .
Ladies and gentlemen , various measures have been proposed within the framework of the Community policy on rural development , in the aim of responding better to the concerns of society as regards environmental protection , compliance with Community standards in the agricultural sector , improving the conditions in which animals are kept and higher food specification standards .
These ideas on the part of the Commission have attracted a great deal of support .
It became clear during the various stages of discussion of the new measures that the reform of the common agricultural policy must be the starting point for simplifying the Community farming development policy .
At sectoral level , the European Commission 's proposals need improving so that the Council can adopt them within the framework of an overall package .
Finally , the reform of the common agricultural policy must include specific measures for young farmers , who represent the future of European farming , and specific arrangements for disadvantaged , isolated and problem areas of the European Union currently threatened with abandonment .
I should like now to refer to the financial aspects of the proposals for the reform of the common agricultural policy . Discussions in the Council have focused on the anticipated financial impact of the proposed market measures and the financial aspects of the main elements of the reform proposals from linked payments , gradual reduction and modulation .
The Commission 's expenditure forecasts show that the modulation and gradual reduction measures are required in order to safeguard compliance with the financial ceilings set by the summit in Brussels in October 2002 .
As the presidency , we shall endeavour to ensure that the solutions adopted are within the framework of the financial frameworks decided for the European Union budget .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , our Council has accepted that the present economic climate is such that we need to go one step further in adjusting the common agricultural policy .
We all need to recognise that the common agricultural policy was never static and that it has always responded to changing circumstances by adjusting existing and creating new means .
These decisions have always been founded on the Community method , which means cooperation between the institutions and compromise between the Member States within the framework of the Council .
Today we are at a crucial stage in the overall process .
With pragmatism and good will , which have always been demonstrated both by the institutions and the Member States , I am optimistic that we shall be able to reach political agreement over coming weeks .
I should like to assure you , ladies and gentlemen , that the Council , like the citizens of Europe , awaits the views of the European Parliament with the keenest interest .
.

( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen , the reports by Mr Bautista Ojeda , Mr Cunha , Mrs Jeggle , Mr Olsson , Mrs Rodríguez Ramos , and Mr Souchet , as well as the proposals by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development are , in my view , truly impressive evidence of the commitment with which Parliament intends to tackle the pressing challenges facing European agriculture and the future of the common agricultural policy .
For that , I wish to extend to you all my warmest thanks .
I do think that there is a large degree of unanimity among Parliament , the Commission and the Member States when it comes to analysing the problem and defining our general objectives .
There is no doubt that this consensus is founded on the common denominator of the model of multifunctional and sustainable agriculture , the maintenance of which is of prime concern to all of us .
This model is our programme .
If the common agricultural policy is to claim to be sustainable , it must be consistently guided by economic , social and environmental objectives .
If we measure these objectives against the reality , the extent of what still remains to be done becomes apparent .
The social function of agriculture , the general economic framework , the stability of international trade relations , the maintenance of the environment , the preservation of cultural landscapes and , above all , the production of high-quality , safe food - all these things , taken together , are the challenges that we must overcome in the interests of farmers and in the interests of all Europe 's other citizens .
It is these factors that underlie the Commission 's proposals for reform , which are being debated here today .
We want to adapt market management mechanisms to future conditions of supply and demand , in order to avert crises before they develop .
We want to make direct payments that are compatible with the market and with our international trading obligations .
We have to offer farmers the legitimate expectation of adequate payments and determine the amounts paid in individual cases by reference to historic levels of support .
The expectations of present-day society cannot be ignored ; we have to tie the direct payments to criteria measuring the protection of the environment and of animals , the safety of food and safety at work .
We want to facilitate uniformly productive farming and see cultural landscapes preserved by means of agricultural activity rather than through any other kind .
To the instruments of rural development policy , we want to add elements guaranteeing quality and protecting animals .
We are obliged to introduce degression in order to secure finance for new reforms , and modulation can help to develop rural development policy .
Last but not least , we do not want our reforms to lose sight of the need for cohesion .
In listing these elements , I am treading upon the ground that is , to a substantial extent , common to all of us .
I do not want to deny , though , that there are differences - some of them major ones - as regards the assessment of the situation and the choice of the appropriate instruments .
I am of course aware that we still have some way to go before we reach agreement .
As the President of the Agriculture Council said , however , this is for us the way forward , both in Parliament and in the Council of Agriculture Ministers .
Looking at the specific elements in the Cunha report , I have to acknowledge that it contains much food for thought , and I also thank Mr Cunha for his clear affirmation of the need for reform .
I , too , am sympathetic to preferential treatment for disadvantaged areas , but I wish neither to repudiate nor to endorse the idea that applying different modulation rates is the most appropriate means of doing so .
There are also reasonable arguments to be adduced in favour of not granting farm income payments for certain vulnerable production sectors such as the keeping of suckler cows , sheep or goats , not least the maintenance of agricultural production in problem areas .
We do , though , have to consider the drawbacks of such a course of action , which includes such things as the market-distorting effect of coupled aid , or the constraints that prevent farmers from doing the most economically sensible thing for their businesses .
There is sound reasoning , too , behind the idea of excluding fruit and vegetables from the land eligible for support , yet we also have to ensure that we do not , overall , go so far as to risk losing the advantages of decoupled aid .
In the Olsson report and the Committee on Agriculture 's amendments to it , I admire Members ' ambitious visions of the further development of rural areas .
I agree entirely with Mr Olsson that we should all make the effort to avoid the proposals being watered down .
This makes me sceptical about the large number of proposed amendments , and also about their scope .
In my view , programme packages put together on the basis of Regulation 1257 should not be wholly dismantled halfway through the programming period .
I might add that the existing Budget framework does not permit fundamental changes to the amounts and rates of aid .
Ultimately , the Commission also has to take care that the whole package should retain its coherence .
The same can be said of the rules for state aid and the regulations of the Structural Funds .
We should not forget that the great debate on the future of structural policy still lies before us .
When the Commission presents the third cohesion report at the end of this year , it will also be putting forward proposals for the new , post-2006 structural policy .
This brings me to the reports on the market regulations , and I would like to start with the Souchet report on cereals and starch .
We have learned from the experience of recent years that , in Agenda 2000 , we took too little account of market development .
Our analysis of long-term prospects gives very clear indications that , without further changes to market support , the EU 's cereals producers will be unable to find adequate markets for their produce .
That , at the end of the day , is what counts .
This dilemma is made even more acute by changes in the exchange rate of the euro against the dollar .
It is for that reason that we must regrettably cut intervention prices by 5 % as scheduled , and stop increasing them on a monthly basis .
As is well known , this still involves a number of specific problems - with rye , for example , intervention stocks of which have increased to 5.3 million tonnes , equivalent to more than the harvest for a normal year .
This state of affairs , already unsustainable , may well get even worse after enlargement in 2004 .
Responsibility for these structural surpluses lies primarily with the intervention mechanism , and so we should do away with the problem for good , rather than - as the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is proposing - fixing our sights on a partial solution in the form of the introduction of national indicative maximum quantities .
As I see it , there is no alternative to abolishing intervention for rye .
From the point of view of economic principle , the retention of production refunds in the starch sector is no longer necessary , as market prices will correspond to those on the global market .
Any minimum price for starch potatoes are made questionable by measures in the cereals sector , with which it competes .
Moreover , the retention of a 50 % coupled premium will provide sufficient economic incentive to grow starch potatoes .
Turning to dried fodder , I would like , in order that the Commission 's position be better understood , to remind you of the trenchant criticism levelled at these rules by independent studies and the Court of Auditors ' report , on the grounds of adverse effects on the environment .
There is no doubt that the amendments aimed at using aid rules to promote technical progress , in order , in particular , to minimise energy consumption , are of interest , but I ask myself whether it really does make sense to do something of this sort within the framework of market support measures .
Would the rural development programmes not be a better framework for such a scheme ?
In view of the social , economic and environmental significance of the rice sector , I have no wish to question the need for a market regulation on rice , but there is no getting away from the need for radical reform , without which , we would end up with enormous intervention stocks , which - quite apart from the resultant cost to the Community budget - we would be unable to sell .
I am glad that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development shares this view in principle and supports the essence of the Commission 's proposals for dealing with this .
A number of your amendments , such as the increase of import volumes and the obligatory price refund , have my complete support .
As for your other proposals , I support their general tendency , but not the form of words you have chosen .
I am convinced , though , that the guidance you have given me will help with the final negotiations in the Council .
As regards import rules , any change to the bound customs duties on rice would have to be negotiated under Article 28 of GATT .
For that to happen , the Council would , ultimately , have to give the Commission a mandate to conduct negotiations on the subject .
In addition , as I understand it , import duties for rough rice should be checked separately .
If , however , a permanent intervention mechanism for rice were to be retained - albeit only at the level of EUR 150 per tonne - that would prove very expensive .
I do , though , have an open mind as regards testing a standard mechanism at a price level that is compatible with the conditions expected on the markets and that prevents a renewed increase in stocks .
This brings me to the last two reports - Mrs Jeggle 's - on market regulation .
I note that the members of the Committee recommend the extension of the rules on milk quotas until 2015 , whilst taking a critical view of the bringing forward of price cuts under Agenda 2000 from 2005 to 2004 , as well as of other cuts in intervention prices and the limit on the intervention volume for butter .
I am convinced , however , that these steps are needed in order to make the EU 's milk sector more competitive .
Being the world 's largest exporter of dairy products , we also have to allow developments on global markets , and discussions in the WTO , to influence our decisions .
It is evident that the 1 % increase in the milk quota in both 2007 and 2008 is another sensitive issue .
Independent studies have shown that increased consumption means that the markets are able to cope with these additional quantities .
I am therefore convinced that this proposal makes sense .
If , however , you want first to wait for the changes to happen , the Commission will not stand in the way of a discussion on the subject .
I am sceptical , though , about the proposals for granting higher support payments , increasing them in disadvantaged areas , differentiating on the basis of quality standards or fixing prices in line with the costs of labour and production .
I do , however , have an open mind when it comes to the amendments on the position of those who market their goods directly and the consideration of the question of to what extent the Member States might add part of the transferred quotas to their national reserves .
I share the general view of the Committee 's members that the milk sector must remain profitable and that producers ' incomes must be safeguarded .
I can also assure you that I will give careful consideration to all the proposals you have made .
Finally , let me turn to Mrs Rodríguez Ramos ' own-initiative report on multifunctional agriculture and reform of the CAP .
You have said , Mrs Rodríguez Ramos , that you cannot bring yourself to oppose the objectives of reform , and that is quite something .
We all want to build up the rural environment , especially in disadvantaged areas , and this is what the budget funds allocated , the use of sustainability as a guiding principle , and the payment of farmers for the performance of social services , are all about .
It goes without saying that we have to apply funds in the most effective way , in the way most suited to the end in mind , but we also have to account to the taxpayer for this .
Our concept of rural development and the use of modulation to strengthen it are tangible steps towards the achievement of the objectives you have set out .
This is a more than adequate reward for agriculture 's multifunctional nature .
What you are demanding is a massive redistribution of aid funds , and I cannot agree to it .
I am not convinced that the system would thereby , and automatically , be made more just , but I do understand that we , as a matter of necessity , have to give special consideration to cohesion ; that is why we have included an element of cohesion in the choice of the allocation key of the additional rural development resources that will be available in future , and that must be retained .
All in all , I would like to thank you most warmly for all that you have done , and will add that I look forward with eager anticipation to the forthcoming contributions .
I will be happy to reply to your questions at the end of the debate .
Mr President , the Commission 's goals are laudable and certainly comprehensible in a macroeconomic framework , but it is hard to support them .
The Commission advocates greater price competitiveness , but also respect for the demands of society , in other words , sustainability and quality .
We need to ask ourselves how European farmers are going to manage to meet the demands of society , which is calling for extremely rigid rules on production methods , guarantees , food security and so forth , at a time when they are being forced to reduce prices and keep costs down if they are to continue to be competitive on world markets .
The Commission advocates simplification .
In my opinion , an analysis of the proposals reveals that these are complex measures which will increase rather than reduce bureaucracy .
Just one element of the proposals - the system of rights in respect of decoupling - suffices to make it clear by exactly how much bureaucracy will increase costs for our farms .
I hold a pessimistic view - and I sincerely hope I am wrong - which can be broken down into three very simple points .
Firstly , the proposal to reduce prices , together with decoupling , will lead to large-scale abandoning of production in many regions and many sectors , which will speed up structural changes and cause an exodus from rural areas .
In addition to the impact on farms , decoupling will result in the dismantling of the agrifood chain , threatening jobs and having a severe impact on farming cooperatives .
Secondly , the European market will be strongly influenced by the main world exporters , which , in our view , will certainly not be the developing countries .
Thirdly , the only new measures that will be adopted to help farmers implement more stringent rules and safeguard quality will have to be financed by the farmers themselves through cuts in support .
In view of this , I do not know how it is possible to endorse reform .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the amendments voted on in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development - something like eight hundred of them - have made plain how controversial the Commission 's proposals on the future of the common agricultural policy for Europe are .
The spectrum extends from outright rejection to qualified approval .
Despite that , we have managed to draw up a compromise that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development was able to adopt ; this entailed a feat of strength the like of which has never before been seen , although it must be conceded that this was done under great pressure of time . This compromise represents , as a German weekly periodical puts it , a respectable staging-post on the road to an agricultural policy that will take us up to 2013 .
The imminent WTO negotiations , the soon-to-be-accomplished enlargement of the EU , and a mandate to review Agenda 2000 - these were the constraints upon the Commission when , in January 2003 and at the Council 's behest , it presented Parliament with its proposals for its consideration .
If it is the case that , in the reports now being put to the vote in this House , much has been toned down , much added , and a certain amount rejected as currently impracticable , then that has , in the final analysis , happened under pressure from those who work in agriculture , whom it is our function to represent .
Many critics worked on the assumption that , just as opposing views on the proposals were to be found in the Council , it would not be possible , at the present time , for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to come up with a workable solution .
It may be that the Council had been covertly hoping that Parliament - because it was unable to do so or , above all , because of pressure of time - would not come to any decision , so that it would be this House , rather than the Council , that would be able to put the brakes on an agricultural reform that is much needed .
I can tell the Ministers of Agriculture that they are way off the mark .
Whatever the result of Thursday 's vote may be , it will not be binding , as agriculture is still not yet subject to codecision , a situation which , it is to be hoped , will soon change .
The result of this vote will , however , send a signal and impose on you , the Council , who are supposed to take final decisions , the duty of finding your own compromises before this Presidency 's time is up .
We in Parliament have done our homework , and , speaking on behalf of my group , I can only recommend to the Council that it act in accordance with this House 's balanced proposals .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , we have gone from an Agenda 2000 mid-term review of the CAP to a reform that will be valid until 2013 , in other words for ten years .
It is therefore important that we make no mistakes in our fundamental choices .
With this in mind , Commissioner , you have proposed two major objectives , multifunctionality and competitiveness in agriculture , both in the light of the desire to increase the European Union 's room for manoeuvre in WTO negotiations .
On behalf of my group , I would therefore like to support this promotion of a multifunctional agriculture to meet the expectations of our society and underline the adequacy of resources , the conditionality of aids and the strengthening of actions in the second pillar .
I would like to stress , however , that the rapporteur , Mr Cunha , has had the pertinent idea of increasing the modulation of aid rather than adopting your combination of degression and modulation , which is complex , administratively cumbersome and would leave few resources for the rural pillar .
Turning now to the objective of competitiveness which , you say , entails reductions in prices for cereals and milk , I would like to point out that the application of multifunctionality will result in an overall increase in production costs , while at the same time direct aid to holdings will fall in the 15 Member States .
In this context , to follow your recommendations would be unwise , to say the least , especially since it seems to me that the idea of Europe as an agricultural exporter needs to be looked at again to take account of the new market of 450 million consumers that we will shortly be .
You seem , Commissioner , to see the decoupling of aid as a miracle solution , but it would be better if this were done partially and gradually , to put the Union in a better negotiating position at the WTO , but also so that we can make a first-stage appraisal before possibly going further .
My group , the PSE , is proposing an amendment to this effect to increase decoupling to 50 % for arable crops and male cattle from the time it is first implemented .
It is a solution that combines boldness with caution and I ask all my fellow Members to support it .
Finally , as it is legitimate to make a better distribution between farmers , crops and regions of the aids intended for holdings , my group fully supports the Cunha report 's Amendment No 61 .
This amendment in fact recommends that multifunctional credits be allocated according to the criteria of area and employment from 2007 .
Over all , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , in the absence of co-decision I think we have contributed enlightened and well thought-out opinions .
I therefore want to conclude by congratulating Mr Cunha on his excellent report , which is the basis of the debate , and those by the other rapporteurs , who build on it consistently .
Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , I am on this occasion to express an opinion on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
In my previous speech , I spoke mainly on my own behalf as rapporteur .
The difference is , in itself , marginal .
I am all in favour of decentralisation and like to see things done on a small scale , but I want to say to my esteemed fellow MEPs that globalisation is on the way for agriculture too .
It does not help to bury one 's head , ostrich-like , in the sand and say that we have not noticed anything and that we do not wish to change anything .
When I listen to my fellow MEPs , I find that many of them are in actual fact behaving like the proverbial ostrich .
What is odd is that , in this Assembly , people appear to be more conservative the further to the left they are .
I should like to make a comment on the Commissioner 's view regarding multifunctionality and sustainability .
As those of us in the ELDR Group have said , it is important and a matter of urgency that we should in the long term deregulate agricultural policy , but now it is very important , in the near future , to guarantee aid to a form of agriculture that is multifunctional and sustainable .
That is something with which we agree .
We are trying to change the systems so that we have something to fall back on , the world being as it is .
Mr President , I wish of course to thank everyone for all the work that has been done .
It is fantastic that we coped successfully with all these amendments in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
As representative of my group , I also want to say that we support the compromise in Mr Cunha 's report .
We support it because it is in favour of the principle of decoupling .
That is important , and even if we do not go the whole hog , we shall nonetheless make a little progress .
To the President-in-Office of the Council , I wish to say that , if now we have taken a decision , I regret that we do not also have the right of co-decision .
I nonetheless think that the Council and the President-in-Office of the Council must make use of the opportunity that does in actual fact exist , not completely to fall in with Parliament but to go a step further .
If you do that , you will in any case serve my , and perhaps also the Commission 's , interests rather better .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the mid-term review has nevertheless been quite an adventure and it is no bad thing that we , the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , have arrived at a possible compromise , which might , it seems to me , satisfy farmers .
We wanted the policy directions to be clear to all and that is why we have given the Cunha report a clear introduction .
For us Greens , the positive aspect of this compromise is that it strengthens rural development .
The thorough grooming proposed today allows European farmers to keep the positive aspects of multifunctionality by strengthening rural development , the system of modulation allowing them to pass from the first to the second pillar .
I am thinking in particular of Amendment No 44 to Article 12 .
This proposed modulation uses a territorial criterion for the application of different percentage points , taking account of less-favoured areas .
Indeed , as the rapporteur says in his justification , the objective must be to consolidate the structure of producer organisations .
Moreover , this amendment obliges States to commit themselves to rural development , since they will only get 100 % of the EAGGF Guarantee amounts if they commit themselves to obligatory national co-financing .
I am sure that will encourage States to correctly finance all the social , food quality and environmental aspects of rural development .
The territorial farming contracts model introduced by France was an excellent precursor from this point of view .
It should be noted , since it is essential for the future , that Member States may use this modulation to fund their national contribution for the so very necessary establishment of young farmers .
Similarly , States may - and in our opinion must - chose to finance the compensatory payments to less-favoured areas and to areas subject to environmental constraints or agro-environmental measures - all this without affecting the overall amount allocated by the State to the second pillar .
This strengthening of rural development is therefore a step in the right direction for two very good reasons : the first is to consolidate good farming practices , more extensive practices , protecting the health of the consumer , respecting the environment and biodiversity and producing a good social added value ; the second is to protect the rural world from the vicissitudes of the aggressive commercial liberalism advocated by the WTO .
Thus , the multifunctional specifics of European agriculture or the exploitation of products specific to a particular region will still be able to be paid for under the second pillar , which affords the best protection for small producers in less-favoured areas .
In addition , there is the difference between the degression of direct payments to fragile areas ( 6 % ) and other areas ( 8 % ) .
If it is to remain meaningful , this strengthening of the second pillar must preserve the milk quotas which have proved their effectiveness in safeguarding mountain stock farming .
We must also protect and consolidate natural pasture land , but more than that we must continue to support the fodder and , more generally , the protein crops necessary for healthy , high-quality stock farming - the alfalfa mentioned by Mr Souchet - and maintain the necessary schemes .
It ought to be possible to grow protein crops on all frozen land since Europe is in deficit in them and growing vegetable protein is also beneficial for the quality of the soil and the environment and for the quality of animal feed .
On the sensitive issue of decoupling , we had to decide between those who supported total decoupling and those who wanted none .
We feel that the compromise of going a step at a time opens up a perspective that everyone can accept .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Commission 's legislative proposal contains elements of reform of the common agricultural policy which we feel give some cause for concern .
Total decoupling , proposed by the Commission , will lead to widespread abandonment of production , particularly in disadvantaged areas or areas classed as marginal , and cannot on its own , in any case , provide an exhaustive response to the need for substantial CAP reform .
Indeed , although it gives us more room for manoeuvre in WTO negotiations , total decoupling of production aid could , in the long term , lead to the dismantling of all market management mechanisms .
We consider reform to be necessary , but it must be carried out with due regard for the goals laid down in the Treaties and for the principles of quality , environmental protection and , above all , employment .
With a view to increasing employment , Member States must be given the tangible possibility of making employment a criterion in allocating a quota of the direct aid provided under the first pillar .
In any case , we feel that preserving our farming system and fostering a future of security and dignity for our farmers must continue to be priorities , and we hope that it will be precisely these priorities which will influence any WTO negotiations , not vice versa .
For all these reasons , we believe that gradual , vertical decoupling of aid is possible , with a view to gradually limiting the application of the measure to a few sectors .
It is far too early to extend decoupling to the animal-rearing sector , rice and durum wheat , considering , not least , the definitive nature of the measure .
Then we cannot endorse the proposed differences in aid and we believe that money saved through modulation must be channelled principally into preserving rural development measures which include , not least , support for quality , with no distinction made between disadvantaged and non-disadvantaged areas .
These are the main reasons why we have tabled a number of amendments on behalf of our group , amendments which I hope will be accepted by the House .
We have also , on behalf of the UEN Group , tabled a number of amendments seeking to introduce a more balanced system of aid to the nut sector , a system which , taking into account the different production situations in the Union , establishes a fairer distribution of support between the different Member States and more aid per hectare than was originally proposed by the Commission .
We welcome the introduction of a distinct animal-rearing sector , with the goal of preserving traditional rearing methods and the use thereof in the territory .
We will firmly support all the genuinely important amendments which , like those tabled by our group , seek to establish a system of special benefits for young farmers with a view to facilitating access for new generations to production activities .
Lastly , as regards the dairy sector , we believe that it is desirable to move on from the quota system and that , 20 years on from the adoption of the temporary quota regime , it is now time to bring about an appropriate transition to normal market dynamics through a conclusive process with a reasonably short timeframe .
In any case , we believe that the agreement in principle achieved on the key principles of the reform could serve as a sound basis for the future Council agreement .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have only two minutes to speak so I will get right to the point , and you will no doubt understand , Mr Fischler , that two minutes to tell you everything I think about your proposal , which is , in fact , a complete overhaul of the CAP , is a very short time indeed .
What can we say about the decoupling you are imposing on us ?
Even the United States has abandoned the idea .
That should give us some food for thought .
Whether it is total or partial , fixed or degressive , it will result firstly in a divide between farmers and citizens , secondly , in additional administrative burdens , not to mention the audits you have added , and , thirdly , in speculation in land .
What is happening as regards the transfer of rights ?
I have now asked you that question three times and you have still not responded .
Perhaps I will be in luck today .
What can we say about the absence of any future prospects not only for our young people but also for our current farmers ?
What can we say about your silence regarding Community preference and border protection ?
What can we say about the lack of information on the impact of your proposals ?
The studies were launched very late in the day .
What can we say about the sprinkling of information you have granted us regarding intermediary areas and less-favoured areas ?
What can we say about ecoconditionality and these 38 directives , some of which are the responsibility of the states ?
What can we say about the 1 200 amendments that have been tabled ?
They are proof that your proposal has not satisfied anyone in spite of the good will of the rapporteurs , which I commend today .
Commissioner , your proposal fills farmers with despair .
You have been utterly deaf to their requests .
They do not need a social worker ; they are men and women who simply want to make a decent living from their work and their production .
Mr President , thank you very much for your understanding of my request , and thank you to all the Members of the European Parliament .
As you know , air traffic controllers are currently on strike and the aeroplane on which I have to return to Athens will not be able to take off after 5.30 .
I shall try to say a few things in reply to the very accurate comments by all the Members and the rapporteurs and spokesmen .
I can assure you that I have noted all your proposals with particular interest and shall take them into account in the compromise proposal which we shall submit to the Council of Ministers for Agriculture to be held in Luxembourg on 11 and 12 June .
I have noted with particular interest your accurate proposals on the repercussions of full decoupling , especially on small and medium-sized holdings , together of course with the repercussions which full decoupling may have on holdings in remote and disadvantaged areas , which is why I think that the Council will show particular interest in these proposals .
Now as far as modulation is concerned , I should like to assure you that I am taking serious account of the limit proposed by Mr Cunha , which is slightly higher than that proposed by the Commission , but of course this is a matter that will also be discussed at the Council of Ministers for Agriculture .
I shall close on the issue of cross compliance .
I think that all the ministers are calling for greater transparency in the payment of subsidies .
They are calling for the money paid by European taxpayers to be put to good use , as regards the development of farm holdings , the production of quality products , healthy products for European citizens and of course for our customers , and that is why we want payment procedures to be as simple as possible .
With these words , Mr President , I would like to thank you once again for your very courteous treatment . I assure you that the Presidency will take all the measures at its disposal so that an honest and sincere compromise on a new dynamic and efficient European agriculture is reached at the Council of Ministers for Agriculture on 11 and 12 June .
Thank you , President-in-Office of the Council .
I am sure that your colleagues will make sure that you receive brief accounts of the opinions expressed while you were absent from the debate .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I can assure Mr Martinez that I am very proud of Austrian agricultural policy and of what has been achieved in Austrian agriculture and by the farmers and others who live in rural areas .
Let me start by thanking most warmly all the rapporteurs for the work they have done .
I would also like to extend the warmest thanks to all the staff of this House and also to those of the Commission .
Without them , it would not have been possible , in this short time , to agree on these compromises , which have met with overwhelming approval in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
We all know what close ties bind agriculture to rural areas and to the people who live and work in them , that rural areas are a place of relaxation for our industrialised society , and that they contribute to cultural and biological diversity .
Rural development , then , must be about more than ensuring that food is produced , for the European model of agricultural policy , which is committed to extensive and multifunctional agriculture , makes great demands of us .
The first pillar , which governs the organisation of markets and delivers production incentives , is closely connected with the second , which contains the policies on agricultural structures and rural development .
It is therefore of fundamental importance that these two instruments should be kept in constant balance and harmony with each other , rather than being applied counter-productively .
Objectives and means for rural areas can be worked out centrally , but they must take effect on a regional basis .
Europe 's rural areas are very diverse and have different characteristics , advantages and also problems .
This means that , in many areas , the rural development programme very much needs , as an instrument , to bear the stamp of the regions to which it applies .
There is , in addition , a need for the regions to be fundamentally motivated and involved .
Although the Commission proposal and the report represent two important steps in the right direction , I do believe that it would be desirable for the second pillar to be strengthened to an even more marked degree and for rural areas thus to be developed in a sustainable way .
I can see no comprehensible explanation of why the redefinition of objective criteria that the report calls for is necessary ; I think the definition is perfectly adequate already .
Integrated rural development must not be restricted solely to agricultural structures , for the maintenance and the functioning of rural areas are dependent on a functioning infrastructure being in place .
The utmost care must also be taken with the distribution of funds , as , when supporting the infrastructures of other , new , businesses , care must be taken to ensure that funds from the EAGGF are allocated only to farmers .
Let me conclude by saying that extensive and sustainable agriculture is the guarantee that production will go on in every region .
For example , an Austrian farmer safeguards three jobs both up- and downstream , and we know too that , as enlargement progresses , agriculture will not exhaust the EU 's budget resources ; on the contrary , regional policy has need of many more of them .
( Restrained applause )
Mr President , I would like to speak principally on the report by Mr Cunha .
As regards the other reports , I want to mention only the question of intervention in rye , which the Commission proposes should be done away with and not replaced .
I therefore support the proposal on intervention in the form in which we modified it in the Souchet report in the Committee .
There must continue in future to be the possibility of compensation for certain specified sites , the natural characteristics of which allow only a limited number of economic alternatives .
Let me turn , though , to the Cunha report , which I wholeheartedly endorse .
It incorporates elements that we social democrats have repeatedly called for , such as the requirement for both modulation and cross-compliance , as well as aspects related to the protection of animals .
The preamble inserted before Article 1 reflects this House 's priorities : a secure income for farmers along with support for environmental protection and employment in rural areas .
What I see as important in this is that Parliament is strongly advocating that a start be made on decoupling aid from production ; in the text voted on by the Committee , though , this affirmation is still very muted and vague .
This , in my view , is where we have to choose a form of words that clarifies what we are calling for .
It is for this reason that the Group of the Party of European Socialists has tabled amendments providing for decoupling to start , in 2005 , at 50 % and , following the presentation of a report from the Commission in 2007 , for it to rise progressively and be extended to other sectors .
This is especially important , as , in the compromise motions , we have agreed on the partial decoupling of only two sectors .
Much as we should , certainly , welcome this introduction of decoupling , we should not lose sight of the longer-term perspective .
So I hope that the Group of the Party of European Socialists ' Amendments Nos 126 and 127 will be endorsed , as these amendments will enable Parliament to send the Council a more emphatic message .
Let me conclude by addressing yet another important aspect , that of renewable raw materials .
These offer farmers in many regions great potential for viable alternative crops while , at the same time , having a positive effect on the environment .
The possibility that our amendment - in contrast to the Commission proposal - will continue to enable set aside areas to be used for cultivating renewable raw materials is one that I very much welcome .
Mr President , Commissioner , we have in our hands a huge programme of reform , one that right now is unavoidable .
Our committee has , in a spirit of positive cooperation , drafted a large number of amendments to the Commission proposal .
These amendments will serve to hone the reform to make one that is good for the farmer .
As the lower limit for modulation is being raised to EUR 7 500 and less-favoured areas are being treated with special care , agriculture in the Union will also be able to continue in the poorest regions : in the north , in the south and in mountain areas .
Unfavourable conditions must be taken into consideration when distributing funds earmarked for rural development , and for that reason my group has tabled an amendment proposing that the number of LFA areas be added to the criteria for distribution .
We should not race ahead in the matter of milk production if the market situation does not demand it .
We must remember that milk production is of particular importance in the less-favoured areas , and in those areas reduced prices can be a serious threat to motivation with respect to production .
Commissioner , in Finland rye is very special .
Very high quality rye is used there in the production of functional foods .
The Commission should also take such special circumstances as these into consideration .
For us rye is not just a mediocre crop used as fodder , but an appetising daily breakfast food and a staple in our traditional food culture .
Mr President , the rapporteurs and members of the Committee on Agricultural and Rural Development have had a hard job positively revising the Commission proposals for reform of the Agricultural Policy , which are ill thought-out and unreasonable .
I refer specifically to complex cereals , dried fodder , milk , and also to reductions in defence of the gradual decrease and the full decoupling of direct payments .
Particularly in respect of enlargement , it is a positive thing that the majority of the committee are behind my proposal to allow , with regard to rye , a time-limited intervention for locations where there is no alternative to its cultivation .
All in all , however , I am dissatisfied , in particular as the pressure of time was so great that the assembly-line voting did not produce a conclusive result .
Furthermore , I consider it wrong in principle that the majority show such unwavering solidarity with the Commission on the road to decoupling and total liberalisation .
I want to state clearly that , for me , the issue is not about a primitive autarky , but an agricultural policy whose priority is orientation towards the internal market offering ever greater opportunities for regularisation .
Exports should be limited to finished agricultural products and imports subject to special external protection which does not hinder developing countries , and at the same time does not prevent access to the market for cheap goods from large non-multifunctional agricultural export countries , such as the USA and the Cairns Group .
Without these conditions there can be no sustained universal multifunctional agriculture in the European Union .
We should all be clear about this .
In conclusion I would like to mention two further important reasons for rejecting the Cunha report .
Firstly I am opposed to modulation funds being a sort of second Cohesion Fund .
These funds should be used in the interests of rural development in each Member State .
Secondly I consider it wrong that decoupling is being prematurely implemented .
It is therefore obvious that a regionalised land premium is far more progressive .
The proposal from Mr Cunha , however , will be almost impossible to carry through .
Mr President , Commissioner , Parliament has demonstrated that it is willing to shoulder its responsibilities .
I hope that the Convention now adopts both the form and content of what has been jointly decided , and that not too many exemptions will be placed before the Council .
I could understand it if exemptions for all decisions were to find their way to the Commission , but Parliament must be involved in all decisions .
The work before us has not always been easy .
The analysis has been good , new perspectives have been gained , which are reflected in our preamble , but implementation has been somewhat difficult .
With regard to the audit process , for example , we demand that business consultancy is introduced ; this has been taken to mean that we want to tie the hands of businesses .
Let us consider qualified external protection , which should guarantee multifunctionality ; the Commission gave this too little publicity .
A crucial error has also been made with regard to differentiated modulation and re-designation in the second pillar , in that , firstly , too little money is being moved and , secondly , clearly it is not meant to be decoupled in the second pillar , which thus acts as a balancing mechanism for difficult or at-risk types of farming .
Proposals for decoupling - to which I will return later - should have been made immediately .
The issue is not , for example , support for the rye sector as a whole , but for certain specific types of crops in certain regions , and this is exactly what can happen in the second pillar .
Furthermore , no proposals were submitted for abandoning intervention and export subsidisation .
Whereas with milk you have gone down the same old road , you have proved , with regard to rye , just how brutal reform can be .
Both were ill-conceived and an integrated abandonment to a set timescale with quantitative limitations but no more price reductions should be considered .
Decoupling is also a complicated area .
Many have not understood it ; many have understood it and made use of it for their own purposes .
You have once again completely undermined the possibility of greater freedom in price setting in respect of subsidies by immediately backing down when the starch potato industry says , ' but then we 'll get no more raw materials ' .
The reason why these raw materials will no longer be available should have been discussed more thoroughly and questioned more aggressively .
Why does the milk industry fear that decoupling the milk premium will mean certain areas falling by the wayside ?
If everyone is now saying that milk production in these deprived areas ought to be safeguarded - and has it now been ? - the funds remain the same .
If this had been better publicised , the associations working in the interests of these industries would have had less opportunity to cause trouble .
Finally , the second pillar must become the core component of agricultural reform .
Even here the Commission is very restrained and cautious .
Possibly you thought there are not enough funds available and the instruments have not been assembled , but this too is an omission on the part of the Commission .
I hope that , this autumn , there will be a debate between Parliament and the Commission so we can really flesh out the contents of the second pillar and then make it clear that it can and must be a core component of decoupling .
Mr President , Commission proposals for a mid-term reform of the common agricultural policy have led to a very difficult debate .
The tabling of 1 200 amendments represents a serious divergence of views within Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Attempts by the Commission to introduce premature - and in the case of milk - unnecessary reform , have contributed to insecurity and unease among farmers .
Our immediate objective must be to restore farmer confidence in the political process and to safeguard the integrity of the common agricultural policy , outside of which EU agriculture will not survive .
In the time available it is not possible to evaluate the proposals other than to say that the status quo is not an option , the bottom line must be a sustainable profit margin for farmers , and we need assurances that , whatever the outcome , they are fully protected in the context of the WTO talks .
While there appears to be some consensus emerging on decoupling , I have reservations about the long-term implications for a commercially focused EU agriculture .
I pose the question , and not for the first time , what happens following decoupling if the projected price increase in the market place does not materialise ?
Mr President , EU agricultural aid discriminates against the developing countries , the acceding EU Member States , the environment and ecological interests .
The large intensive farms receive the most aid , leading to environmental damage and reduced animal welfare .
In the set-aside scheme , which promotes the cultivation of marginal land , farmers are paid for doing nothing .
The consumer pays twice : he or she pays via tax for the aid and then pays the artificially high prices for everyday goods .
Reform of EU agricultural aid is therefore more necessary than ever .
The June Movement believes that the only real way forward is to abolish discrimination by creating equal conditions through cutting back on agricultural aid with a view to phasing it out entirely .
The cutbacks must be organised in such a way as to create equal conditions for both conventional and organic farms .

This can be achieved by stipulating that no more than 70 % of the aid is to go to the actual acreage , a target that can be reached by removing the higher amount of aid for protein crops and by promoting extensification by setting an upper limit of 0.5 units of livestock per hectare .
This means that the set-aside aid and the additional measures can in this way also be done away with .
The cutbacks must restrict the artificial structural development whereby the large intensive farms receive the largest amount of aid .
This can be done by having the aid relate to upper limits of 150 hectares and 75 units of livestock .
The cutbacks must also create better conditions for livestock .
This can be done by phasing out the aid for skimmed-milk powder from factory calves , as well as by phasing out the aid for the horrendous export of live animals to third countries . Better conditions for the developing counties can be created by phasing out sugar aid and direct aid for exports .
Finally , the EU countries must be placed on an equal footing .
Instead of increasing aid by 100 % for the new countries in 2013 , the old countries should receive 25 % less aid in 2013 .
Commissioner , you are right when you say that we are discussing reforming the CAP at last , but your reform is not the kind of reform we need , still less so if we call for its impact to be reduced , as Parliament seems to be doing .
Your reform does not get to the heart of the CAP issue , which is the scandalous fact that the European Union is continuing and intends to continue in the future to tie up half its budget in subsidies and agricultural protection in order to protect a sector which represents 2 % of the European Union 's GDP .
We constantly talk about the Lisbon objectives , about making the European Union the most competitive knowledge-based economy in the world by 2010 .
How do we think that this objective can be in any way achievable when half of our budget is being used to protect and subsidise agricultural production ?
CAP reform cannot be based on the interests of farmers ; the focus must be on the interests of the European Union , on the interests of all the citizens and all the consumers who are paying 70 % more for milk than they would on an open market free of subsidies ; who are paying 220 % more for meat while their Argentine cousins are starving to death or , if not dying , are suffering the effects of an economic recession because we are preventing them from exporting their meat to Europe ; who are paying 90 % more for sugar while Mozambique is unable to achieve economic recovery because of European protectionism .
The example of New Zealand is significant , although it is a small country .
After the total elimination of subsidies and agricultural protection , the contribution of farming to GDP rose , employment rose , particularly among young farmers , and quality improved .
Even if we talk about protecting the environment and marginal and mountainous areas , if we continue to call for half of the Community budget to be channelled into protecting and subsidising the production and export of European farm products regardless then that is something else altogether .
We are denying ourselves the chance of reaching an agreement on the major WTO trade agreements and , most importantly , we are continuing to harm the European citizens , consumers and taxpayers .
This is the truth , and reform seeking to dismantle the CAP must be placed on the agenda as soon as possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me first make a small , general observation .
At this point , I would like to express our particular thanks to the ladies and gentlemen of the Committee secretariat , to our staff and the staff in the Parliamentary groups .
All have been under enormous pressure of time .
In particular I must thank the rapporteur with dual responsibility for cereals and dried fodder , our French colleague , Mr Dominique Souchet , for his two sound and , from a practical point of view , balanced reports , and above all , for the truly remarkable and transparent cooperation and close coordination across group boundaries , right from the start .
This is not always the case in this House .
We in this House - and we really should see this - consider ourselves the chosen representatives of the public and understand the individual working situation more precisely and also much more clearly than others - even including the Commission .
Now , briefly , let me turn to the report by Mr Souchet on the subject of cereals .
We consider the proposed reduction in the intervention price unnecessary .
Ten years of continuous intervention price reductions have left it almost at the level of the world market price .
Even the additional monthly charges - Commissioner , I know I said ' yes , but ' - ultimately help towards better distribution over the year .
Of course there have been many suggestions here today - for which we are grateful - regarding the proposed situation in the rye sector .
Amendment No 28 - I mention this amendment in particular - also contains a measure to limit surplus .
It provides opportunities for increased consumption at various levels on the one hand , and the restriction of rye cultivation to limited farm locations - as Mrs Fiebiger has already pointed out , this is by and large where the heart of the matter lies .
Regarding potato starch , which is of course regulated by the cereal market organisation , we envisage the fundamental retention of production refunds .
Nevertheless we will get a decoupling or a step-by-step partial decoupling of cereals .
With regard to the report on dried fodder , Commissioner , I find the total abolition of the dried fodder regulation incomprehensible .
For many of our grassland farms the cooperative drying plants maintained by farmers are a valuable means of support , which make an important contribution to the supply of mineral-rich fodder .
As Mr Goepel has already pointed out , we have all seen the danger that discussion of this reform is happening too close to WTO issues , and also to the discussion on the future structure of the enlarged EU .
In actual fact the current discussion and this conclusion are vital .
We have shown that we have carried out our responsibilities regarding co-determination .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too am taking as a starting point the fact that there was absolutely no guarantee that we would reach the vote in plenary .
We are here because of a sensible decision made by the Parliamentary Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which has displayed great commitment and has adopted a method capable of dealing with over 1000 amendments and achieving a reasonable balance in its proposals overall .
Precisely because of this ability , which I hope will be confirmed tomorrow in the House , I am sure that the Commissioner and the Council will pay greater attention to Parliament 's work .
I consider the reports to be well-balanced , particularly Mr Cunha 's report .
We have emphasised the need for reform , and to those who oppose reform with various arguments I would simply say that blocking reform will not protect the CAP - it will ultimately divest it of social legitimacy .
We have therefore concentrated on introducing useful amendments to avoid the risk of decoupled aid , which would become support measures or lead to the abandonment of production .
We consider partial decoupling to be the right way forward .
Lastly , I would like , if I may , to draw the attention of the Presidency and the Commissioner to the decision we have made to maintain support for durum wheat unchanged , and I hope that there will be particular focus on the expiring COMs as well as on this package - oil , tobacco , fruit and vegetables - so that we avoid using the savings made through the decisions we are about to take for some sectors and not others , in other words solely for milk and sugar , thus avoiding exacerbating imbalances between producer countries .
Mr President , I too should like to thank all the rapporteurs .
With regard to decoupling , I also support the Commission proposals to a large extent , but there are exceptions to every rule , of which I should like to mention two .
It should not be the case that agricultural products such as vegetables , fruit , flowers , and so on , which were not subsidised in the past , should now be subsidised indirectly .
In my view , an exception should therefore be provided for in the regulation .
The second exception should apply to potato starch .
To my mind , the 50 % decoupling , as proposed by the Commission , is not sufficient and should remain at 75 % in order to avoid as unacceptable social consequences .
I too am in favour of making the payment of premiums dependent on the observance of environmental requirements , but what are these ?
They are very vague .
If every Member State were to observe the nitrate directive , agricultural policy would become very simple , but , as thirteen of the fifteen Member States do not observe the environmental requirements , we should prescribe clearer parameters .
I would like to make a third remark with regard to the budget in general .
I do not know what the costs are of the reports on which we are about to vote , but the current proposals mean that the budget is already extremely tight as it is .
What will the Commission do when reform proposals are tabled for sugar , for vegetables and fruit , for olive oil and for tobacco ?
Can we then look forward to other reductions , other degression standards ?
This is the question I should like to put to the Commission .
Mr President , the Commission 's recent proposals on the reform of the CAP do not simply recommend a mid-term , corrective review , but give the coup de grace to small and medium-sized farming , reducing the quality and competitiveness of agricultural produce and destroying the environment .
With harsh , forcible measures , which none of the reports we are debating revokes ; rather they gild their destructive logic with anodyne amendments on individual issues , Community farming is being brought into line with conditions on the so-called globalised market and farmers are being turned on Mr Fischler 's ' because I say so ' from producers into businessmen , as he is wont to say ; in other words they are prey to the laws of the market , importers and multinationals in the foodstuffs industry .
Decoupling subsidies from production and paying direct income support , modulation with the gradual reduction and degression of support over and above EUR 5 000 per holding and making aid conditional on strict compliance with environmental standards , so-called cross compliance , are turning the already disastrous CAP into a mechanism for wiping out farmers , with radical changes to the productive map of the countryside .
Mr Cunha 's analgesic proposals such as , for example , the partial decoupling method , in other words making decoupling gradual rather than universal , with fewer products in the first year instead of all products , revoke none of the above and , on a medium-term basis , they will have the same catastrophic results on the rural economy .
The objective of the reform of the CAP is to save resources from agriculture for other policies - EMU , CFSP and others - and to orientate farming to the market on terms of unadulterated competition , with no social , development or environmental criteria , as required by the mechanisms of the WHO and pressure from the USA .
The reference to environmental protection , which is repeated throughout , is being used as an alibi to reduce agricultural production .
A typical example of this hypocrisy is in the giving way to pressure from the USA for the release and use of genetically-modified organisms , with unforeseeable adverse repercussions on the environment and public health .
The famous multifunctionality of agriculture , with resources being reallocated to the second pillar for supposed rural development , is nothing more than a very poor pretext to conceal the pursued objective of marginalising the rural world and changing its social and environmental role .
The implementation of these proposals leaves no margin to develop the rural economy , leads to the forcible readjustment of holdings , the disappearance of small-scale cultivation , and an increase in tenant farmers both in the new Member States and in the existing Member States , increases the profits of the multinationals and reinforces and consolidates the plundering of developing countries and their peoples .
Not only do Parliament 's reports fail to get their act together and move away from the Commission 's disastrous policy ; on the contrary , they add fuel to its fire .
As the farmers are fighting not to embellish but to overturn anti-farming reforms , we shall vote against these proposals .
We take the farmers ' side and support them in their proactive fight , which is the only way to secure their survival and protect the quality of products , the consumer and the environment .
Mr President , in this Parliament we have discussed the CAP often , and at length .
I hope this time we shall achieve some conclusive results .
I am sure I speak on behalf of the whole farming community in that regard .
I come from a country , Wales , where the per annum income of some of our farmers , especially in the less-favoured areas , 80 % of our nation , is as low now as EUR 6 000 .
This is at a time when the large supermarkets receiving their products are recording their best profits ever .
Such a situation is totally unsustainable .
The plethora of amendments to the reports highlight the conflicting viewpoints on this very emotive issue .
We must avoid a situation where a small number of the large Member States dictates the future shape of European agriculture at the expense of a more representative and democratic decision .
The lesser regions and nations in the European Union , with endemic problems of the exodus of young people from rural communities , small family farms and less-favoured areas , should also be involved in the important decisions taking place .
The general swing now towards partial decoupling weakens what could have been a bold move on the Commission 's part .
It could at least have provided the mechanism for Member States , and importantly the nations and regions within them , to target support at their own priorities through national envelopes .
To this end , as has been mentioned by other Members , democratic representation of regions in the Council of Ministers is vital , as well as codecision for the Committee on Agriculture .
My problem with a mixture of the current livestock support schemes and the new decoupling scheme is that it would result in an uneven playing field for many sectors and bring increased bureaucracy and more barriers for producers aiming to focus on the market .
If this means people having to leave small family farms in less productive areas to find work , it risks undermining the very foundations on which these rural communities are built .
I know this is a scenario that the Commissioner will be keen to avoid .
Having discussed this topic extensively with Welsh farmers , I find that what they undoubtedly want is simpler , more market-focused policies to help farms return to profitability .
Mr President , Commissioner , if an instrument overshoots its goal , you need to adjust it , but the goal needs to be the right one .
Commissioner Fischler proposes decoupling aid and production .
He has given up the fight for the European agricultural model within the WTO before it has even started .
That way , he is overshooting the goal .
Complete decoupling may well serve the cause of trade liberalisation , but it does not serve the European agricultural policy .
On other continents , decoupling as an instrument has failed .
Should we repeat this mistake ?
Mr Cunha is right to draw our attention to the great difference between economic theory , which is probably very rational , and practical application , which brings with it many risks .
European farmers should not again fall victim to economic experiments devised at drawing boards in Brussels .
Decoupling does not work in places where there are no stable internal markets .
The Commission 's plans lack any measures to promote stability .
I would , for example , mention protection at the borders against great fluctuations in the world market price and regulation of production on the internal market .
To be sure , I too would welcome an end to the intervention regime and export subsidies ; not , however , via a structural reduction in prices but by restricting production .
Rural policy stresses the multifunctionality of agriculture in the European Union .
This is why a substantial proportion of the proposed modulation should reinforce this second pillar .
As is evident from my amendment , it is only fair that the Member State that makes the saving should be able to use these monies for rural development within its borders .
Mr President , by agreeing , although with a number of reservations , to back the decoupling line proposed by the European Commission , the Cunha report is asking us to take a step in the wrong direction .
Why ?
It is a step in the wrong direction because decoupling , by introducing a radical divide between farmers ' wages and production , would transform direct payments into income linked to the land , of a set amount , comprising a sort of negative tax that is hard to justify in the eyes of the public and taxpayers , increasing the price of land in an inappropriate and uneconomical manner , and thus making it more difficult for young people to become farmers and establish themselves .
Decoupling would also have negative consequences for the regional localisation of crops and would therefore encourage relocation rather than land-use planning .
The declared aim of decoupling is to promote our negotiating position in the WTO , but it is hard to see how the announcement of a reform before the negotiations could give us any more weight .
Finally , by doing away with all links between production and State aid , we are forgoing any market guidance and control measures , which are the basis for all of our COMs .
We must therefore abandon this crazy , pointless idea of decoupling .
Total decoupling would be a total mistake and partial decoupling would be a partial mistake .
Partial decoupling would be an incomprehensible compromise , a bureaucratic monster and an unsustainable system .
It would make the CAP , which must be simplified as soon as possible , even more complex .
It would create a new cursor , that of the decoupling rate , and many hands would ensure that this moved towards total decoupling , to the detriment of our agriculture , our independence and our food security .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , representatives of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I would like , if I may , to start by thanking the rapporteurs for their excellent work .
I would stress that , overall , we can only support the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy , given the financial constraints which we have imposed on ourselves until 2013 and considering , not least , the new challenges posed by enlargement .
However , we do have a number of concerns .
Firstly , we do not know the proposals for all the sectors and so we do not have an overall picture .
Secondly , once the principle of decoupling has been endorsed , the Commission is free to apply it as it wishes .
We must therefore endeavour , first and foremost , to reassure our farmers . I therefore call upon the Council to regulate this mechanism as rigorously as possible , safeguarding the different areas of production and , above all , farmers ' incomes .
Another part of the Commission 's proposal which causes me great concern is the employment incentive .
The July proposal referred to the criterion of working units : this criterion disappeared subsequently and we have attempted to reincorporate it through amendments , for we consider it to be necessary .
The danger that the transferral of aid from production to income will not encourage working of the fields may be partially averted by this decision .
We must therefore put all possible effort into these areas of reform , and also into quality , for in promoting quality we will be equipping our agriculture to compete on the markets .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposals are not in the interests of farming and could have serious consequences for family-based farming and for small and medium-sized farmers , unless some of their basic assumptions are revised .
Instead of correcting the present imbalances in the distribution of aid amongst countries , areas of production and producers and instead of paying particular attention to the specific characteristics of countries such as Portugal , the intention is basically to ensure that the Community budget under the enlargement process is frozen and to take a step further towards liberalising the farm sector at world level , with a view to the forthcoming negotiations at the World Trade Organisation .
One of the policy 's fundamental principles is to establish aid on the basis of historical reference criteria from recent years and to ensure its decoupling from production , which primarily benefits the large producers and the countries with the most advanced forms of farming and condemns the producers that lag behind , the small-scale and family farmers , to their current situation .
Consequently , in addition to speeding up the process of concentrating production and land , this will set in stone the current inequalities in aid distribution in which Portugal suffers greatly , and encourage absentee land ownership and speculation on the market in farmland . It will promote unfair competition between the forms of productions entitled to aid and those that are not and create further hurdles to entering the sector , particularly for young farmers .
We cannot accept this being converted from a policy of support for production to a policy of social handouts .
The CAP reform that we want to see is quite different and we regret the fact that the opportunity provided by this mid-term review to establish such a reform has not been taken .
Some of the amendments adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development are to be welcomed but most of them are not .
One of the most worrying is the report by Arlindo Cunha , which is dangerously similar to Commissioner Franz Fischler 's proposal .
In fact , it not only fails to put forward a genuine proposal for modulation , it also accepts decoupling aid from production for some payments for arable crops and bovines .
What is required is for instruments to regulate the market to be promoted , guaranteeing the maintenance of a price that is fair and that compensates for farm production , for the principle of Community preference to be guaranteed in order to protect the internal market , and for consumer safety and food sovereignty to be promoted , taking account of Portugal 's conditions and specific characteristics .
We shall continue to fight to achieve these aims .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to use my speaking time to call for a reform of the CAP that does not again overlook those regions of the Union that have climatic and environmental conditions and farming traditions that are particularly appropriate to multifunctional rural development . These are regions whose farming consists of small and medium-sized family holdings , based on land and pastures , regions that have considerable milk-producing capacity and which , because they did not have the necessary milk quota when they joined the Community , have undergone a Malthusian modernisation , which has led to the disappearance of tens of thousands of holdings .
Today , these regions receive practically no production subsidies , which means that they would not receive decoupled aid either .
They form part of States where there is an enormous deficit between milk consumption and production .
I am talking about Galicia , but I am not only referring to my own country ; I am talking about countries that need their milk quota to be increased , countries that could provide for their internal markets without calling European balances into question .
I hope that these are not ignored once again in this reform of the CAP .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today , you are called upon to give your opinion on the various draft reports on the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy .
I will not talk about the substance but , as Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I cannot ignore the comments , not to say the criticisms , some of you will be tempted to make as regards the procedure chosen for the adoption of these various reports .
Unfortunately , we were pressed for time and I am the first to regret this .
The goal of the Council presidency was to have Parliament 's opinion by the end of June .
The time we were allotted was very short .
However , we have chosen to respond to this request so that it cannot be said that the principle of consulting the European Parliament merely causes delays in the discussions underway .
In fact , at a time when the debate on the development of the European institutions is considering precisely the competence of our House , any delay in the consultation procedure could have been interpreted as a sign that Members were incapable of dealing with an issue head-on and giving their opinion within the allotted timeframes .
That is why , in the Committee on Agriculture , we adopted a procedure that made it possible to respect both the timetable set for us by the Council presidency , which is keen to move this issue forward , and the right of expression and of amendment of the members of the Committee on Agriculture .
We achieved this as a result of the remarkable work of the committee staff , and also the coordinators .
I felt it was necessary , Mr President , to explain why we adopted a working method dictated by the urgency of the situation and increased the pace of the work , whilst respecting our fellow Members ' right of expression .
As far as I am concerned , it is the result of a compromise achieved through the desire of the members of the Committee on Agriculture to preserve the key provisions on the management of agricultural markets laid down by the common agricultural policy , whilst allowing us to move towards a form of agriculture that gives greater consideration to the general interest .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you must now take the right decisions to guarantee a decent income and a future for our farming families .
Mr President , Commissioner , I shall begin by expressing my deep disappointment with this reform of the common agricultural policy and I wish to challenge your conscience , Commissioner , with the injustices and the discrimination that your policy is perpetrating against farmers and also with regard to the way in which you are protecting desertification and damaging the credibility of the Union itself .
Let us look at the injustices : you are responsible , Commissioner , for around seven million farmers in the Community .
Only three-and-a-half million are entitled to direct aid - only three-and-a-half million .
Of these three-and-a-half million farmers , 52 % receive only 4.5 % of the aid .
Is this or is this not a profound injustice ?
In my own country , one hundred farmers - the one hundred largest - receive more than 60 % of farmers in my country do .
I challenge your conscience with this injustice .
Next , Commissioner , your policy is discriminatory !
Two areas of production , cereals and bovines , which between them account for 21 % of Community production , receive 60 % of aid ; I repeat , 21 % of production receives 60 % of all aid .
I call that discriminatory , Commissioner !
It is all the more discriminatory because these two areas of production are those most responsible for desertification .
By not opposing this policy , Commissioner , you have contributed to the enormous increase in unemployment throughout the Union , because the only winner is something that causes unemployment and not the areas of production that actually employ people .
The third issue concerns the damage done to our credibility , because the institutions have a duty to protect the weakest .
Commissioner , I have probably been involved in politics as long as you have , and the basic duty of the institutions is certainly to protect the weakest members of society and yet you have put yourself in the position of protecting only the strongest .
Why have you abandoned the ceiling , Commissioner ?
Even the United States , which has companies that are two hundred times larger , has a ceiling of EUR 350 000 , and you , who initially had a ceiling in place , abandoned it , concluding that it was excessive because it should not exceed EUR 100 000 .
You and this Parliament will go down in history as being profoundly unfair and discriminatory and for having damaged the credibility of the political process .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the past year , it was important that confidence in Agenda 2000 should be maintained .
Today we deal with the further development of the common agricultural policy post-2006 , taking into consideration world trade law , with the applicant countries participating as appropriate .
I emphasise that it is right at this time to make a serious and sustainable decision on the future of the common agricultural policy .
However , Commissioner , the parallelism of agricultural decision-making on the one hand , and the continuance of world trade discussions on the other also have a part to play here .
They can only be properly combined if the Commission adheres strictly to the whole package of WTO negotiations and allows no watering down in this case .
With this in mind I would like to say that Mrs Kinnock 's comments with regard to the evaluation of the agricultural policy are an evaluation of the Agricultural Policy from 20 years ago .
If we do achieve a balance in development policy and commit all industrial nations to this , we have no reason to hide behind others .
Commissioner , you have always quite rightly said that only economically healthy businesses can be sustained in the long term .
The concept of sustainability does not have to be continually updated .
It is adequately and internationally defined and set out in Agenda 21 .
The issue before us today therefore is in a sense to rework the Commission 's proposals so that they are , if possible , more practical and more manageable , and at the same time to make the necessary adjustments without these adjustments asking too much of businesses or people .
Regarding the simplification of the agricultural policy , with regard to the thirty-eight directives named and the possibility of Member States implementing these administratively , I would ask that still more be done to avoid hardship cases so that the simplification of European agricultural policy also fully and completely respects the basic principle of non-discrimination .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , can the European Union continue to ignore the expectations of society , which has been deeply affected by the food crises we have experienced in recent years ?
Is it right for 80 % of agricultural aid to be distributed among only 20 % of farmers ?
Can Europe seriously be exonerated from the need to carry out an in-depth analysis of a policy that accounts for almost half of its budget , at a time when it is preparing to welcome 10 new countries ?
You were right , Commissioner , to prefer movement to the status quo , anticipation to a waiting game .
Your reform is courageous , for it advocates , through decoupling , a break with the approach of providing incentives for production .
It is ambitious in that it seeks to strengthen the multifunctional nature of European agriculture .
It is relevant in terms of the future WTO appointments and the impending enlargement of Europe .
However , I am afraid that it may also be unfair in that it is based exclusively on the situation in mainland Europe and does not give sufficient consideration to the diversity of regional situations , particularly as regards production in the outermost regions .
These regions have not yet achieved the initial objective of the CAP , namely a degree of agricultural self-sufficiency .
Their markets are far from being saturated .
They need incentives to help develop their farms .
If the proposed measures were automatically applied to the outermost regions , they would be an undeniable hindrance to the dynamism we have witnessed in recent years .
It is not a question of putting the outermost regions in a bubble ; we simply need to take account of their specific situations .
The legal basis already exists , in Article 299 ( 2 ) ; what we need now is the political will .
The Parliamentary Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has shouldered its responsibilities by adopting on 21 May an amendment , which I tabled with the aim of ensuring that the outermost regions are not subjected to automatic , systematic application of the reform .
The Commission and the Council must now shoulder theirs .
There is no doubt that we must learn from the lessons of the past and adapt our agricultural policy to the challenges of the twenty-first century , but it would be unacceptable to allow this reform , in the name of general principles , to sound the death knell for the Union 's most vulnerable farmers .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a proposal for reform , however comprehensive , will never be able to satisfy the many different farming systems in Europe .
It was therefore inevitable that the debate would become heated and even change in tone according to the different viewpoints of the Members .
To get straight to the point which interests me , I would like to say that I come from the mountains , and in this debate I want to express the opinion of those who live and work in mountain regions .
We endorse the transition from market , in other words from production , to farm , and we also endorse the proposal to transfer the savings made through modulation to rural development .
Despite the many instances of reluctance to address mountain concerns , despite the fact that the mountains are not mentioned anywhere in this reform , we can say that there is hope on the horizon .
At last , for the first time , multifunctionality , which is indispensable for some disadvantaged peripheral areas , is treated quite seriously .
Multifunctionality has always been practised in mountain areas where , together with their primary activity , farmers are required to control forestry development , channel watercourses , concern themselves with animal welfare and look after the environment for the benefit of farm and other tourism .
This also means taking the greatest possible care to ensure the quality of typical products and niche products , which have for some time been highly successful and not unprofitable on the market .
This too could help to convince a young farmer or two not to abandon the mountains .
It is not enough , however : multifunctional farming brings added value to the community and it is therefore right that there should be appropriate remuneration .
The ridiculous premiums for meadow mowing are not enough : a decent , fixed , supplementary income should be provided for those who work in the mountains and perform these services for the benefit of all .
Otherwise , the exodus already taking place will continue and depopulation of the mountains will be the inevitable result .
Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the resolutions adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development even though I do not doubt that , in many areas , they do not go far enough .
Having had the same experience with the foot-and-mouth disease report , I would also like to congratulate the members of the Committee on their tremendous hard work .
It is hard work but an agreement must be reached .
Much that has been negotiated , however , has still not been implemented .
In addition , many of Commissioner Fischler 's proposals , which I believe go in the right direction and in which there is very much that I can support , have unfortunately still not been fully implemented in all areas , something of which he is well aware .
We should however stop breaking everything down and unravelling it all again because in the end , we can only negotiate the whole as a package .
There is , of course , the World Trade Organisation , which requires that we observe certain rules .
If one considers the governments that took part in the negotiations from 1986 to 1994 in the Marrakech Round and the Uruguay Round and which ones then signed the treaties at the end of 1993 or 1994 , there were abstentions in many areas .
Even though I come from Upper Bavaria , I do of course think that an increase in the milk quota is wrong .
Many other price interventions have to be readjusted as well - rye is one of them - because everything cannot be ploughed up in one go or from one day to the next .
That will not work .
I would also like to make it clear that I support cohesion in the European Union and the shifting of funds into those regions and countries that have less , to help them to improve .
I do not understand , though , why money that , for example , will be cut back from many operations that are in a higher grouping , should go back to the Commission for redistribution elsewhere .
The bulk of the money should be used within the two pillars , according to the principle of subsidiarity , in the regions from where it originates .
Otherwise , to put it bluntly , many will in reality be paying twice .
Commissioner Fischler 's reforms are necessary and they would be necessary even without the entry of the ten accession states and without the World Trade Organisation because no one in this Chamber will seriously claim that the system is fair in terms of the way it has been managed up until now .
It is not fair .
Decoupling in the most widely varying of areas - and , as you and I know , this will one day be complete ; it is a matter of time - will lead to greater fairness .
It will not help however if everyone takes their region out and says that nothing should be done here and nothing should be done there .
That does not begin to solve the problem .
A few words on the developing countries : I am really glad that these have been discovered in the meantime .
The ' Everything But Arms ' initiative will not kill anyone or cost anything .
We must however look at which countries are attempting to sell from the little that they produce because they need other vitally important goods .
We must look into that .
In the European Union , for decades , we have dumped our surpluses at a world market level and have forced them onto the developing countries and deprived many of their farmers of the capacity to make a living .
We should also give some thought to that .
Mr President , as far as we are concerned , Commissioner Fischler will go down in history as the Commissioner of decoupling .
If , in order to guarantee a successful WTO agreement , we have to choose between two options , then we would pick decoupling rather than price reduction .
If the Council and Commission have listened carefully , this is , in any case , the direction that Parliament has indicated .
The CDA ( Christian Democrat ) delegation in the European Parliament has been happy to help reach a compromise on the Cunha report which contains a number of points that were of interest to us and which we have highlighted by means of amendments .
First of all , there is set-aside .
In our opinion , it should be possible to rotate , and it should be up to the farmer to decide , rather than it being fixed for ten years .
Secondly , land that has been decoupled and where other products may possibly grow should definitely not be used for growing free products , including consumption potatoes and vegetables .
The CDA has tabled an amendment to that effect , which has been adopted by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
Our third point , which is a little more controversial , is that we welcome the increase in franchise per farm on which decoupling is practised , from EUR 5 000 to 7 500 , but that is too little in our opinion .
The European Christian Democrats should protect the family concern and in our view , this ceiling should be raised to EUR 10 000 or 15 000 .
In fact , we in the CDA have , together with our British colleagues , tabled an amendment for EUR 10 000 , and a Spanish amendment has been tabled for EUR 15 000 , both of which we will support .
With regard to the dairy sector and reform , we back the Jeggle report and , partly based on a CDA amendment , we have decided in favour of far less far-reaching decoupling and also for change .
In our opinion , we should first reach 5 % , wait for a WTO agreement and possibly implement the Berlin Agreement in its entirety .
Anyone who thinks that the dairy sector should be reformed - and I am particularly addressing Mrs Kinnock - should realise that , since 1983 , the European Union has surrendered 5 % of the global market and that production has not benefited the developing countries but other rich ones .
To state that we must further pull down European dairy policy without considering the effects is evidence of armchair socialism .
It is a cheap form of armchair socialism .
I am in favour of any discussion on development cooperation , provided this is done on the basis of the agreements which Europe has reached with the 48 poorest countries and after we have considered the implications for the European farmers and farmers in developing countries .
If we fail to do this , the European farmers will be sitting targets in the whole discussion on development cooperation .
As a member of this Parliament , I refuse to have any part in this .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like also to be able to say Minister , President-in-Office of the Council , but , unfortunately , he is absent .
I wish to start by congratulating all the rapporteurs who have worked on the very important matter we are debating today , but mainly I wish to congratulate Mr Cunha on his magnum opus , which I do not envy him at all .
I would not want to be in his shoes , but I congratulate him on what he has managed to produce .
Allow me to convey to you the anxiety and uncertainty of Greek farmers , because Mediterranean products are not included in the reform of the CAP , and their anxiety as to what will emerge from part two , from the second round of negotiations , when we discuss Mediterranean products after the Cancun round of the World Trade Organisation .
We are worried . We are very worried and I hope that it will turn out that we have no reason to worry but , until it does , we shall worry .
We consider that the EUR 5 000 limit is very low .
It needs to be increased drastically if we really want improvements to production and monitoring of all the preconditions needed for us to have improved prospects in the agricultural sector .
I also wish to express the conviction that disadvantaged island areas , which in my country especially are particularly exposed , and mountain areas throughout the European Union should receive special treatment .
We must take care to keep these people in their villages , in their agricultural areas , instead of making them unemployed town dwellers .
I welcome the prospect of making agricultural production a business .
However , I want to see how farmers are to become businessmen .
Finally , we obviously all welcome the enlargement of the European Union with the 10 new Member States , but what I should like is for not only the farmers of the European Union to be called upon to pay the bill for enlargement .
Mr President , Commissioner , there have been many speeches this afternoon about the financing of EU agricultural policy .
In my opinion , the overall situation over recent years has been much more favourable for consumers than for farmers .
I never tire of saying that the proportion of outgoings spent on food by the citizens of the European Union has fallen continuously over recent decades .
There are hard figures indicating that those who , decades ago , spent 40 % of income on food , now spend approximately 14 % , so foodstuffs are not surplus junk and , with EU support , the farmers produce them and look after the countryside perhaps even far more cheaply than municipal farms could do it .
My idea of the European agriculture model has remained unchanged for years .
I would like farmers in the European Union to continue to perform the dual task of producing high quality products and caring for and maintaining the cultural landscape .
In my opinion , therefore , we should really now be using the debate on common agricultural policy to ensure that this task can be performed in the long term in difficult locations not only in Germany but in all European regions .
There has been much discussion today about your proposals , Commissioner , but , if I have understood you correctly , there are one or two places where you have allowed for a certain readiness to compromise , and this affects decoupling .
The agriculturalists in my parliamentary party are demanding clear differentiation between arable and animal production .
I therefore regard as eminently important the consistent continued development of common agricultural policy and also quantity-oriented market policy for milk .
Commissioner , I am convinced that we should now decide - as you have always said .
The parliamentary reports are available and I am very keen to know what the Council will make of them .
We should really use this negotiation capital .
Finally , I would therefore like to encourage you to follow our suggestions .
If we all fight together it will produce the best results for agriculture and I am someone who would really like to defend you out there .
I cannot imagine what interest you could have in initiating something unsuitable .
( Applause )
Mr President , I congratulate the Commission on its radical proposals for decoupling .
I fear that the propositions that Parliament is putting forward are far too timid and believe that we should go down the road of decoupling .
If we are going to do it partially , then let us at least do it sector by sector , not by horizontal decoupling across all sectors .
Mr Cunha , you know I believe that part of the proposal is mad .
Farmers need a clear direction as to where they are going .
We need a decision from the Council of Ministers so that farmers can plan for the future .
What we do not want is a complete mixing of decoupling .
If we need to look after less-favoured areas there are ways to do that .
We do not have to do that through production subsidies .
The decoupling system that you have put forward , Commissioner , will help us with the WTO round .
It will also help us face up to enlargement .
Let us face it , many of the accession countries would find it very difficult to put into place the production-based subsidies we have .
What point is there in asking them to put those systems in place if , a year or two later , we change the whole system again ?
We have to face up to the reality that we will have a different agricultural policy for 25 Member States than we have for the existing 15 .
That is where we have to be careful in what we do .
We also have to be sure that when Europe goes to the WTO round we can fight our corner and face up not only to the United States , but Third World countries .
We need to support our farmers , but not at the expense of Third World trade .
The proposals you put forward will help us to support European agriculture , European farmers and give good value to European taxpayers who are sometimes forgotten .
. ( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank you all for your contributions , which , even though in parts very critical , were constructive and always relevant .
I would also like to assure all of those who have pointed out the importance of giving the European Parliament the power of codecision in the field of agricultural policy , that you have the full support of the Commission and also my full personal support in this matter .
Anyone who is involved in European politics knows that compromises are necessary in the interest of a common cause and in the interest of reaching a joint decision .
Compromises must , however , be judged by criteria , and these criteria are the substance of reform , which must be preserved .
The Commission cannot depart from this principle and does not want to do so .
On many topics however , there has for some time been discussion on the adaptation of Commission proposals .
These include , for example , the concentration of the cross-compliance requirements on the most important provisions with the aim of improving administrative manageability , a moderate increase in the portion of cross-compliance moneys remaining in the Member States , a longer preparation time for the installation of the management advisory system with initial voluntary participation which shall only later be made obligatory , greater flexibility for the Member States with regard to the payment of advances relating to direct payments , flexible treatment of cases of hardship and problems in calculating and allocating the uniform management premium as well as the option for the Member States to exclude certain types of fruit from the areas subject to premiums , the retention of the rotating set-aside land with the possibility of secondary growth of commodities in these areas , delaying the decoupling of milk premiums in the interest of simplifying administration or a more flexible cofinancing rate for agricultural environmental measures and an occasional increase in the promotion sums in areas with specific environmental restrictions .
There are however other topics where even greater efforts are required in the discussion to enable us to achieve solutions .
The Presidency will certainly undertake these efforts jointly with the Commission , especially next week in Council .
These topics include , amongst others , the various aspects of the decoupling of direct payments .
Here as well there is definitely scope but again , it is important to achieve the basic objectives of decoupling .
These are the simplification of our promotion policy , the avoidance of absurd production incentives , the strengthening of a market-oriented entrepreneurial trade and finally , the avoidance of trade distortions .
In particular , we should not forget that decoupling means that of the promotion granted , twice as much money will remain in the farmers ' pockets as under the old system .
This has been demonstrated again recently by the OECD .
The important topics still requiring an open discussion include the treatment of the outermost marginal areas or overseas areas .
Here as well , it is crucial to protect the basic principles .
This of course includes the need to take into consideration both the special features of these areas and the objectives of the POSEI Regulations .
I would also like to mention the wish voiced in many quarters for an even more targeted strengthening of the two columns of common agricultural policy .
You will not be surprised that I am open to ideas here as regards strengthening these two pillars even more than was envisaged .
Once again let us briefly return to the question of decoupling because very many here have mentioned partial decoupling : I think there are problems with the idea of introducing decoupling gradually over a long period or only decoupling a certain percentage of each individual support measure .
These mixtures of a partial decoupling mean in the end that the disadvantages of the existing system are linked to withholding the advantages of the new system .
We should therefore be very careful here .
The particular disadvantages of the existing system are the farmers ' lack of freedom to make decisions about their farms .
Other disadvantages are that the farmers have to pay out more for increased and more complex bureaucracy and in particular , they are denied entrepreneurial freedom .
A final word on the question of intervention prices , in regard to which some of you have been very critical , asking why we actually want or need a measure to guarantee market balance for the coming years , 10 years in total .
The main reason is that if we compare the market forecasts that we used as a basis for the Agenda 2000 with the market forecasts that the same institutes , for example , Fabri , are now publishing , these institutes have had to drastically lower their very positive expectations of that time .
For example , a reduction of 14 % for wheat , 10 % for barley , 16 % for maize , 37 % for butter and more than 30 % for skimmed milk powder .
How can we then come up with a 5 % drop in the intervention price ?
Only because we were considerably more cautious then when these forecasts were suggested to us and we can therefore now take a more moderate approach .
Not taking steps however , would again result in a market imbalance and that means none other than downward pressure on price .
Last of all , the question on Mediterranean products : I would like to say to you quite clearly that next week , when it is time to decide in Council , we will be pressing for the Agriculture Council , jointly with the Commission , to make a declaration guaranteeing that Mediterranean products are assessed on an equal footing and in the same way if new steps are taken .
Thank you very much , Mr Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0097 / 2003 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
I regret that this Question Time , as a result of where it falls on our agenda , always , or almost always , begins late .
Today we are beginning 30 minutes late , which means that we must deal with it is quickly as possible .
I am banking on the cooperation of all the Members .
Part I
Question No 22 by Stavros Xarchakos , which has been taken over by Mr Folias ( H-0317 / 03 ) :
Subject : Measures to combat the deadly SARS virus
The deadly SARS virus has justifiably caused alarm throughout the world .
What immediately implementable measures to protect against this virus , if any , has the Commission proposed to the Member States ?
On behalf of Mr Xarchakos , who cannot be here for reasons beyond his control , I would like to thank the Commissioner .
Question No 23 by Lennart Sacrédeus ( H-0314 / 03 ) :
Subject : Violation of human rights in Cuba
In March this year , 78 opposition figures were imprisoned in Cuba .
Summary trials with no chance of a proper defence or the presence of independent individuals were held in April , followed by sentences of 15 and 28 years .
The prisoners are now serving their sentences under inhuman conditions , in solitary confinement or together with hardened criminals , most often so far from home as to make visits by relatives impossible .
These conditions are clearly a violation of human rights .
Given that the Commission has recently opened an office in Havana and that the Cotonou agreement makes certain stipulations regarding human rights , what does the Commission intend to do to secure the release of political prisoners in Cuba ?
What is the Commission doing to ensure that the treatment of the Cuban prisoners improves and that they are moved nearer to home ?
What steps will the Commission take to support the prisoners and their relatives ?
Part 2
Question addressed to Mr Monti
Mr President , I wish to thank Commissioner Byrne for his answer .
Approximately 60 of the 75 people sentenced and imprisoned in Cuba following summary trials have received prison sentences of more than 20 years .
They feel , quite simply , that their lives are threatened .
Sentences as tough as these have not been handed down in Cuba for several decades .
My follow-up question to the Commissioner is about how we might follow up the protests in terms of practical politics .
Can we act within the world community - within the UN - by trying to persuade the Red Cross to take action ?
Can we act through churches or in some other way ?
By means of various types of sanctions , can we put pressure on the Cuban regime ?
We are concerned here with people who have had to pay a very high price for the sake of democracy .
. As I have already indicated , the view of the Commission is that the International Red Cross should be invited to examine and report on the situation .
In addition , a new EU démarche is being prepared for the beginning of June , but there is no agreement yet on the text .
To sum up , the situation is that the Commission is keeping this issue under review and maintaining such pressure as it is capable of bringing to bear on the situation .
Commissioner , the people whom the European Union calls human rights activists are nothing more than agents of the United States of America , as proven in the Cuban courts .
In addition , the Americans themselves have admitted that they are offering them several tens of millions of dollars to set up internal opposition in Cuba .
Indeed , which country would not protect itself from outside plotting ?
In all events , I should like your comments , Commissioner , on the action by Mr Cason in Cuba and by his office .
I should also like your comments on Mr Bush 's message on 20 May , promising freedom to Cuba , and your comment on the fact that the United States have not punished the hijackers who forced aeroplanes to go to Cuba .
And , finally , what do you think about the detention by the United States of five Cuban patriots who have barely seen 80 % of the bill of indictment , because it is supposed to be confidential ?
As the author is not present , Question No 24 lapses .
Question No 25 by Ward Beysen ( H-0315 / 03 ) :
Subject : Parallel trade
Is the Commission aware of the continual threats to legal parallel trade in medicines inside the EU , a process which saves Member State governments and European patients millions of euros each year ?
Has it considered using Article 82 as a legal basis for ensuring pharmaceutical manufacturers play by the single market rules ?
. ( IT ) The honourable Member 's question is not just undeniably of interest but is also extremely topical .
The question is interesting in any case because the barriers to parallel trade in pharmaceutical products have for some time been a source of concern to the Commission , which has already prepared many cases for trial in this field in the past and continues do so now .
In particular , a large number of cases are currently under investigation in the competition sector , at the request of both pharmaceutical laboratories and complainants .
The matter is also , as I said , highly topical .
As you are aware , the Commission has two legal instruments under which it can take action : Articles 81 and 82 .
With regard to Article 81 , just a few days ago , Mr Tizzano , the Advocate General of the Court of Justice , presented his conclusions on the Bayer case , relating to parallel trade in one of the company 's products .
I do not want to go into the details of this case or the conclusions of the Advocate General , which concern a matter of highly specific legal practice .
The conclusions do not , however , endorse the lines taken by the Commission on the case .
The Court 's judgment will be issued in a few month 's time but will not , in any case , compromise the Commission 's other decisions on issues different from the matters addressed in the Bayer case , such as , for instance , the decision adopted by the Commission on 8 May 2001 on the dual pricing system employed by the company , Glaxo .
As far as Article 82 is concerned , the Commission is currently working along precisely these lines .
That raises a number of new questions , especially with regard to the definition of markets and abusive practices .
Moreover , last February , the Court of Justice received a preliminary question from the Greek Competition Committee , which is the Greek authority responsible for competition .
This preliminary question seeks to establish to what extent the refusal by a pharmaceutical company in a dominant position to supply a wholesaler with a view to stopping parallel trade can be deemed to be abuse prohibited by Article 82 of the EC Treaty .
The Commission will , as usual , be called upon to express its opinion to the Court in the coming weeks , but the Court is not due to issue its judgment for many months yet .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his extensive response to what is indeed a very topical problem , which , as the Commissioner was right to emphasise , causes great concern .
In my view , Article 82 is indeed the only legal basis on which we can carry on , and I hope that more light will be shed on the situation within the foreseeable future , because major mergers within the medicines sector almost always lead to huge cuts in employment .
Moreover , current practice is very detrimental to the consumer .
I would therefore expect , as soon as possible , a more detailed answer to the question that was put before you .
. I subscribe to the importance that you attach to the subject , as well as to its urgency .
I shall give you just a brief indication on where we are going .
As I said , our priority for the moment is to finalise our contribution to the Court of Justice in the Greek preliminary ruling request - this should be done by mid-June - concerning the treatment of approximately 30 cases pending before the Commission .
I am sure you will understand that I cannot give precise dates .
The assessment under Article 82 is ongoing .
One way or the other you can expect the Commission to adopt its position - positive or negative - on the supply quota systems by the end of this year .
. The whole problem posed by the increasing role of Internet trade exists for aspects related to the internal market and competition .
It is a positive challenge for the authorities to take on , given the benefits that consumers can draw from the increasing use of the Internet , and also given the continuing need to ensure that whatever the technology adopted for the conduct of transactions , the key principles that support the Community 's legal order should not be circumvented .
Thank you very much for your cooperation with Parliament this afternoon , Mr Monti .
We will now move on to the 20 minutes of questions to Commissioner Reding .
Questions to Mrs Reding
Question No 26 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0301 / 03 ) :
Subject : Minority languages
How is the Commission preparing for EU enlargement in terms of the promotion of minority languages , and what part do linguistic minorities whose languages are majority languages in other Member States play in the discussions ?
In reply to Mr Posselt , I would like to say that the definition of minority and regional languages used by the European Commission is that established by the Council of Europe in its European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages .
What we mean by a regional or minority language is , and I quote , a language ' traditionally used within a given territory of a state by nationals of that state who form a group numerically smaller than the rest of the state 's population , and different from the official language ( s ) of that state ' .
This definition therefore encompasses many languages that are minority languages in one country but majority languages in another .
As regards the promotion of minority and regional languages within the Union , the Commission finances the European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages as well as the Mercator research centres .
Their 2003-2004 work programme includes measures to provide information on European policy in the areas in question to the future members of the Union .
Meetings are held on this issue , such as the Bolzano Conference of 26 and 27 May on the topic ' Best practice in promoting linguistic diversity in an enlarged Europe ' .
The European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages has also begun to work on the establishment in the new Member States of national committees representing linguistic minorities , along the lines of similar committees existing in the current 15 Member States of the Union .
It must be said that the future members already have the same opportunities as the Fifteen as regards minority and regional languages , namely the funding of initiatives through the existing programmes .
Some of the programmes involved - Socrates , Leonardo da Vinci - are also open to all of the candidate countries .
Finally , the Euromosaic study on the production and reproduction of the minority language groups in the European Union will be extended to the new Member States .
The new Member States have also been invited to participate in public consultations that have been launched by the Commission as part of the preparations for an action plan for language diversity and learning , which will be presented to the Council and Parliament in July , in the context of the analysis of the new generation of Leonardo , Socrates and Youth programmes .
All linguistic minorities , including those whose language is a majority language in other Member States of the enlarged Union , have been able to take part in these consultations .
.
( DE ) Mr President , in this regard I can reassure Mr Posselt that the Union will not intervene in projects that , in accordance with the subsidiarity principle , fall within the competence of Member States .
I am therefore at a complete loss to explain the origin of this discussion because if a Member State wants to help out another Member State or a third country in some way and wants to carry out cultural projects in this Member State , then this is a matter for the Member State and the Union should not interfere .
On the contrary , I am happy for Member States to organise numerous cultural projects in their neighbouring countries .
I was very interested in the Commissioner 's response and her definition of languages , which is well known in this House .
I fully support the notion of providing financial assistance to minority and lesser-spoken languages , and like many colleagues I am familiar with the educational programmes and the work of the Bureau .
As the Commissioner knows , respect for someone else 's language , respect for that person and his or her culture and customs , helps support the integration of those communities .
In that vein , can I ask the Commissioner to at least consider , perhaps by means of a study or a survey , giving support for re-defining the definition and including other languages perhaps non-European in origin , but still spoken and understood by many people , languages understood across many EU states - Urdu , Hindi , Bengali and Tamil , to name but a few .
I realise that this is a significant suggestion , but my fear is that if we do not at least consider this , we will be sending a very divisive message to many ethnic minority communities at a key time of integration .
In effect we will be saying that languages spoken by a few hundred people in some cases , and I agree with the support of those languages , are more important to the EU than others spoken by hundreds of thousands .
I wonder whether the Commissioner would be prepared to consider that ?
. In answer to the honourable Member , all Community action concerning languages is inclusive , not exclusive action .
We have not clearly defined what the languages are because in the action programme which I am going to present in July this year we would like to outline all the languages spoken in the enlarged European Union .
We will see if it is possible to include migration languages such as those you mentioned , Mr Evans .
At any rate , they are not excluded by any of our texts .
Mr President , as regards the issue of language learning beyond the official languages , that is to say , the regional languages , minority languages and also the issue of migration languages which has just been raised , I believe that these areas should indeed be kept separate , with the official languages , regional and minority languages on the one side , and the migration languages on the other .
I would ask the Commissioner to share her opinion with us on this point , also with regard to the programme which was launched in connection with the European Year of Languages and which was very clearly defined .
In my view , also given that the funding available is limited - the Commissioner needs far more resources for this area of activity than she is currently being provided with - some sort of prioritisation is essential .
.
( DE ) Mr President , the honourable Member is quite right , of course : we will never have enough money to do everything .
However , during the European Year of Languages , we not only gave the official languages their say ; we also facilitated the provision of funding for languages which are actually spoken in the territory , if that was what associations or citizens wanted .
We must be vigilant in monitoring what is happening through our schools and in society in general .
In our schools , it is inevitable that the mother tongue is the official language , the first language .
I have always demanded that we should endeavour to teach two foreign languages in addition to the base language , and this is something that our heads of state and government have accepted .
That is one point .
The other point is respect for multiculturalism , for cultural diversity in our society , and I do believe that in some regions , languages spoken by migrants are also part of this cultural environment .
That is the reality , and it must be taken into account when analyses are carried out and language diversity is subjected to academic study .
Nonetheless , the priority , in my view , will continue to be supporting traditional languages and promoting multilingualism in our schools .
Question No 27 by Joan Vallvé ( H-0306 / 03 ) :
Subject : Violence at football grounds
The subject of violence at football grounds is addressed in the Council Decision of 25 April 2002 concerning security in connection with football matches with an international dimension ( 2002 / 348 / JHA
In response to the question by Mr Vallvé , the Commission must point out that it does not give an opinion on issues that are outside its remit .
At present , the European Union does not have any direct competence as regards the organisation of sports events , or , at least , I should say that it does not yet have any such competences , as the Convention is currently looking at this issue .
In this respect , the European Court of Justice has on several occasions recalled that sporting bodies have a broad degree of autonomy as regards the way in which they organise their competitions .
As Mr Vallvé mentioned in his question , the European Union 's official position on security at football matches has an international dimension and is set out in the Council Decision of 25 April 2002 .
This document does not contain any references to the subject raised in the question .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for her response and her analysis of the future of sport in the European Union .
As you know , the Union is made up of nation states but also of multinational states .
In some of the latter , certain nations may have national teams , as is the case with Scotland and Wales .
However , it is not the case with Catalonia .
In future , we would like to see our national team participating in official competitions .
We therefore thank you for your response , Commissioner , and we believe that in future the European Union , in its bid to recognise the cultural identities that exist throughout Europe , will have to allow these cultures to express themselves through sport .
Mr President , Mr Vallvé is well aware of my love of the cultural diversity in the Union and the great wealth this diversity offers all Europeans .
Naturally , Catalonia , with its language , its history and its wonderful culture , is part of this tradition of cultural diversity .
As far as sport is concerned , I am afraid I cannot say any more than I have just said because it is up to the sporting bodies , whose autonomy is recognised by the Union through the Court of Justice , to resolve the issues raised by Mr Vallvé .
While I do not have a photographer present like Mr Vallvé , I have a serious point to make about violence at football matches .
Could the Commissioner tell me the latest position on the question of organised racist violence at football matches ?
My own country , England , will shortly be playing a football match against a candidate country and risks being thrown out of the competition in question as a result of racism from its fans .
While I know that this is the preserve of UEFA and not a matter directly for the Commission , I want to ask about the increase in racist violence at national and regional football matches , the fact that it is organised - often from the far right but not exclusively so - and whether the Commission would at least make a statement about this increase because , as the previous speaker said , sport is an expression of the culture and way of life of countries within the European Union .
I am particularly worried about that expression from candidate countries where racism in football matches will be on the rise .
. The honourable Member is right .
It is shocking to see how something which should be the expression of joy is distorted into the expression of rejecting other human beings .
It is for this reason that , with the help of the European Parliament , the Commission has decided to make 2004 the European Year of Education through Sport .
We would like to discuss this phenomenon in schools , clubs and society at large , and to speak about the true values of sports , which are about fair play , about recognising the other , about people reaching out their hand , not clenching their fist .
I would like all Europeans - including Members of the European Parliament - to commit themselves during that year to getting that message across to young people in our Member States and in the enlarged Europe .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for her response to Mr Vallvé .
I would also like to voice my support for his request regarding national teams , although I did understand your message , Commissioner .
As regards cultural diversity , Parliament has adopted several resolutions , one of which I hold particularly dear : that of 1989 , which recognises that the Catalan language has a somewhat special role among the minority languages and which called on the Commission to publish a number of fundamental texts in our language , Catalan .
My predecessor in this role , Mr Gorka Knörr , who is currently the Vice-President of the Basque Parliament - whom I am replacing for that reason - had raised the question of Basque .
Why does Catalan enjoy minor status as a recognised language and why can Basque not have the same status ?
Therefore , at the very moment when the Spanish authorities have shut down the only Basque newspaper , Egunkaria , I would like to ask you the reason for this difference in the status of Basque and Catalan .
Commissioner , this question is not supplementary to the question on violence at football grounds ; it bears no relation to it .
Question No 28 by Theresa Zabell ( H-0328 / 03 ) :
Subject : Article on sport in the future Treaty
Can the Commission say what steps it has taken to ensure the inclusion of an article on sport in the future EU Treaty ?
Reports concerning anti-doping measures in sport are more and more worrying and sportsmen are increasingly vulnerable .
Can the Commission say what it knows about the new World Anti-Doping Code and what its opinion of it is ?
There is sometimes good news even in politics , and I think that this is one example from the point of view at least of the work being carried out in the Convention .
In fact , the inclusion of a Community competence in the field of sport is currently being considered by the Commission for its draft constitutional Treaty .
Following the proposal by the Praesidium of the Convention to introduce such a competence under the areas of supporting actions , the Commission , through its representatives , Mr Barnier and Mr Vitorino , took the initiative of submitting a draft article to the Convention , to which my services and myself made a significant contribution .
The draft constitutional Treaty , as it currently stands , incorporates the principles of the Commission 's draft and includes competence for sport in Part III , Chapter V of the Treaty , areas where the Union may take coordinating , supplementary or supporting action : education , vocational training , youth and sport .
Sport is therefore added .
In this article , paragraphs 1 and 2 are specifically dedicated to sport , and I am very happy with this proposal , as with this article , the Union encourages the educational and social functions of sport without harmonising the laws and regulations of the Member States .
Therefore , this new article , if included at last in the final Treaty , would also provide the response to the previous questions .
The second part of the question relates to the new World Anti-Doping Code .
As you know , the Commission welcomes all efforts to combat doping .
However , there is no unique or miraculous solution that would enable us to resolve this problem .
The World Anti-Doping Code will help to combat this scourge , but other measures are needed too .
The Code is a preventive instrument , targeted at high-level sport .
Nonetheless , it is important to be aware that the fight against doping should also cover the amateur sector and encompass issues of prevention , education and research .
The Commission wants to emphasise that the issues covered by the Code are not directly within its remit , but it is following these developments very closely and will continue to keep a close eye on them .
The Member States support the Code , and the Commission , which does not have an official position as this is an intergovernmental matter , is , instead , stepping up its efforts in the areas of education , prevention and legislation on sports foods .
We have therefore established a form of complementarity : we help the Member States to reach agreement .
Moreover - before the major meeting in Copenhagen on doping - a meeting of Sports Ministers was organised by the Commission in Brussels with a view to enabling Europe to speak with one voice .
In these cases , however , it is the ministers who speak and not the Commission .
Thank you for your reply , Commissioner .
I would like to congratulate you on the good work you have done , because I believe that introducing sport into the future European Union Treaty is very important .
It seemed very difficult , but all indications are that it will be achieved .
I am reassured by the information you have given me , because I had seen certain proposals from international sporting organisations which really did not reassure me very much in terms of the inclusion of sport in the future Treaty , amongst other things , because , being rather difficult , we ran the risk of achieving nothing in the end .
With regard to combating doping , my feeling is that , since the World Anti-Doping Agency was created , there is almost less control in this area then there was before .
I would like to hear the Commissioner 's opinion on this and on whether she believes it is necessary to rather reinvigorate the fight against doping at European level and , if possible , at world level .
The honourable Member welcomes , as I do , the wisdom of the Convention members , who have actually included sport in the draft treaty , taking into consideration what the Union and Parliament have been saying on this subject for years .
We have been talking about the social dimension and educational dimensions of sport for years .
It is these dimensions which have been included in the draft treaty , not , I am glad to say , the excessive demands of certain sporting bodies .
The wisdom of the Convention members has therefore prevailed over the demands of certain sporting organisations .
At this point I should like to thank all the sportsmen and sportswomen and all the sporting organisations , including the President of the International Olympic Committee , who have been helping us for years in our aim of getting this article included in the treaty .
I should also like to thank the Convention members , the Members of the European Parliament and all the national politicians who have contributed to this effort .
As for the World Anti-Doping Agency , WADA , it poses a few small problems , since among other things it is not based on international law and , therefore , neither are its proposals .
The Agency is a body under private law , which does not make things any easier .
As for controls , I do not know whether there are fewer now than before .
Just about everybody tells me that there are too many , and that everyone is carrying out overlapping and contradictory controls , and that it would be better to concentrate them and to act logically and in accordance with Member States ' laws .
Many problems still have to be sorted out before a final solution is achieved .
A World Anti-Doping Agency code is not enough .
We need a change in , or an adaptation of , Member States ' laws .
Imagine a situation in which a sportsman is given a two-year suspension and appeals before a national court , and it turns out that the law of that State is not in accordance with the World Anti-Doping Agency code .
The sportsman would be acquitted and we would find ourselves in complete chaos , and with even more uncertainty than before .
I believe that we must decide , at last , to endeavour to strike a balance , to reform Member States ' laws on doping and to obtain from the Union an assurance that it is committed to complementary action in the form of educational and preventive measures .
Mr President , I am pleased to hear that the Commissioner is taking action in this area and I offer her my congratulations .
On the issue of doping , I have a very specific question : time and again , when doping cases occur , it is pointed out that the athletes were not clear about the content of the products .
A fairly simple measure which could be adopted - although it is admittedly not absolutely watertight in its effect - is to identify doping products on the label , perhaps by including a red dot or a red line on the packaging , in order to draw specific attention to the content and the risks associated with doping .
Could the Commissioner take steps in this direction ?
.
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Ebner is right .
We are responsible for the labelling of medicinal products .
I have already spoken to my fellow-Commissioner Mr Byrne about ways in which we can label medicines in order to prevent such substances entering the body by chance - although as we know , something like that does not happen entirely by chance .
However , we also know that it is not just medicinal products that are causing the problems , but also food additives , so this whole issue is fairly complex .
However , if we want to control doping in Europe , we need a comprehensive list of the medicines and additives concerned , and this list must then be distributed - in collaboration with the sports associations - to the sportsmen and sportswomen themselves .
Therefore I believe that providing information both to sports doctors and to athletes is extremely important .
I also want , however , to point out that we do not just have a problem with professional athletes .
For example , we carried out a study on fitness centres which revealed that even teenagers - primarily young men between 15 and 17 years of age - are taking banned substances because they have seen the older ones doing so and because these substances are freely available in some of these fitness centres .
We are clearly dealing with a public health issue here , and in this respect , I believe that more political action is needed than we have seen to date .
Mr President , Commissioner , I found out today that France has banned rugby .
That is fine by me .
However , my question is this : do you think that boxing is really a sport which should be encouraged , and do you think that boxing is especially conducive to the morals and ethical values of young people ?
. ( DE ) Mr President , I do have my own favourite sports , and I must say that boxing is not one of them .
Has France banned rugby ?
That is news to me .
I need to check that and see why it has done so and what the underlying thinking was .
As far as the rest is concerned - and this is the message to be sent out during the European Year of Education through Sport - I believe that sport is enjoyable ; it brings people together , both as individuals and as nations , and it must seek solutions to social problems .
It should not be a social problem itself .
Thank you very much for your cooperation , Commissioner .
Questions to Mrs Diamantopoulou
Question No 29 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0293 / 03 ) :
Subject : Implementation of Council Directive 1999 / 70 / EC by Greece
Presidential Decree 81 / 2003 transposes Directive 1999 / 70 / EC
Mr President , Greece has indeed transposed the directive and very recently notified the Commission of the implementing legislation .
The Commission is currently in the process of evaluating the transposition and will take a decision following a careful examination of the dossier .
However , it is perfectly clear that , under clause 5 of the directive , the Member States must establish a framework to prevent abuse arising from the use of successive fixed-term contracts .
The directive gives the Member States a number of options as regards the application of this clause .
They must introduce at least one of the following measures : objective reasons justifying the renewal of fixed-term contracts , maximum total duration of the contracts and number of renewals .
A first reading of the presidential decree shows that article 5 makes provision for the above and that it expressly stipulates that the renewal of fixed-term contracts of employment is allowed if justified by an objective reason and examples of objective reasons are given .
Of course , the Member States themselves determine what is meant by the term ' objective reasons ' . However , the measures introduced must be adequate measures to prevent abuse .
For example , the argument that work in the public sector per se is an objective reason for unlimited successive fixed-term contracts is unacceptable .
There must be objective grounds based on the nature of the object .
The Commission , as I said , intends to arrive at an evaluation of the transposition of the implementing legislation and to proceed to take any subsequent action required .
Mr President , I appreciate the Commissioner 's reply and I understand her position , given that she herself is from Greece .
As she understood , the question does not concern the objective reasons and the implementation criteria , it concerns the scope .
I have noted what she said about the public sector , but I should like to ask her : when does the Commission believe that it will have finished its evaluation of the scope of the directive and of what I consider to be the unacceptable exemptions being made for the public sector and certain industries ?
There is legal chaos in Greece .
We already have judgments from the courts of first instance in Patras and Larissa and from the court of appeal in Crete , which apply the directive and do not apply the presidential decree .
I should like to ask the Commissioner if she could estimate when we shall have this opinion from the Commission .
What we are trying to do is to present it as quickly as possible .
All I need say to you is that we received it about 10 days ago .
There are legal procedures , but there are also internal committee procedures .
I believe that we shall be able to present our evaluation before the summer .
Question No 30 by Paul Rübig ( H-0302 / 03 ) :
Subject : EU senior citizens ' card
Today 's senior citizens are active , dynamic and enjoy travelling - not only within their own country , but all over Europe .
This makes the introduction of a European senior citizens ' card useful and worthwhile . Such a card would allow the holder to pay the reduced rate for senior citizens for public amenities , museums and events etc. throughout the whole of Europe .
This would not only support and encourage mobility , but would also increase general acceptance of the EU , and improve contact and understanding between individual Member States .
Does the Commission feel it is possible or necessary to introduce an EU-wide senior citizens ' card ?
Mr President , several years ago , in 1989 , the Commission issued a recommendation which it addressed to the Member States concerning the introduction of the European over-60s senior citizens ' card .
The Commission 's recommendation at the time concerned the possibility of access for senior citizens to all resources provided by decision of the Member States to their own senior citizens , from museums and cultural activities to free subsidised transport .
Of course , the technical obstacles to the introduction of this card proved to be quite considerable .
To date three cost / benefit studies have been carried out , describing the systems which exist and the limitations to which they are subject , together with the obstacles which exist in numerous Member States .
The final report from the last study was submitted to a contact group of representatives from the Member States for policies for senior citizens and to the association group of senior citizens ' organisations .
No Member State and none of the pan-European senior citizens ' organisations in this group , to which the final study was submitted , supported the idea of the card or the proposals contained in the report .
Consequently , the Commission does not consider the introduction of a senior citizens ' card in the European Union to be feasible .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Flemming , ladies and gentlemen , the senior citizens ' card really should also be a symbol of the tremendous purchasing power enjoyed by senior citizens in Europe .
We are all aware of the current strikes about the pensions reform .
I think that the best practice model would be appropriate here too .
We should demonstrate which kind of best-practice reforms have achieved the target most effectively .
I would therefore like to ask you this : does the Commission have any thoughts on how to promote pensioners ' power as consumers in future through best practice and benchmarks ?
Mr President , it is not easy to give an answer at this precise moment to the question of whether there are global policies to strengthen the intervention of the purchasing power of senior citizens .
They are consumers . We know that there is a very large section of the European population who are pensioners and well-off pensioners .
These people really do have mobility at European level and participate in consumption , but the question was very specific and concerned the need for a card .
It is a nice idea . I agree with you that this sort of card would facilitate the mobility of pensioners even more , but an idea also has to be adopted by those who will be called on to apply it and by those who will be called on to enjoy its advantages .
At this precise moment , we see that there is no inclination either on the part of the Member States or on the part of senior citizens ' organisations .
Obviously , if there is any movement , we too shall act accordingly for our part , but I do not think that the Commission has any possibility of acting at present .
Commissioner , age is the future for Europe and - I hope for you all - it is your own future too .
I have already reached it : I am already seventy years of age .
I am also very proud that the European Union , in Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam , has the only constitution in the world to include a ban on discrimination on grounds of age .
Yet this is no longer provided for in the Convention 's draft .
My question to you is this : do you see any possibility of bringing influence to bear , even at this stage , so that this unique ban on discrimination which currently exists in Europe can be included in the new constitution as well ?
Both the text presented this precise moment to the Convention and the Charter of Fundamental Rights retain the wording concerning the issue of discrimination based on age intact .
It is precisely the same wording which we had in article 13 . It has not changed .
It is an element of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and it refers to age , race , religion and sex .
There has been no change to the sectors to which the area of discrimination refers .
Question No 31 by Michl Ebner ( H-0304 / 03 ) :
Subject : Youth unemployment
Youth unemployment is a phenomenon deserving of serious attention and is indeed dealt with accordingly in the European Union ; even greater significance will , however , need to be attached to it as a result of the accession of ten new countries as part of enlargement to the East .
The Member States will in future be confronted with an influx of young people seeking work from the new Member States which will boost their own rates of unemployment .
Is the EU equipped to cope with this imminent surge of arrivals ?
Have specific projects already been drawn up ?
What kind of assistance is the Commission providing and what objectives is it pursuing ?
Naturally the European Commission has analysed the prospects and specific problems concerning youth unemployment in enlarged Europe .
The first point concerns the fear of waves of immigrants .
Usually , it is the youngest workers who move .
Studies which we have carried out show that mobility from the 10 future Member States to the present European Union of the 15 will be relatively limited .
It is estimated that there will be an outbreak in the first years , which will reach 250 000 people per annum , half of whom will be manpower , but that this mobility of manpower will start to decline towards the end of the decade to fewer than 100 000 people .
Of course , these studies always have a significant number of forecasts . However , they are fairly convincing if you think that they have taken account of all the prevailing conditions in each of the Member States .
Similarly , previous experience of enlargement in Europe and studies into the phenomenon of immigration suggest that young migrant workers from the new Member States will tend to migrate towards the wealthier areas of their own countries , to large towns where unemployment rates are relatively lower and there are relatively good prospects of finding work .
Young people in these countries tend to opt first for their own towns and their own areas which are better developed , rather than choosing to go to another country .
So much for the study of the phenomenon of immigration flows .
The second point concerns transitional arrangements for the free movement of workers decided at European level .
As you know , there is an agreement on the free movement of workers during the first two years .
Following accession , each Member State can decide on free movement , but it can also postpone it for five years .
This is the 5 + 2 rule .
The third point concerns the strategy on employment , the application of policies in which the European Union has an added value .
Here we must say that there has been cooperation here for three years between the European Commission and each of the candidate Member States , where essentially we are trying to support the creation of individualised action plans to combat unemployment .
Considerable efforts are being made to include reducing the drop-out rate from school , which is a serious problem in many of these countries , and to prepare them so that , with the new generation of Structural Funds , there will be optimum investment in human resources .
Thus , I repeat that my reply includes three basic categories of issues .
Immigration flows and the study of the phenomenon with possible forecasts .
The second is the institutional framework as configured at European level and the third is the application of policies on employment .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like the latter part of your informative comments to be given added depth , especially with regard to the use of the Structural Funds in the field of education .
You specifically raised the issue of school drop-outs .
I think it would be very important for the European Union to focus especially on education and training , so that young people in the accession countries have a chance to benefit from suitable job opportunities in their own countries .
It would also be important in psychological terms , in terms of the basic attitude in these countries , for young people to see that they have a chance in Europe and that Europe guarantees them this chance .
For this reason , I am wondering whether it is possible , in terms of funding , to launch special measures via the Structural Funds .
Mr Ebner , at this stage , a first round of discussions is being held for the next generation of the Structural Funds .
The discussion also relates to which areas funding from European resources should be directed at and to the priorities of the sectors which have to be financed .
There is broad agreement that high priority needs to be given to human resources .
Without significant investment in human resources , there will be a problem with the take-up of funds , even for the projects , even for business support .
Thus , the discussion is being directed to a large extent towards the fact that the candidate countries , as they are already doing , will have to prepare those structures with which they will be able to fund the employment strategy , to fund the infrastructures of their education systems and the reforms needed , all of which are very important to their development .
It is not my feeling that , with the agreement that already exists , significant resources will be safeguarded for the new countries .
As the Commissioner knows , she has made me a very happy man today , but hopefully she has made a lot of other people very happy too !
I am talking about the work in the Luxembourg Council today and the Atypical Workers Directive , which has not passed further .
That is genuinely very important for youth employment opportunities .
Many young people and young students rely upon temporary work for employment in between term times and they will therefore be as happy as I am at the lack of progress today .
My question to the Commissioner is really will she consider - and I am only asking her to consider , not to commit herself - saying a final goodbye , rather than au revoir , to this directive ?
If so , she will not only make me happier , but a lot of young people happier too .
. Mr Bushill-Matthews , would you accept the title of ' charming provocateur ' ?
It is true that today we were not greatly successful .
However , as you know , the directive for temporary agency workers is a very difficult and complicated one .
The central concept of this directive is to strike a balance between flexibility and security .
I am not at all ready to say adieu .
As I said in my press conference today it is an au revoir , not a ' goodbye ' .
Therefore you can expect a new phase with negotiations on this directive .
Mr President , I should like to enter this very interesting debate and state that I agree with the answers the Commissioner has given .
Nevertheless , I believe that the problem of unemployment amongst young people in Europe is almost a red herring since , if we are able to increase Europe 's economic growth , we will be providing employment and we will need many young people . Consequently , the young people from the countries now joining the Union , who will be able to compete on the labour market of the current fifteen , are an asset and not a problem .
There could certainly be a problem in the countries they leave behind .
To put it briefly : economic growth plays a crucial role in a country 's capacity to absorb young people and this growth and economic development must be of concern to everyone .
Young immigrants are always an asset .
Mr Bushill-Matthews is well aware that the contribution made by young Portuguese people and Portuguese immigrants has been crucial to the great prosperity that his country , Luxembourg , now enjoys .
I totally agree with you , I only need give you a few figures .
In order to achieve the objective of full employment in 2010 , we need to create 22 million jobs for the 25 new countries , so that we arrive at unemployment throughout Europe in the order of 3.5 % - 4 % .
Is this feasible ?
As you quite rightly said , provided growth rates are achieved and the agreed reforms are applied , we have statistics from the past to show that we created 5 million jobs in the 15 countries alone over a four-year period .
Thus a combination of growth and reform can indeed give the desired result .
My second comment is that obviously the problem is in the countries from which immigrants come .
We have the brain drain phenomenon , the fact that these countries are losing human resources at their most dynamic age , the cleverest , most spirited people , and it is very important for these countries to keep their human resources , which is also why our approach , especially with the Structural Funds , is to invest in human resources , especially at these ages .
Question No 32 by Roy Perry ( H-0316 / 03 ) :
Subject : Misapplication of the Acquired Rights Directive with respect to British lecturers
The United Kingdom has stated by way of a letter to the Commission that it is removed from the field of application of Article 3 ( 2 ) of the Acquired Rights Directive 77 / 187 / EEC
. I can assure you that the Commission is fully aware of the importance and seriousness of the issues at stake in relation to the complaint concerning the presumed wrong application of Directive 77 / 187 / EEC following the transfer of colleges of further education in England and Wales to the private sector in the 1990s .
Indeed , this has led to continuous correspondence with the Commission services since 1996 .
The honourable Member is probably aware of the fact that the Commission 's legal analysis differs from that of the complainants .
According to our information , the United Kingdom has now correctly transposed Directive 77 / 187 / EEC into national legislation .
Accordingly , disputes concerning incorrect application are , in principle , a matter for the national courts .
Therefore the Commission services have stressed on several occasions over the years that the national courts constitute the appropriate legal framework for dealing with the issues raised in the case concerned .
It should be recalled in this respect that the complainants have indeed addressed the national courts but without success .
As far as the legally binding nature of collective agreements in the United Kingdom is concerned , I would like to point out that this is also a matter of interpretation of English law , often requiring a factual appreciation .
The directive and , in particular Article 3 ( 2 ) , does not oblige a Member State to change the legal nature of collective agreements .
Furthermore , even if , generally speaking , collective agreements are not legally binding in the United Kingdom , nothing prevents them from being legally binding if they are incorporated into an employment contract , thereby becoming part of the contractual terms .
Whether or not this is the case is often a complex issue requiring a factual appreciation .
Contrary to the conclusion reached by the Employment Appeal Tribunal in the complainants ' case , a recent judgment concerned such a binding collective agreement applicable in the National Health Service .
In its judgment , the European Court of Justice explicitly acknowledged that it is for the national courts to determine , if necessary , whether benefits arising from a collective agreement bind the transfer and thus also bind the transferee under Article 3 ( 2 ) .
Accordingly , a non-enforceable collective agreement before the transfer will continue to remain non-enforceable after the transfer .
.
As you very well know , there are two different issues : first , the transposition of the directive and how we evaluate this transposition and , second , implementation .
There have been thousands of pages of correspondence on this matter over many years .
As far as the transposition is concerned , there is now a legal decision according to which this transposition is acceptable , and there is no problem with the government of the United Kingdom .
On the second problem , implementation , it is for the national courts to decide whether it is implemented correctly or not , and there is a decision of the national courts , so the Commission cannot go further .
I am grateful for what the Commissioner says in terms of compliance by the British Government .
I have myself been approached on similar cases , particularly in relation to the exclusion of pension rights from being fully protected under the Acquired Rights Directive , as in the case of a company in Boreham Wood in my constituency .
I wonder if the Commissioner , looking forward , might learn some lessons from the case raised by my colleague and myself in terms of future reviews of the directive even if further action under the current rules appears not to be possible .
. No , there is nothing in the pipeline concerning the changes in this Directive .
Thank you very much , Mrs Diamantopoulou .
As the time allotted to questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 33 to 55 will be replied to in writing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with your permission , I should like , first of all , to thank the President , Mr Pat Cox , for his kind invitation , for the quality of the welcome that has been given to my delegation and to me personally , and for the words which he has kindly spoken about me and about the Algerian people , which demonstrate the strong links which unite us with the people of Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking to you at a time when the people of Algeria are still seeking to eradicate the consequences of the disastrous earthquake which has plunged them into mourning , to heal the wounds and the traumas caused by this catastrophe and to rebuild the ruins and to restore life to the towns and villages which were destroyed .
I am most anxious to express our profound gratitude for the gestures of solidarity and sympathy which the European Parliament made to us , and for the assistance of all kinds which was immediately sent to the disaster area by the countries of Europe .
This spontaneous show of solidarity has been a great comfort to the people of Algeria , and I should like , on their behalf , on behalf of the families that have been so sorely tried , to express once again our feelings of intense gratitude to all those who have been at our side throughout this cruel affliction .
Mr President , on 22 April 2002 at Valencia , in Spain , Algeria and the European Union , by solemnly signing their Association Agreement , set the seal on a new and sustainable relationship for a future of solidarity and cooperation .
This agreement represents a genuine economic anchor binding Algeria to the European Community , and it is an illustration of our consistent desire - a desire which is shared by our European partners - to base our relationship on the essential values of mutual respect , shared prosperity and friendship .
The undertaking that we gave together on that occasion opens up broad prospects for intensifying the political dialogue between Algeria and the European Union , in the interests of a global partnership which we are hoping will be in line with our expectations .
Was it not an omen that the Treaty of Rome was signed by a France which had full and entire sovereignty over an Algeria which was already into its third year of the war of national liberation and which was nevertheless still divided into three French départements ?
Was there , at that time , a single signatory State to the Treaty of Rome which had the good taste and presence of mind to express reservations in favour of our country which was occupied and struggling to gain national liberty ?
This undertaking is in line with my country 's consistent attitude in favour of privileged cooperation with Europe , as is demonstrated by the gamble taken by Algeria in making Europe , right from the beginning of the seventies , its major energy market .
Algeria committed itself very early on in that respect , via the construction of gas pipelines through Italy and Spain , to the path of long-term cooperation with Europe , thereby giving an expression to a fundamental act of faith in European integration and in future prospects for cooperation with the European continent .
All this goes to show the importance that my country has always attached to the promotion of political dialogue and an economic partnership with the European Union , and I can only say how much I welcome the fact that the signing of our Association Agreement has strengthened our conviction .
Traditionally , we have held regular political consultations with the European Union , a lively and constructive dialogue involving the exchange of many delegations of political parties and members of parliament , who have helped to introduce a climate of understanding into our relationship as a result of a mutual desire to know one another better in order to be better able to cooperate .
Mr President , in this troubled time for international relations , the Euro-Mediterranean region is facing major challenges of different kinds , which are in danger of aggravating the instability factors and the fracture lines between the two shores of the Mediterranean Sea .
Europe 's southern Mediterranean coast is the soft underbelly of Europe , as an eminent leader of the twentieth century once said .
It was precisely in order to address this situation and to arm ourselves in advance against these dangers that , together , seven years ago now , we launched the pioneering Barcelona process , with which all the countries surrounding the Mediterranean were to associate themselves .
For Algeria , such a process remains a key reference framework , as well as an essential forum for political dialogue and cooperation , and also an instrument which is relevant to the promotion of stability and security throughout the whole of the Mediterranean basin .
By its objectives , and by the actions which it envisaged , it gave rise to great hopes among the peoples on the southern shore of the Mediterranean basin .
Today those hopes assume even greater significance at a time when the enlargement of the European Union towards Eastern Europe is in danger of diverting the attention of European countries away from the south towards the east , thereby displacing the real centre of interest of the Barcelona process .
For my part , I remain convinced that the enlargement of Europe ought to be a source of precious political inspiration , enabling us to imagine innovative concepts of cooperation between Europe and the countries south of the Mediterranean , and calming legitimate fears of the risk of Europe 's distancing itself from its neighbours to the south .
It is all a question of balance , and I am sure that the European Union will be able to reconcile its various demands which , let us not forget , also influence the stability and the security of the continent of Europe .
Is it not true to say that , twice in its history , my country has found itself , all too unwillingly , involved in two world wars which had Europe as their principal theatre of action , and that , ever since Sedan , Algeria has taken part in all France 's wars ?
The Euro-Mediterranean project into which we have launched ourselves without hesitation implies , on the part of everyone , a total commitment to the implementation of the objectives set out in the Barcelona Declaration .
In this context , our action must take into account the interests of all the partners involved , and must respond to our many and varied concerns .
Consequently , it must be global , balanced and multi-dimensional .
Mr President , the emergence of the new context of globalisation had allowed us to hope that growth and development would occur at the same rate .
The countries of the South agreed to many sacrifices , often under duress , in order to be a part of this development of the world economy , and adapting to this new situation has often involved painful adjustments and given rise to burdensome social repercussions .
It has to be admitted now that the promised prospects have , so far , become a reality only in the wealthy countries .
The split between rich and poor countries is becoming increasingly wide .
It is currently a source of deprivation , a source of violence and a source of intolerance , accompanied by other social scourges such as rural exodus and population migration .
As part of the creation of the Euro-Mediterranean Free Trade Area , we are obliged to implement , within relatively short time limits , far-reaching changes to our economic and social system .
That represents an enormous challenge and involves huge upheavals in our social and economic structures .
We cannot hope to succeed in making these changes unless the Association Agreement allows the Algerian economy , which is already stretched as a result of the reforms that have been carried out over the past decade , to acquire the means to become integrated , gradually and harmoniously , into the world economy , and to acquire the added value which will give it full credibility , particularly from the point of view of increasing the flow of European investment .
Despite the difficulties which I have just mentioned , Algeria has launched a huge programme to boost the economy , and has provided funding in the form of USD 7 billion over a period of four years .
This is barely enough , in view of the size of the reforms underway .
The support of the European Union is absolutely essential at this particular stage , especially in the form of a sustained commitment to keep investments flowing .
I am afraid that the financial support measures allotted to the Euro-Mediterranean partnership as part of the MEDA programme fall well short of expressed expectations .
An example is the budgetary appropriations allocated to Algeria for the first and , in particular , the second tranches of the MEDA bilateral programme .
Mr President , the last 12 years have been an appalling nightmare for the Algerian people , who , while suffering the violence of a particularly cruel form of terrorism , have also had to cope with natural disasters , with droughts lasting several years , with floods , and with several earthquakes , the latest of which has just devastated the area around Algiers .
Although international solidarity was spontaneously and generously shown on the occasion of the last two natural disasters , the people of Algeria have , by contrast , had to live with the feeling that they had been abandoned to their fate during the whole of the time that they were subjected to the extortion , destruction and massacres perpetrated by terrorists who - most cruelly of all - claimed to be motivated by religion .
The developed world has taken a long time to understand the threat posed by this phenomenon , which has usurped the mantle of ideological respectability and used democracy as a means of persuading European opinion that it has the right to destroy Algerian society .
These terrorist organisations have even found asylum and freedom to act in certain capital cities of Europe , where the massacres in Algeria were still giving rise to questions and doubts which showed a total ignorance of the internal situation of the country and of the threat that it represented to the rest of the world .
It was only after the events of 11 September 2001 in the United States that the world 's perception changed and it became possible to envisage terrorism as an international scourge against which it would be necessary to engage in a merciless battle on a worldwide scale .
I think I can say that , at that moment , the situation in Algeria became better understood and the sacrifices borne by the Algerian people were at last fully appreciated .
Terrorism is a threat to the very foundations of civilised human society .
As a matter of urgency we must put an end , finally , to this nihilistic culture of terrorism .
However , it is even more important to mount a thorough campaign not only against the manifestations of terrorism , but above all against its causes , its roots , and everything that gives it sustenance .
This world will never build anything solid or lasting unless it bears this objective firmly in mind as a major priority .
However , deprivation engenders violence , and unless you wage war on poverty , poverty will wage war on you .
In that case we shall never fully enjoy the happiness of a peaceful and secure world .
After 12 years of struggle , the security situation in our country has improved considerably , but it still requires the measures of vigilance and protection made necessary by the isolated acts of violence which occur from time to time .
The policy of civil concord and national reconciliation which I introduced as soon as I took office has made a very significant contribution towards calming social tensions , and has reduced terrorist violence to its lowest ever level .
Today , that violence no longer constitutes an obstacle to the resumption of economic activity and growth , or to national or foreign investment .
In the same way , political life has come into its own again , and last year saw several important steps regarding the organisation of legislative elections and the holding of local elections - both of which showed crystal-clear and total transparency - and the constitutional amendment which enabled Amazigh to be elevated to the status of a national language .
Our willingness to create a state subject to the Rule of Law , which respects the rules of democracy and which respects political pluralism , has once again been reinforced by these democratic advances .
The Algerian Government remains convinced that the deepening of the democratic process and the acceleration of economic and social reforms will allow the emergence and the strengthening of a civil society which is capable of making its contribution to the progress of Algerian society , while respecting the rights and the duties of each individual .
In this context , the overall approach of the Government tends to give automatic preference to dialogue and consultation and to make them not only the instrument of political and social regulation but also a powerful factor in promoting vital political and social consensus .
In this dialogue-centred approach , economic and social problems , and the numerous social claims which form the corollary to those problems , assume a special place because of the enormous constraints burdening a national economy which finds itself in the process of changing and of opening up to the demands of the market economy .
It is by no means easy to evolve from a planned economy into a liberal economy , any more than it is easy to evolve from political dirigisme to democratic openness .
What is more , the market economy , like democracy , originates from a culture which cannot be imposed .
At another level , the consolidation of a State subject to the rule of law also comes about through a commitment to reform education , the structures of the State , and the justice system .
In this context , the revision of the penal code and of the penal-procedure code which Algeria has started work on is intended to provide more guarantees regarding the independence of the judiciary and the freedom of the press , to which we remain fundamentally committed , seeking in this way to reinforce the ethics of the associated professions .
In our countries , too much ' state ' is an aberration .
The decline of the state , however , leads to catastrophe and anarchy .
The issue of human rights is one of our main concerns .
It is included in the steps that we are taking to consolidate a State subject to the rule of law .
We are aware of our imperfections in this area , but we all know that in any society respect for human rights requires a long apprenticeship which leads to a true human-rights culture .
We are seriously committed to that , and we are persevering in our commitment .
The creation of the National Consultative Committee for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights is a response to this major concern , and demonstrates our willingness to move forward in this area .
The Association Agreement which now links us to the European Community will enable us to multiply our contacts and exchanges with European countries , and I am convinced that this will lead us towards a strengthening of the democratic tendencies in our own country , and towards a greater openness towards the human-rights culture .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , is this the place , is this the time ?
I believe that it is , and I do so in good faith .
It is therefore with painful emotion that I again refer to the memory of the victims of the crisis that our country has experienced , assuring their families , as I stand before you here , of the compassion that all Algerian people feel towards them in their pain .
The international community has also shown its sympathy and compassion towards them .
Immediately after the dreadful earthquake which shook several provinces , or wilayas , of the country , I asked the Algerian authorities to mobilise all civil and military resources without delay to cope with this national disaster .
The very next day , the Council of Ministers passed the necessary emergency decisions , which the Government immediately implemented .
Thus the People 's National Army , the Security Corps , the civil defence authorities , the medical and paramedical services , Sonelgaz , the Algerian water authority and the other major public services , with an acute sense of duty , mobilised all their available human and material resources and united their efforts in order to cope with the crisis and with the tragic situation with which the country was suddenly faced .
As I speak to you here today I should like to express my gratitude , in particular , for the tremendous upsurge of national solidarity which emerged spontaneously throughout the country on the part of all our citizens , and in particular our young people , who were so keen to bring to their brothers in distress the support of the whole nation .
I also wish to emphasise how great has been the international solidarity , which shows the esteem in which Algeria is held today and the respect which is felt for the Algerian people .
All the countries , large and small , rich and less rich , to whom I now express my gratitude , in addition to the telephone calls and the messages of condolence and sympathy sent to me , have expressed their willingness to provide any material aid which our country needs , and have been anxious to show their sincere and brotherly solidarity in the form of practical gestures , which the entire Algerian population particularly appreciates .
In this respect I should like to pay particular homage to all those specialist rescue teams , from countries which are our brothers and our friends , who , alongside the People 's National Army , the civil defence authorities and the Algerian medical teams , have done a splendid and remarkable job of work and have provided us with assistance which is greatly appreciated in these difficult times .
This extraordinary chain of national and international solidarity has been remarkably well supported by the great majority of the media who have done everything possible to provide , in this case , a real public service , making their communication and broadcasting resources available to the families of the victims .
In these sad circumstances I must emphasise that the state has done its duty , the government has assumed its responsibilities , the public institutions and services have played their part and the civilian and military agents of the state , the local authorities and the public establishments and enterprises have done what was required of them .
I have personally been at pains to supervise personally the smooth running of operations to assist the victims and the implementation of measures of all kinds adopted in this field , and to verify that all the institutions in the country are remaining mobilised for this purpose .
Finally , I should like to turn my thoughts to the people who have suffered , and who have met this terrible ordeal with exemplary courage and dignity , and I should like to say to them , speaking from this House with you as witnesses , that we shall take it upon ourselves to reconstruct the areas affected by the earthquake .
The Algerian people have demonstrated , yet again , that solidarity to them is not an empty word , and that they will find in themselves the strength and the capacity to overcome this new ordeal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , facing Europe , the African continent is seeking a way of escaping from its under-developed position and , like the European continent , it is trying to achieve unity through better coordination of its efforts and better use of its resources .
This ambitious undertaking is intended to be based on a vast economic programme which is currently known by the name of NEPAD , and which the leaders of Africa have once again presented to the Heads of State of the G8 countries at their meeting in Évian .
I raise this question because I know the interest that Europeans show in everything that relates to Africa and the sympathy that they have always shown towards the efforts of Africans to participate in world development .
In Africa , development , which has been called the ' new name of peace ' , has for a long time now been more familiar with the inhibiting burdens of selfishness than with the generous outbursts of a dynamic concept of interdependence between nations .
The so-called ' lost decades ' for developing countries have been followed by more of the same , and the spectres of poverty , famine and pandemic diseases constantly reappear in Africa .
The countries of Africa have learned much from their failures and their mistakes , in their economic and social choices and in the implementation of particularly restrictive structural adaptation programmes .
It is thus having come to the end of a path rich in lessons that we find ourselves contemplating the possibility of effective African integration , conceived as a long-term , complex and multi-dimensional undertaking and supported by the cooperation of the world outside .
It is a possibility because Africa has courageously brought about a revolution in attitudes in order to ensure a future of democracy , peace and prosperity .
The decision taken at the Algiers Summit of the Organisation of African Unity , establishing an African doctrine for the disqualification and rejection of anti-constitutional changes in political regimes , was a historic decision , marking an important stage in Africa 's development .
In the same spirit , the New Partnership for Africa 's Development ( now known as NEPAD ) defines new methods of operation , based on specifically African efforts characterised by responsibility and solidarity , such as Peer Review , which is a system whereby each African Head of State voluntarily submits his internal actions to the calm and rigorous assessment of his peers .
For its part , the institutional architecture of the African Union includes provisions intended to ensure that the nature and democratic operation of national governments are equipped to deal with any attacks and attempts to pervert them , so that joint African action is in line with rules which no one is allowed to infringe .
In this context , it is of the utmost importance that we should really turn globalisation into an opportunity for the development of the countries of the South , by the encouragement of new forms of partnership , capable of unleashing the dynamics of sustainable growth and development .
From this point of view , it must be possible for globalisation , which takes the form of a remarkable contraction in space and time , to become more human and more democratic , because unless the equal participation of all the actors in the great movements of contemporary history is encouraged , globalisation will intrinsically involve the risk of giving free rein to violent forces hostile to the cohesion of national societies and of international society .
The tragic events of 11 September 2001 , which brought the horror to its climax , demonstrate the truth that , in the world of today and tomorrow , there can be no sanctuary of security and prosperity in an environment of vulnerability , disorder and destitution .
When international debate covers up legitimate concerns in order to sanction the status quo , when the logic of power relationships carries more weight than mutual understanding , when the voice of reason is stifled or ignored on the international scene , extremists will find an inexhaustible source of nourishment in the injustices , disappointments and frustrations that people experience in their daily lives .
Fundamentally , the response to the phenomena of violence lies in the proper management of international relationships and the promotion of human rights , in their indivisibility and universality at worldwide level .
This presupposes that the international community will abandon its former practices and open itself up to new horizons , in the search for a better-quality destiny for the human race .
It also presupposes that Africa will receive its fair share of the benefits of the growth of the world economy , and will become a centre of attraction for the flows of capital and technologies in which it is so cruelly lacking , so that it can assume primary responsibility for its own development and contribute to the greater equilibrium of the emerging international community .
We should like to believe that the meeting in Évian has amplified this message and that the G8 countries have confirmed their faith in the recovery of Africa and renewed their determination to give it all their support in the best-understood interests of everyone .
Algeria is one of the African countries which founded NEPAD , and its activities on the African political scene reflect the major role that it plays in accepting responsibility for and solving the problems which arise in our continent .
A new dynamic is emerging in Africa , whether it is concerned with settling conflicts , deepening the democratic process , improving governance , strengthening institutional capacities or being more ready to accept responsibility for the human dimension of development .
On a smaller scale , we are working with our other partners in North Africa to give substance to the Arab Maghreb Union , of which Algeria currently holds the presidency .
I personally have faith in the future of the AMU .
I have taken on the task of remodelling it on sound and secure foundations .
I have not given up hope of being able , soon , to convene an AMU summit , which will enable us to re-launch sub-regional cooperation .
Algeria remains attached to this objective , which cannot be made conditional upon the settlement of the Western Sahara question , which is an issue that requires , in the last analysis , the application of international legality and the implementation of the United Nations settlement plan , to which we are continuing to lend our support .
The role of the UN remains central here , as does the holding of the absolutely essential referendum on self-determination .
Recent developments in the Middle East , a region which is so sensitive and which has suffered so much , constitute a forceful challenge to all of us , because of the serious threat that they represent to stability and security in the region and to peace in the world .
Deprived of their most basic rights , the people of Palestine continue to suffer the horrors of a brutal occupation which has lasted too long , and they are paying a heavy toll faced with Israel 's intransigence and its systematic stubbornness in opposing any peace initiative , the latest of which , the ' roadmap ' , has given rise to no less than fourteen major reservations from Israel , which completely destroy the - albeit very modest - substance of the plan .
It is high time that the international community and , in particular , the United Nations Security Council , pulled itself together and acceded to the legitimate claim of the Palestinian people finally to have their own independent State , ...
( Applause ) ... in the context of respect for the rights of all the peoples of the region to live in peace and security .
We hope that the unacceptable intransigence and repeated demands of Israel will not result in the failure of this latest attempt at a settlement represented by the ' roadmap ' of the Quartet , despite the somewhat diffident nature of its content .
It is also time that those Syrian and Lebanese territories that are still under Israeli occupation were evacuated and returned to their legitimate rulers .
The situation in Iraq is also a source of great concern in the Arab world .
On this issue , Algeria remains in favour of the strict observance of law and of international legality .
It now believes that the political stabilisation of Iraq will be achieved by re-establishing the sovereignty of the country , ... ( Applause ) ... and that the international community , represented by the United Nations , must be effectively involved in any process of political rehabilitation and reconstruction in Iraq .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have tried to paint you a picture of the situation in Algeria and of certain other issues , both internal and international , which are a source of concern to us .
I have tried to promote a better understanding of the situation in Algeria , a situation which Members of the European Parliament can always appreciate for themselves by coming to visit our country , where they are always welcome and where we shall be happy to receive them and very happy to listen to their comments and above all to their advice .
These exchanges , which are based on mutual confidence as well as an already established friendship , are more essential than ever now that we are linked by an Association Agreement which strengthens our solidarity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me once again to thank you for the welcome that you have given to my delegation and to me , and for having been willing to give your attention to what I have to say .
From this platform I say , with your permission , that my country too is made either to succeed or to learn from its misfortunes .
One day soon , in a national upsurge of reconciliation between Algerians , the fields of hope will be green again , and the orchards will once more be covered in blossom .
The winds of adversity and of national discord will be conquered , without a doubt , by the grace of God and thanks to the tenacity of the Algerian people , tempered like steel by suffering , and , in an increasingly interdependent and mutually supportive world , thanks to the help and the support of the international community .
( Loud applause )
President Bouteflika , I should like to thank you for your official visit to the European Parliament , a visit , as I have already emphasised , without equal and therefore a first .
I should like to thank you for your fascinating speech which has touched us all and to which we have listened with a great deal of interest .
Ladies and gentlemen , the formal sitting is closed .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0154 / 2003 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on transboundary movements of genetically-modified organisms [ 15546 / 1 / 2002 C5-0081 / 2003 2002 / 0046 ( COD ) ] [ Rapporteur : Mr Sjöstedt ] .
. ( SV ) Thank you , Mr President .
When the Cartagena Protocol was successfully negotiated in 2000 , this was a significant success for the European Union .
It was also a success for all those of us who want free trade to be conducted in the context of environmental concern and respect for consumers .
The protocol clarifies the conditions for global trade involving genetically-modified products .
To date , 49 countries have ratified the protocol .
It is only necessary for one country to ratify the protocol for it to come into force .
The draft law we are now to debate lays down EU rules for the export of genetically-modified organisms .
In adopting these rules , the European Union fulfils the requirements laid down in the Cartagena Protocol .
These new rules are coming at precisely the right time , and they may perhaps also serve as a model and inspiration for states that are working on their regulations right now .
Compared with the proposal tabled by the Commission , the rules we are to adopt tomorrow are a little stricter and clearer .
They are more in line with what is laid down in the protocol and , in certain areas , go still further .
In Parliament , we have focused on tightening up the proposal in certain key areas .
We have made sure that rules and definitions shall not be looser than what is laid down by the protocol and that express approval by the country of import shall always be required before the export takes place .
The draft law now makes this crystal-clear , explaining that the absence of a response from the country of import may never be viewed as ' silent consent ' .
The legislation of the country of import must always be respected .
The proposal makes it clear that we must not export anything from the EU that is not permitted within the EU and that there must be considerable transparency , with the public being given information about the export taking place .
The proposal also makes it plain that responsibilities must be clearly distributed so that it is the actual exporter who gives notice of the export .
Overall , the text we are now to adopt means that the European Parliament has obtained a hearing for approximately 80 % of what we wanted to get through at first reading .
We have also discussed this proposal with the Council of Ministers .
COREPER has already adopted the text we are to adopt tomorrow .
In this way , we can avoid conciliation , and the legislation will be ready when the protocol comes into force globally .
That has been possible thanks to a significant consensus between the Council of Ministers and Parliament .
There has also been a clear willingness to compromise and a shared desire on the part of the political groups to work quickly .
This has happened following constructive cooperation with the shadow rapporteurs , whom I would thank , one and all .
We have also had very close cooperation firstly with the Danish and then with the Greek Presidencies .
They too deserve thanks , and the same applies to those with responsibility at the Commission 's Environment Directorate-General , who have been of very great help .
By adopting these rules , we show that environmental considerations and respect for developing countries ' legislation are key concepts for the EU 's view of the global trade in genetically-modified products .
There is a need to do this at the very time when the United States is pushing for issues of this kind to be resolved within the World Trade Organisation .
We have recently seen examples of how this country has dumped genetically-modified food in countries that do not permit such food in their own national legislation .
This shows very clearly how important it is for the EU to adopt rules right now that indicate a more responsible , credible and long-term approach to these complex and very controversial issues .
.
( SV ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Sjöstedt , in Swedish , for his excellent work on this very complex issue .
It is an issue of great importance not only for us Europeans but also for the rest of the world , especially the developing countries .
. Mr President , the proposal on the table today is linked to the recent ratification by the European Community of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety .
The overall purpose , as we have heard already , of this United Nations agreement is to establish common rules to be followed in transboundary movements of GMOs in order to protect biodiversity and human health at world level .
The European Union has to fulfil its international obligations , which means transposing into our own legislation the provisions of the Biosafety Protocol .
This is the objective of the proposal we are discussing today .
The Commission has already expressed its reservations on some political points of this procedure , particularly since the common position agreed in the first reading goes well beyond the provisions of the Biosafety Protocol on a substantial number of issues .
Despite its reservations , the Commission is willing to cooperate on the basis of the package of compromise amendments we have on the table today , in order to increase the chances of reaching agreement at the second reading .
Therefore , in a spirit of compromise , the Commission will not oppose the package .
However , the Commission still believes that it might have been better to adhere more closely to the provisions of the protocol in order not to impose an excessive burden on Community exporters .
Nevertheless , the Commission considers that it is important to progress swiftly in order to have the implementing legislation adopted before the protocol enters into force .
This will be soon , as Mr Sjöstedt said , since 49 countries have already ratified it and the deposit of 50 instruments of ratification is required for its entry into force .
I would like to stress that the European Union has been a key player in these international negotiations from the very beginning .
I remember this vividly since that is what I had to start with as a new Commissioner .
We need to send a clear signal that we intend to honour our commitments and be in a position to fully implement the protocol as soon as it enters into force , which should now be a matter of months .
The Commission is in a position to support the package of amendments submitted for the approval of the Parliament as part of a compromise .
The package consists of Amendment Nos 19-26 .
Let me just comment briefly on some of the amendments from the package to illustrate the Commission 's position .
Amendment No 19 does recognise the need to respect the party or non-party of imports that can be regulated by your safety framework , consistent with the protocol .
This is in line with the position taken on numerous occasions by the Commission in international forums , which is to respect the right of countries to a free informed choice with regard to GMOs .
So the Commission can accept Amendment No 19 .
It can accept Amendments Nos 24-26 on improved public access to information regarding transboundary movements of GMOs , which is in line with the general framework of public access to environmental information and with Directive 2001 / 18 / EC on the deliberate release of GMOs into the environment .
Amendments Nos 21 and 22 impose an obligation to wait for prior written consent before proceeding with the export of GMOs .
The Commission believes that this goes beyond the Biosafety Protocol and is also the only amendment in the package about which the Commission had some serious reservations .
However , as part of the overall compromise , the Commission can agree to both amendments .
By way of conclusion , I would like to say that Parliament has worked in a swift and transparent manner in close cooperation with the Commission and the Council .
Once again , therefore , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Sjöstedt , for his efforts .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to start by thanking our rapporteur Mr Sjöstedt very warmly for his cooperation , which was positive and fair .
However , my thanks are due equally to the Commission , the Danish and of course particularly the current Greek Presidency , which worked with great commitment to achieve a compromise between the Parliament and the Council .
We are all keen to avoid a conciliation procedure for this report , for it deals , after all , with the transposition of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety and the protection of biological diversity , which is a subject close to everyone 's heart .
The European Union was indeed a key player in the negotiations on the Cartagena Protocol .
This makes it all the more important to transpose the Protocol swiftly into Community law now , thus sending out a clear political signal of our continued commitment .
The main priority of the draft before us is to find a solution , which has eluded us until now , to the issue of EU exports of living GMOs to third countries .
Here , practicability must be the key imperative .
We must achieve realistic legislation that can be applied in practice .
This is why I am pleased that the Council has not incorporated , in this regulation , a number of amendments proposed at first reading , for example on the inclusion of aids .
These amendments aimed to intervene in pending legislative processes through this report on the transposition of the Cartagena Protocol .
By ' pending legislative processes ' , I mean the legislation on genetically-modified food and feed , their labelling and traceability .
We debated and voted on this matter at second reading in committee just two weeks ago .
The outcome was very close ; opinions diverge widely and it still remains to be seen how the plenary will finally vote in July .
It would therefore be quite wrong to try to anticipate the outcome .
A vote on the environmental liability regulation has only just taken place at first reading as well .
A final decision on this issue is certainly not yet in sight .
For this reason , any statement on the liability issue in connection with traceability of GMOs and aids in the current report on transboundary movement had to be emphatically rejected .
These issues have nothing to do with the transposition of the Cartagena Protocol into Community law .
However , relevant amendments from the first reading did not make it to this second reading either .
I am pleased that the Council has decided in principle to adopt my amendments on exemptions to the system of notification and information for GMOs in transit and in closed systems .
We really do need these exemptions to ensure that there are no impediments to research .
The Council has also made it clear that the so-called Advanced Informed Agreement procedure set out in the Cartagena Protocol should only apply to first movements .
Conversely , this provides an exemption to the information procedure for GMO exports to a third country , if this third country has already given approval to another country for the import of the same GMO .
These exemption provisions are necessary since the AIA procedure , as the information procedure in this case , does not promise any enhanced safety and would simply obstruct transboundary movement unnecessarily .
I believe that the report before us , with all the compromises that we have drafted , is good and viable , and would ask all of you to vote for all the compromise amendments .
This will set us on the right course and avoid a lengthy conciliation procedure .
Mr President , I should also like to say a big thank-you to Mr Sjöstedt for his outstanding work on putting into effect the Catagena Protocol on Biosafety in Europe .
Mr Sjöstedt has shown considerable openness and a very great desire to achieve results , but I also think that the Commission and the Council - during both the Danish and Greek Presidencies - have made very positive contributions so that we can now avoid protracted discussion in the Conciliation Committee .
We are now obtaining a high level of protection in relation to the rules for the export of GMOs from the EU .
I think that the developing countries , in particular , are well protected . They are in the position of being able to exercise genuine choice in connection with the import of GMO products , even though they may of course be thought to be exposed to quite aggressive marketing from parts of industry .
By far the majority of Parliament 's amendments have been accepted , and this means we can have the Catagena Protocol put into effect without its wording being weakened for political reasons - on the contrary , with the wording of the protocol being tightened up in certain respects .
This means , for example - and I see this as the most important thing of all - that there can be no export of GMOs without the express consent of the country of import .
It is not enough that there should be no reaction , and this cannot be interpreted as tacit consent .
Express consent is also required , something that I think has been quite crucial in these negotiations .
In my opinion , the result makes an important contribution to the overall complex of laws that we shall now soon have on the subject of GMOs and that are designed to protect our health but , above all , to protect biodiversity , even though the ability genetically to manipulate the products of nature has opened the way for doing so .
This is , however , a constructive contribution to the overall picture .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am very pleased that it has been possible to achieve a common position between the Council , the Commission and Parliament here .
It would have been very sad if no consensus had been reached on such an important issue .
As Mr Lund has already mentioned , the Council initially agreed unanimously that the exporters must have the approval of the importing country before they undertake the first transboundary movement .
However , in order to meet the Commission halfway , the Council and the Parliament then voted in favour of the requirement for this approval to be provided in writing prior to the first transboundary export of a GMO .
It was also possible to reach a consensus between the Parliament , the Council and the Committee with regard to the exporters ' notification documents .
The exporter is required , for a period of a minimum of five years , to keep a record of the notification and the acknowledgement of receipt from the competent authority of the importing country .
He is also obliged to forward these documents to the authority of the Member State from which the GMO is exported and to the Commission .
The Commission then makes these documents available to the public in compliance with the European regulations on access to environmental information .
This new-found consensus between the Council , the European Parliament and the Commission will , I believe , give the public the opportunity to be informed at all times about everything that happens .
I am certainly convinced that these provisions will be effective .
I hope very much that this new European regulation will overcome much of the public 's mistrust of GMOs .
Mr President , I too would like to pay very warm tribute to the rapporteur .
This regulation is a great success .
It means that the eight remaining Member States yet to ratify the Protocol can now begin the process .
The Protocol will therefore come into force very soon , marking the start of a new era in international environmental law , an era of international genetic technology law .
The Biosafety Protocol is the first international treaty to regulate genetic technology , and it does so explicitly and exclusively .
It is to be hoped that the voices still raised to dispute that there is any difference between genetically-modified and conventionally bred organisms will at last fall silent .
This House has greatly improved the regulation before us on numerous points , often in exemplary cooperation with the Council .
On many key points , the regulation goes far beyond what is required by the Biosafety Protocol itself .
The fact that all groups support the compromise reached is therefore encouraging and a hopeful sign for the implementation of future environmental agreements .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am now faced with the very difficult , if not impossible , task of finding something new to say .
Everything has already been said , but not yet by everyone .
I shall therefore follow everyone else 's lead and express my warm thanks to the rapporteur for the good work and positive cooperation .
I would also like to congratulate him on his excellent substantive work , as well as on his great sensitivity during the negotiations , which enabled us to achieve a compromise among the parliamentary groups and among the European institutions .
I think that is absolutely crucial .
It has already been said repeatedly here today that the speedy entry into force of the Cartagena Protocol is naturally an issue that is close to everyone 's hearts .
However , I do not want to pass up the opportunity to express my great regret that the largest exporter of genetically-modified organisms , namely the United States , again remains outside the frame on such a key issue , where global multilateral regulations are essential .
We face a major political challenge , that of convincing our counterparts in the United States of the need for such regulation .
The common position is also a great success .
In substantive terms , the Council endorsed almost 70 per cent of the position adopted by Parliament at first reading .
I note with satisfaction , especially as rapporteur for genetically-modified food and feed , that there is clearly something of a tradition here , with the Council generally following Parliament 's position .
I hope that the vote tomorrow will be a major step towards the ratification of the Cartagena Protocol .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Wednesday , at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0151 / 2003 ) by Mr De Roo , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 1999 / 32 / EC as regards the sulphur content of marine fuels [ COM ( 2002 ) 595 C5-0558 / 2002 2002 / 0259 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , in our discussions in the Committee on Industry , we focussed especially on the various technical options to reduce the sulphur content of marine fuels .
Here too , we started by considering the real impact of such a reduction .
We can visualise this in very practical terms .
If you visit any port in the European Union - let 's take Hamburg as an example - and sit down on the quayside , you have buses on one side which comply with the Euro 4 limit and now produce virtually no particulate emissions , and on the other side you have ships - service barges , perhaps - where you can actually see the particulate matter being released .
There is clearly something wrong here , technically speaking .
It is therefore appropriate to step up the measures adopted in respect of shipping .
In Hamburg , for example , 80 % of sulphur dioxide emissions and around 20 % of particulate emissions now come from shipping , even though there are of course far fewer ships on the sea than private vehicles and lorries on the roads .
If we consider that ships are replaced relatively infrequently and engines are long-life products , it is difficult to achieve very much with exhaust gas technology for diesel engines in the short term .
We are therefore focussing on the technology to reduce the sulphur content of marine fuels .
That has a direct impact , and Mr de Roo has already given us the figures : such fuels typically contain 2.7 % of sulphur , compared to 0.0001 % for automotive fuels .
There is clearly a great deal of potential here .
We need to agree on the level of reduction we must achieve .
The aim is to introduce a 0.5 % sulphur limit on marine fuels in order to attain a real reduction in sulphur dioxide and particulate emissions .
We spent a long time discussing how we can sensibly achieve this target , and finally opted for this two-step approach , which offers scope for development .
I too would ask you , Commissioner , to go along with this two-step approach so that we can finally achieve the 0.5 % limit .
It is supported - as you see - by a large majority in this House .
Of course it would be better if we could proceed on the basis of an international consensus here , because naturally , the ships are not only refuelled in the European Union .
However , MARPOL is itself a cumbersome vessel , as the Commissioner knows , which offers little room for manoeuvre .
In my view - and the negotiations on the other issues of relevance to the environment and safety bear this out - if the European Union is the driving force here , MARPOL will start to move as well .
In other words , if we take this step towards a 0.5 % limit , I believe that this will offer us the prospect of achieving more robust agreements on this limit at international level .
From our perspective , the task is not just to decide on a specific technology .
If it is possible to reduce sulphur dioxide and particulate emissions in another way than by reducing the sulphur content , that is naturally to be welcomed .
The aim is to reduce emissions .
It is not our job to decide how this should be done .
To that extent , I am also in favour of examining alternative technologies and , if this review produces the right outcomes , to implement them as well .
We have therefore opened the way for alternative technologies here as well .
The cost issue was naturally a major consideration in the Committee on Industry .
Low-sulphur fuel is of course more expensive .
However , as experience in the Baltic bears out , low-sulphur fuel oil has the advantage of resulting in less maintenance work and better fuel efficiency , so the additional cost of using low-sulphur fuel oil is to some extent compensated by cost savings .
I therefore believe that in the interests of the environment , but also in the interests of the economy , the 0.5 % limit should be the target .
I believe this is the right route , so let us follow it together .
Mr President , Commissioner , I do not usually thank my fellow rapporteurs , but this time I want to thank Mr de Roo , together with all my colleagues , for their constructive cooperation .
We have worked openly and constructively .
I have proceeded on the basis that we in actual fact want to improve the environmental situation in the coastal states .
When , today , we look at the Commission 's proposal and at the MARPOL Convention 's Annex VI , we see that , according to information I have received , it should quite soon come into force because 47.57 % of world tonnage is affiliated to it .
I must , however , say what a shame it is that a great many EU countries , including the country I know best , have not ratified it .
I think , however , that the example involving MARPOL shows that the Commission 's proposal was not perhaps as ambitious as we had wished and that we must make further progress .
When we get together to take a measure within the maritime sphere , we can now , as Mr Lange also said , achieve a very great deal internationally .
Together , the EU countries and the candidate countries have such a large fleet that we often have our rules put into effect in the IMO .
I therefore also view the directive and the improvements we are making in the light of this .
That is how we must work together .
We have been talking a very great deal about the new reduction methods , an area Mr Goodwill said I had been anxious about .
In actual fact , I want the Commission to take an honest and broadly based look at the subsequent environmental effects .
It may well be that the methods are better for one area of the environment but worse for another .
We need broadly based follow-up systems in different eco-systems in different types of water .
The overall effects need to be looked at .
Finally , I want to say that our group will request a separate vote on Amendments Nos 20 and 21 in order to clarify anything that may be obscure .
Our group will also vote against them because we do not think it is possible to implement them .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr de Roo on his excellent report and on the fact that he was able to reach a compromise with the shadow rapporteurs .
I shall say , first of all , that , according to data from the European Environment Agency , in order to reduce carbon dioxide emissions we must focus on maritime transport .
This focus on maritime transport in order to resolve the problem of climate change must not be developed , however , at the cost of acidification by sulphur dioxide emissions .
I therefore consider it unacceptable that the efforts made on land to reduce sulphur dioxide emissions have not been matched at sea and I consequently welcome the Commission 's excellent initiative , although I feel it should be more ambitious .
First of all , the upper limits for sulphur content should be lower , and so I fully support the figure of 0.5 % ; secondly , zones should be extended with the aim of reducing sulphur dioxide emissions into other zones to below the levels laid down in the MARPOL Convention - it is therefore crucial that the Commission fights within the MARPOL Convention to extend these emissions reductions to the Mediterranean , the Northeast Atlantic and the Black Sea ; thirdly , I believe it is important that our action in the field of climate change to reduce the economic costs of complying with the Kyoto Protocol can also be applied to the problem of acidification .
If we are going to achieve a EUR 1.3 billion reduction in the cost of complying with the Kyoto Protocol in Europe , we should also apply an identical system for sulphur dioxide emissions trading so that we can lower even further the cost of achieving these aims .
. Mr President , the Commission has carefully considered the proposed amendments .
We are able to accept three-quarters of them fully , in part , or in principle .
Most offer helpful clarification and improve the quality of the proposal , as has been expressed by speakers here tonight .
Those amendments that we cannot accept or accept only in part relate to three main issues .
The first and biggest issue is the proposal for tighter marine fuel sulphur limits extended to a wider sea area .
The report proposes a phased approach , starting with the 1.5 % set out in the Commission proposal , with a tighter 0.5 % limit in a second phase .
Later phases also extend the area where ships have to comply with these limits in all exclusive economic zones and territorial seas throughout the European Union .
Amendment No 20 contradicts this and goes further still , proposing that the 0.2 % sulphur limit for ships at berth should be extended throughout the 12-mile territorial seas of all EU Member States .
We believe that these new and extended limits are premature .
I do not doubt that there may be environmental benefits .
These have not been quantified ; nor have the costs , which could be significant .
Contrary to the normal rules of economics , the more low-sulphur fuel is required , the more expensive it gets .
That is because refineries have to invest more and more in de-sulphurisation technology to increase capacity .
The proposed new phases also go beyond the internationally agreed 1.5 % sulphur emission control area in the Baltic Sea , the North Sea and the English Channel , but it is open to Member States to propose the designation of new sulphur emission control areas at the International Maritime Organisation and to negotiate tighter fuel limits for these areas .
Shipping is a global industry .
Given that this international policy mechanism exists , we believe that it should be used as a first resort .
However , if tighter limits prove necessary and an international solution cannot be reached , the review clause in the proposal gives the Commission the right to take action at EU level at a later date .
The second issue concerns emissions offsetting , or trading .
The concept of emissions trading for conventional air pollutants is not currently well developed at EU level , even for land-based stationary emission sources .
For sea-going mobile emission sources - ships - we also believe that the idea is somewhat premature .
Trading is not permitted under MARPOL Annex VI .
Another concern is that ship emissions of air pollutants have regional or local impacts that trading schemes might not be sensitive enough to address .
It is quite difficult to see how and by whom any scheme would be administered and enforced .
That said , we are actively considering emissions trading and other economic instruments as possible complements to regulation in future .
For this reason we can accept Amendment No 44 in principle , which requires the Commission to consider a range of economic instruments and report back to Parliament and the Council .
The last issue relates to requirements on the Commission .
Amendment Nos 32 and 44 propose to bring forward the date of the Commission 's 2010 report on the implementation of the directive .
They also require the Commission to present new proposals , with a report , to revise fuel sulphur limits or to introduce economic instruments .
The Commission believes that it would be too early to report on the implementation of the directive in 2007 or 2008 , given that some of the proposed fuel sulphur limits would not enter into force until 2008 .
We also believe that it is premature to prescribe the content of the report and require it to be accompanied by legislative proposals .
While we can accept Amendment Nos 30 and 34 in principle , we believe these are also too prescriptive about the Commission 's activities .
You know how sensitive we are to these things .
In each case we would propose an alternative wording .
Finally , just a few words about the possibilities offered by exhaust-gas cleaning .
The tighter fuel sulphur limits proposed in today 's report are linked to the possible use of exhaust-gas cleaning technology or scrubbing , as an alternative means of compliance .
This is allowed under MARPOL and , provided it does not emit harmful effluent into enclosed waters , the Commission proposal already includes a review clause to allow scrubbing in future .
The technology appears to offer potential benefits , reducing sulphur dioxide emissions , nitrogen oxides and particles .
It may also cost less than switching fuels for ships which frequently travel on EU seas .
On the other hand it is very important to prove that the technology has no adverse impact on the marine environment , so that we do not simply replace one environmental problem with another , as you have also pointed out .
Subject to successful sea trials we believe that scrubbing can indeed be considered as an alternative to low-sulphur fuels and not just for the proposed second-phase limit of 0.5 % .
So , we welcome Parliament 's proposals for a new text on scrubbing .
I would like to hand in a list in writing summarising the Commission 's position on all the amendments tabled
Thank you Mrs Wallström .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Wednesday , at 12 noon .
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries :
( A5-0168 / 2003 ) by Mr Hudghton , on the proposal for a Council regulation for the conservation of fishery resources through technical measures for the protection of juveniles of marine organisms [ COM ( 2002 ) 672 C5-0026 / 2003 2002 / 0275 ( CNS ) ] ;
( A5-0165 / 2003 ) by Mr Stevenson , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the management of the fishing effort relating to certain Community fishing areas and resources and modifying Regulation ( EEC ) 2847 / 93 [ COM ( 2002 ) 739 C5-0030 / 2003 2002 / 0295 ( CNS ) ] ;
( A5-0162 / 2003 ) by Mr Fava , on the Commission communication to the European Parliament and the Council on the Action plan to counter the social , economic and regional consequences of the restructuring of the EU fishing industry [ COM ( 2002 ) 600 C5-0073 / 2003 2003 / 2039 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , we are well aware in this House that many thousands of fishermen , processors and ancillary workers have suffered severe hardship as a result of the cod recovery proposals agreed by the Council last December .
The whitefish fleet in Ireland and the UK in particular have been hardest hit , being forced to tie up their boats for half of every month and having their quotas cut by more than 50 % on the days that they can fish .
These interim measures have been in place since 1 February this year and yet not a single penny in compensation has been paid to any of those affected by the cuts .
It was salutary to note that Commissioner Fischler himself saw the need to call upon the Member States to live up to their responsibilities and apply for aid from the fisheries budget .
He said that of the EUR 3.7 billion in the budget to 2006 , only 3 % had been earmarked for socio-economic aid , despite the obvious hardship suffered by many fishermen .
In fact , in the UK the figure is 0 % , which is a shameful indictment of the UK Government .
Its failure to apply for this aid or indeed , to submit proposals for emergency aid from the EUR 150 million voted by a huge majority in this House in March , amounts to a naked betrayal of our fishing sector in their time of need .
No wonder more than 230 UK fishermen have applied to scrap their vessels .
But decommissioning on such a scale , on top of the 20 % who scrapped their vessels last year , could take the UK whitefish fleet below the critical mass needed to support the harbour workers , ancillary staff and processors on whom the remaining fishermen rely .
If they go , the whole industry will collapse .
And it is against this background that I must express my surprise at the Commission 's position on the Irish Box .
It seems to me to be an utter paradox that the Commission can , on the one hand , support such a draconian regime to enable cod and other whitefish stocks to recover , while at the same time calling for the effective dismantling of the Irish Box .
The Irish Box is one of the most important nursery and spawning grounds in European waters .
It is of vital importance as a conservation resource , as numerous scientific studies have demonstrated , and yet the Commission appears ready to accept the argument that restricted access in this zone somehow amounts to discrimination .
Let us be quite clear about this .
Of course there is restricted access within the Irish Box .
That is why it is a conservation zone .
But the Irish , British , French and Spanish fleets have been fishing in the Irish Box for years .
Now I am well aware that our Spanish friends are dissatisfied with the current arrangements which restrict access to only 40 of their trawlers .
However , it is worth noting that the 40 Spanish trawlers fishing in this zone at any given time are all massive 25-metre plus vessels , often twice the size of local Irish boats .
The problem is , there are a further 120 massive Spanish trawlers waiting just south of the Irish Box , keen to gain access , but I do not see hundreds of Greek or Italian trawlers demanding access to the Irish Box !
It is also worth noting that the same proposal for a Council regulation in Western Waters would burst open the 200 mile economic exclusion zone around the Azores .
Again this is an area of high sensitivity which has supported generations of local Portuguese fishermen , often braving the wild Atlantic gales in tiny , open wooden boats .
Simply to throw these waters open to giant trawlers from Spain or anywhere else would be catastrophic both for conservation of fish stocks and for the preservation of jobs in the fragile Azorean fleet .
We cannot allow this to happen .
I support my Spanish colleagues in many ways .
I have worked hard to find compensation for the damage caused by the oil tanker Prestige .
I have supported the international third-country agreements which are of such benefit and importance to the Andalucian and Galician fleets .
But I cannot stand idly by and watch the destruction of key conservation zones around the Azores and in the Irish Box , simply because our Spanish friends and only our Spanish friends wish to catch more fish in these waters .
To accept this argument would be to fly in the face of conservation policy .
Our job as parliamentarians , and my job as Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries , is to ensure that fish stocks are allowed to recover .
I therefore urge the House to accept the amendments tabled by the UEN Group and others to the Stevenson Report and in particular to support Amendment No 20 , which calls upon the Irish Box to be maintained for a period of 10 years , with a review by ICES and STECF at the end of that period , to establish whether the policy of restricted access has assisted in meeting the objectives of the cod recovery plan in rebuilding endangered whitefish stocks .
Commissioner , like many of the Members , I believe that fisheries play a social and cultural role as well as an economic role , particularly small-scale fisheries , given their ability to contribute to social and economic cohesion processes , especially in the most remote , outermost regions .
We therefore welcomed the Commission 's Action Plan seeking to avert the negative social effects of the fisheries reform and we endorse the idea of addressing these negative effects through a compensation programme .
That said , a number of points in the Commission 's proposal give cause for concern in that , for example , the reference data put forward is obsolete , dating back to 2000 .
Three years have passed since then , and the Commission itself acknowledges that the assessment is largely theoretical .
There is a need for a serious and detailed debate on the model to be adopted : whether to opt for industrial fisheries , involving a small number of large , modern economical vessels , or small-scale fisheries , involving a large number of small and medium-sized vessels , which may be less profitable but certainly employ more labour .
Lastly , there is a need for an updated version of the Commission 's Action Plan , parts of which ought to have been updated in line with the conclusions of the Fisheries Council in December 2002 .
Moreover , Commissioner , some parts of the proposal are unconvincing .
For example , the Mediterranean is completely disregarded .
The Commission does not take into consideration its specific nature but only a number of areas of the North Sea and the Baltic Sea .
This amounts to cultural penalisation caused by historic long-sightedness in the process of European integration itself : our Europe continues to be purely north-facing .
This was the case during the many years when the common agricultural policy was being developed and it is the case now as well with regard to the common fisheries policy .
However , it is dangerous , first and foremost , because we are on the eve of the inauguration of the Mediterranean area of free trade in 2010 , which will make the Mediterranean sea a major area of social , economic , human and political exchange for which we must be prepared .
Another key aspect is job losses .
The Commission appears to envisage the loss of 12 000 jobs , which are to be recouped over the space of four years .
We feel this prediction is optimistic , in that it underestimates the impact of the reform , failing to take into account the consequences for related sectors , dockyards and the processing industries .
It is estimated that the European processing industry alone employs at least 100 000 people .
Above all , the Commission 's estimate fails to take into account the fact that it is unlikely that it will be possible to retrain workers , such as those in the fisheries sector , who , especially in some areas of Europe , have a low level of education and work in areas suffering from an extremely high unemployment rate .
If we think we can recoup them and retrain them to do other jobs we are deluding ourselves , particularly where Spain , Greece , Italy and Portugal are concerned .
Then , in many countries , there are no welfare support provisions and fishermen would be in danger of becoming reject workers , superfluous citizens ; another implicit risk is the social , cultural and economic desertification of many parts of the Union .
We need to focus aid on small-scale fisheries , seeing as they currently employ half the fishermen working in the sector and account for 75 % of vessels .
It is true that the level of catches is very low , but in terms of employment small-scale fisheries play a vital role .
The Commission acknowledges that financial incentives to small-scale fisheries have not served much purpose , it acknowledges that further measures are needed , although they will be some time coming , and talks only of long-term perspectives .
These considerations call forth the question of what resources to invest to mitigate the socio-economic consequences of this reform .
We are opposed to reprogramming of the Structural Funds , considering , rather , that these funds should be reserved for other priorities .
The fact that 80 % of the regions concerned are Objective 1 and 2 regions means that the Structural Funds are currently necessary and crucial for addressing priorities which cannot be confused with the project contained in this resolution .
In our opinion , we need to set up an ad hoc fund , a measure which could even be temporary for implementing recovery plans .
One last point , on the subject of women .
The fact that 22 % of the labour force is made up of women is not reflected at all in the Commission 's Action Plan .
Overall , we support the long-term conclusions , but we feel that it would be appropriate to reformulate some parts of the Action Plan and to analyse the socio-economic impact of the reform more carefully .
.
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking you , Mr Hudghton , Mr Stevenson and Mr Fava , for your reports on our proposals .
I will turn to Mr Hudghton 's report first .
As you know , the Commission 's proposal covers a substantial amount of the regulation on technical measures .
You said there is little interest because the proposal is so technical .
Yes , but there is no other option : a proposal on technical measures has to be very technical .
Furthermore , as a result of the problems with the cod and hake stocks , a number of Commission and Council regulations have been adopted which supplement or amend the regulation on technical measures .
One of the main objectives of our proposal is therefore to draw together all these provisions , which are contained in many separate regulations , into a single regulation and thus make them far more manageable .
We also used this proposal , however , to introduce a number of new elements .
There are three issues which arise here : firstly , we want to harmonise the provisions on the individual species of fish which are caught using trawl nets of various mesh sizes in all the Community waters in the north-east Atlantic .
We want to avoid a situation in future in which a fishing vessel , which has been fishing in the Bay of Biscay , for example , and wants to continue fishing south of Ireland , is subject to different catch conditions .
The harmonisation will also extend to the waters of the Skagerrak and the Kattegat , where separate provisions currently apply .
Secondly , the rules should also apply to ships of less than 12 metres in order to provide better protection for young hake .
Thirdly , we want to amend the provisions on grading the catches in order to reduce discards .
We also propose setting out the detailed rules in Commission regulations , such as the percentage composition of the catches if fishing vessels carry trawl nets with two different mesh sizes on board , or the physical dimensions and immersion times for static nets .
On your question regarding the regional advisory councils , Mr Hudghton : as you know , we have re-established these advisory councils as part of the reform and they are also included in the basic regulation .
This basic regulation states that the advisory councils can be consulted .
We cannot change this option envisaged in the basic regulation and make it a general obligation in a secondary regulation ; there are legal obstacles to this .
However , I can tell you that we ourselves have a massive interest in ensuring that these advisory councils are consulted as far as possible .
Now , technical measures are certainly no longer enough on their own - as we all know - to achieve sustainability in fisheries .
For more than a decade , scientists have therefore been demanding the management of the fishing effort as well to enable a sustainable conservation policy to be pursued .
That is precisely what we are aiming for with our proposal on the western waters which is dealt with in the Stevenson report .
As you know , the special provisions on access by Spanish and Portuguese ships to the Irish Box and on access to the Portuguese coastal waters lost their legal basis from 1 January 2003 .
However , as the relevant regulations from 1995 did not establish any time limit for the western waters , we must remove the legal uncertainty which exists here .
We are therefore proposing a new regulation to replace the existing regulations , containing the following provisions : we want to restrict the fishing effort in the ICES sub-areas of the western waters for all Member States in a non-discriminatory way .
We propose defining the fishing effort so that the reduction in fishing opportunities since 1995 and the actual fishing effort deployed between 1998 and 2002 are taken into account .
We want to limit the fishing effort for pelagic species as well and we want further restrictions on access to waters in the outermost regions .
I do not think anyone should create a threat scenario here and be alarmed about the prospect of a Spanish armada .
As we have seen in recent months , that is really not the case .
We must not forget that the aim is to restrict the fishing effort in general and the issue of relative stability comes into play here .
It is therefore inappropriate to act as if the Spanish fishing boats were fishing the waters dry .
Let me make one other thing clear : the proposal before us is based exclusively on scientific evidence , which was not the case with the old Irish Box .
Let me turn briefly to Mr Fava 's report , which deals with the Action Plan to counter the social , economic and regional consequences of the restructuring of the EU fishing industry .
We have attempted , in consultation with the Member States , to assess the potential job losses and the need for financial resources to alleviate the socio-economic impacts .
We have held meetings in the Member States - one last September , and one this April - and we also consulted the fishing sector , the stakeholders , in January .
Your report , Mr Fava , contains fifteen recommendations which I can broadly endorse because they comply with the general guidelines of the common fisheries policy and support the long-term goals of our Action Plan .
That is an initial presentation and I will of course be pleased to answer your questions at the end .
.
( ES ) Mr President , I am speaking as spokesperson for the Committee on Budgets on fisheries issues and it falls to me firstly to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Fava , whose report I am essentially going to comment on , on its excellence .

Allow me to point out that the Common Fisheries Policy is funded almost entirely by means of the Union 's budget .
But it does not even represent 1 % of the whole budget , and is funded by the Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance ( FIFG ) , the regional fund and the social fund .
The action plan is intended to alleviate the short-term consequences for fishermen and the fishing industry resulting from the conservation and protection measures , by means of the reprogramming of the FIFG for social measures and a review of all the existing aid , but it also provides for the possible release of additional sums .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and the Committee on Fisheries which has incorporated the following points of the Committee on Budgets into the Resolution :
The first stresses that it is not probable that the Council 's amendments to the Commission 's package on the reform of the CFP , adopted at its meeting of 16 to 22 December 2002 , will facilitate the application of this reform nor the scheduled reprogramming of 611 million from the FIFG .
The second points out that the financial resources available in heading 2 of the financial perspectives intended for the fisheries sector and the areas dependent on fishing can be calculated at EUR 28 000 million for the period 2000-2006 .
Finally , it is stressed that additional European Union funding can only be allocated to fishing measures intended to compensate for losses if this is compatible with the maximum limit in heading 2 of the financial perspectives , or by employing the flexibility instrument laid down in Article 24 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 6 May 1999 .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteurs for the three reports we are dealing with tonight , Mr Fava , Mr Stevenson and Mr Hudghton , and I would also like to say to the latter , Mr Hudghton , that I agree with many of the comments he made in his speech .




I would also like to condemn the conceit of the Commission , which takes decisions behind the backs of the sector , the lack of communication between scientists and fishermen and I agree with him that none of this helps in promoting a credible image of Europe amongst our citizens .
The time available for this debate is limited , and the issues dealt with by these three reports are very important .
I will restrict myself to a brief comment on each of them .
I believe that these three reports , particularly when debated together in this way , demonstrate the contradictory way in which the Commission presents its proposals on reform of the CFP .
The report by Mr Fava on the action plan to counteract the social , economic and regional consequences of the restructuring of this industry in the European Union raises the need for the Community to deal with the losses with sufficient financial resources and without so much uncertainty , particularly in terms of employment , which this reform of the CFP will cause in the regions dependent on fishing .
The Committee on Fisheries is requesting additional funding to alleviate the effects of this reform .
The Commission must ensure that the socio-economic structure of these areas is maintained .
It will be cheaper to support the maintenance of the existing socio-economic fabric than to stand back and watch it disappear and then try to create other replacement economic activities , with which these regions - and I agree with Mr Stevenson - would have great difficulties , since they are located in peripheral areas and suffer from a lack of professional training , new technologies , infrastructures and access to the markets .
The Commissioner is well aware that each job on a ship generates from 4 to 5 jobs on land , and therefore the disappearance of fishing would cause serious disruption to the socio-economic fabric of these regions .
With regard to the report on the management of fishing in relation to certain areas and resources , I believe that , when drawing up resolutions , we Members of Parliament must take account of reality .
And the reality is that the transitional period following the accession of Spain and Portugal has come to an end .
The CFP has quite enough exceptions already without restoring and perpetuating those which at one time were mere transitional mechanisms .
Mr Stevenson , this exception , which has come to an end , is not one favour which is being exchanged for another .
If anybody has led you to believe this , I am very sorry , because it has come to an end .
It is a problem of legal basis and it has come to an end , and it is not being exchanged for anything .
You helped us in Morocco ; we will help you as much as we can , but the exception has ended .
Finally , my group supports the Commission 's proposal on the protection of juveniles .
Correct and effective technical measures should be the basis for achieving the balance between fleet and resources .
The excessive scrapping which some people want to see is anti-economic and antisocial , and could lead us to a situation in a few years when we have created sufficient quantities of fish but do not have either the ships or the fishermen to catch them .
With regard specifically to the Irish Box , I believe that to use 1998-2002 to measure fishing is far too little , it is shameful .
With regard to the consultative committees , I support this measure , but quite frankly I would like the Commission to clarify whether all the Member States are currently in an equal position to implement this new element .
I would like to know whether we are all in an equal position , because , if we are not , we would be generating a new source of disparity , of unequal treatment and injustice , and I am told by the sector in my country that we are not all in an equal position .
Mr President , rapporteurs , thank you for your contributions and efforts , although I can imagine that Mr Stevenson is not altogether happy that his name has been associated with this report .
There is a reason for this .
With regard to the Hudghton report , I should like to say that it is crucial in future to really involve regional consultative committees in order to keep , and use , the mix of science and hands-on knowledge as closely to fishing as possible , thus giving us information and allowing the topic to be approached from a more European point of view .
I should like to make a few comments with regard to the Fava report .
These are tough times , of course .
There must be severe cut-backs , as the Fisheries Council decided in December 2002 .
There is a plan to cushion the negative social and economic impact of restructuring , which is necessary and unavoidable .
It is particularly unfortunate and regrettable for people who are hit by it .
I set great store by implementing the plan as effectively as possible , and this should be backed up by the necessary resources .
It is important , in my view , for the sector itself to be involved in the plans that are required to offer these people new opportunities .
Money on its own cannot offer a structural , long-term solution .
In recent years , subsidies have been granted continuously to the small-scale sector that was facing difficult times , but this money has not led to a smoothly-running small-scale fishing industry .
Therefore , if resources are deployed , it should be with the intention that the sector can ultimately help itself and take its future into its own hands .
I have already tabled amendments to this effect in the past .
Structural change , offering alternatives , is what is crucial .
The Member States also have an important role to play , not only by handing out subsidies but also by changing policy , setting up new tasks and creating new opportunities for the sector in society .
I think that we should indeed learn from this experience , and I hope that we can maintain a balanced policy .
Mr President , this proposal for a regulation on managing the Atlantic waters suffered a major setback at the last Fisheries Council , with the presentation of a proposal for a compromise by the current Presidency of the Union . In the name of non-discrimination between Member States and on the pretext that the transitional period for fully integrating Portugal and Spain into the common fisheries policy has ended , this proposal seeks to eliminate the division between their fishing zones , making it difficult to adopt measures to control the fishing effort and calling into question the guarantee of the sustainability of resources in Portuguese waters .
This proposal would mean opening up access for Spanish vessels to the zone between 12 and 200 miles from the exclusive economic zone , thereby creating an enormous border-free fishing zone . Given the size of the Spanish fleet , this would not only have devastating effects on fisheries resources , with serious consequences for Portuguese fishermen , but it would also nullify the measures for resource conservation that Portugal has implemented .
Hence the importance of maintaining the division of the ICES statistical fishing sub-areas IX and X and the FCECA areas . This cannot be called discrimination between states .
Discrimination exists when situations that are different and specific are considered to be equal , as is the case with Portuguese fishing .
We must therefore take account of the specific arrangements for access by Portuguese and Spanish vessels to the waters of Portugal and Spain respectively , without setting an end date .
Lastly , I would also like to mention the specific situation of the outermost regions and the need to preserve existing derogations for access to their exclusive economic zone , as laid down in this report .
Mr President , the Irish fishermen both from the North and from the South whose home waters are those of the Irish sea are now staring in dismay at what is happening to their industry .
There is no doubt that this matter of the Irish Box is all-important .
All the sacrifices they made were argued about before , but now all those sacrifices were in vain , because the Commission now takes a different line and says the box has got to go .
The time has come when this House must face up to the fact that the fishermen from the North and the South of Ireland , for the first time in history , have come together to face this particular problem .
It is a serious problem , it is a problem that is causing people who were pro-European Parliament to turn against this Parliament .
This is a serious matter , and I trust that tonight the Commissioner will take this to heart and to his very soul .
The fishermen are looking for a fundamental review of the current quota system , they are looking for a review of the tie-up policies , they are looking for a review of the direction of the Common Fisheries Policy , they are looking for a review of the best way to achieve proper cod recovery and to achieve the recovery of other fish stocks .
These are matters that must be faced , they cannot be swept away .
I appeal to the Commissioner to come to Ireland , both North and South , hear the fisherman at first hand and act for them and the future of this industry .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I am disappointed by this debate as it seems like a hotchpotch of national interests and I am hearing very little about Europe , but rather a defence of the conservation of resources which responds entirely to each of the parties ' own interests .
I believe that the Commission must play a significant role in defending European interests .
Everyone is looking after number one , and that is not what we want to see .


I would like to congratulate the three rapporteurs , or rather the four , I would like to congratulate Mr Ó Neachtain , because he produced the report - Mr Stevenson 's name now only appears as chairman , despite the fact that the amendments presented to the plenary come from the UEN Group , although they have also been signed by Members with national interests .

I will say nothing about the report by Mr Fava since we are all going to accept it and I believe there is little controversy about it .
With regard to the reports by Mr Hudghton and Mr Stevenson , I would like to say that I support what has emerged from the Committee on Fisheries , which is our specialised and competent committee .
What subsequently emerges from the politics in the plenary is another issue .
We support Mr Hudghton 's report .
I would simply like to say that on the issue of the regional consultative committees , I agree with him , that they are consultative .
We must listen to the regions , we must listen to the sectors .
We have said this in Parliament and it has been said in the Council , but of course Parliament and the Council will then have the final word , because consultations are obligatory , but there is a common policy and common European bodies which must take these decisions after listening to the sectors in all regions .
With regard to the Stevenson report , there are two fundamental principles : firstly , the conservation of resources ; secondly , equality of Member States .
They are two principles which the Commission must accept .
We have scrupulous respect for the conservation measures .
We want a genuine sustainable fisheries policy , responsible fishing , with all the necessary measures , including fishing bans .
If there are areas in which there are reproductions , of juvenile and restocking fish , there must not be any fishing , nobody fishes .
And that is the way to create healthy biological bans .
This must be made absolutely clear .
These sensitive areas must therefore be sensitive .
But this must be balanced with a second principle , which is the need for the Community principle of not discriminating against any State for reasons of nationality and therefore all these conservation measures must be taken in a manner that affects everyone , not benefiting some and harming others ; that would be an anti-Community measure and would end up in the courts , the Court of Justice in this case .
I hope that this is not necessary so that the Member States , which have actually come to the end of their transitional period of 17 years - the longest transitional period in the history of the European Union - whose rights have been restricted for these 17 years , can now accede under equal conditions .
The conservation measures must therefore affect everybody .
There are measures , as the Commissioner knows , which consist of limiting the ACRs , fishing days , the capacity of fleets , all of which are selective technical measures .
There are many measures , but they must clearly be applied equally to everybody .
It is discriminatory , Commissioner , because the period intended to be used as a reference is 1998-2002 , years during which there were two countries - Spain and Portugal - whose rights were restricted or limited .
They are therefore not operating under equal conditions if we take that period as a reference .
We are naturally against the amendments which will be presented tomorrow by the UEN Group and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , because we believe there are other ways to conserve resources without discriminating against certain States .
Finally , Commissioner , I would like you to clarify whether we are discussing the first proposal you made or the proposal which is already in the Council and on which there is an agreement , as certain Members have said .
If that is the case , I would ask that this Parliament be consulted again and if it is not , we will use all the rights this House enjoys to see that it is .
In any event , the political decisions adopted in this House will have to be respected , but I would insist that what has been debated here today has been a hotchpotch of national interests , unfortunately for fishing , and that is not something which I , as an MEP , wanted to see .
And the Commission is not playing the leading role it should playing in terms of a conservation of resources in the sensitive areas of Europe which affects every one of the Member States in an equal manner .
Mr President , I should also like to add my support to what has already been said on the concept of regional advisory councils .
They are essential to provide a dialogue with all interested sectors .
However , I would like to concentrate on what is now called the ' Stevenson report ' .
I would like to thank Mr Ó Neachtain for all his work on what was originally his report .
I regret that he had to move his name from the report but I also understand that he was left with no option .
The proposal from the Council seeks to put in place a new regime for fishing effort in Atlantic waters and a system of fishing effort management , concerning certain Community fishing areas and resources .
However , on the one hand it would appear that the proposal looks for a management instrument to ensure no increase in fishing efforts , but on the other hand the issue of access of Spanish vessels into what is known as the ' Irish Box ' becomes a matter of real concern .
The whole issue rests on the question of access to the Irish Box - water within 50 miles of the Irish coast .
This area is an important spawning ground , rich in juvenile fish .
This sensitive biological area deserves protection .
Thus it is vital that the EU restricts the fishing effort in the Irish Box in order that future generations can enjoy a sustainable fisheries .
The Irish Box was specially recognised as an area of biological sensitivity .
However , this report as it stands , instead of applying the policy of sustainable development , would open up this area of sensitivity to over-exploitation .
As reports in the Irish Examiner note , fishermen are primarily concerned that fish stocks will be decimated if the Spanish fleet gains unlimited access to the Irish Box .
Even the Irish Marine Minister expressed his frustration that he could not get the European Commission to give its opinion on the legal status of the Irish Box .
I understand that there has now been some communication in this matter and that there is tentative compromise on the table , although the Irish and Spanish ministers are diametrically opposed .
I too share my Irish colleagues ' concerns that , as Mr Ó Neachtain stated in the Irish Examiner , we could find these waters completely fished-out in no time at all .
I would therefore like to ask colleagues to recognise the importance of boxes in scientifically sensitive areas .
I understand that this is not just a north versus south issue .
My colleagues from Portugal also value the sensitivity of boxes , especially concerning the Azores .
If we are truly serious about a common fisheries policy , I believe that boxes are an important management tool , in recognition of biologically sensitive areas .
This is not about discrimination .
Far from it .
This is about ensuring a sustainable fishery for future generations .
I hope that colleagues will support the amendments tabled , especially Amendment No 20 , and make sure that the vision Mr Ó Neachtain had is seen through in this report .
Mr President , a commitment to sustainability leads us too to support fully Amendment Nos 20 to 30 to the Stevenson report .
We must ensure proper protection for sensitive nursery and spawning grounds such as the Irish Box .
Sustainability also requires the use of technical measures as dealt with in the Hudghton report , but these are most effective when they have the full support of those engaged in fishing .
Indeed , fishers may become pioneers in the area as happened in Scotland with the square mesh panel .
Therefore we thoroughly endorse the involvement of regional advisory councils in decisions on technical measures and we hope for the speedy establishment of such councils .
Finally , as regards the Fava report and the sustainability of the fisheries industry , decommissioning may be good for marine resources , but if fleets are reduced too far then the industry simply cannot survive .
Even with a moderate level of reduction , effects on communities are severe .
Help is urgently needed .
Only today we have heard that the Commission has declared that what seems to be an eminently sensible arrangement in Scotland concerning quotas , is not compatible with common market rules .
How many more blows are our fishing communities supposed to take before faith in the European project is finally lost ?
When we see what is happening to them , even the most committed amongst us may begin to have our doubts .
Please let us act with the sustainability of resources and of industry and with communities in mind .
If we do not , it may be too late on all counts .
Mr President , this is quite a difficult debate , which we must approach in a spirit of democracy , whilst also showing sensitivity to all parties involved .
We all agree that the principle of sustainability based on scientific criteria must , of course , be observed when exploiting the sea 's resources , but the principle of non-discrimination must also apply , although this must be duly combined and complemented with the principle of relative stability , which is also important .
I wish to thank those colleagues who , together with Mrs Figueiredo , voted for my amendment on access to waters in the Azores region .
In fact , as has already been stated , this is an extremely sensitive situation , with a very complex ecological balance , and enormous care must be taken in granting access to these waters , since fish are concentrated in a tiny part of these waters , in the furthest reaches of the sea .
Secondly , I also wish to support the Commission 's intention , expressed in this proposal for a report , to continue the specific arrangements with regard to access to the waters lying between Portugal and Spain . This was , in fact , decided in 1995 , by common agreement between the two countries , and has had the support of the Commission and the Council .
We hope that these arrangements can continue , because they are the best way of pursuing responsible fishing and a climate of peace between the fishing communities of the two countries .
Mr President , Commissioner , Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries and dear friend , Mr Stevenson , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking to you at a particularly difficult time for the autonomous region of the Azores , as has already been said .
Things are also difficult , however , for all those who believe in sustainable development and in the need to reverse the trend of over-exploiting fishery resources and of exterminating species , which is leading our oceans and , with them , our fishing communities , to disaster .
The Commission 's original proposal for the Western Waters and the Stevenson report both seek to uphold and strengthen existing legislation protecting the resources of Portugal 's Western Waters .
Nevertheless , to our great surprise - as Mrs Figueiredo has already said - we have just discovered that the Council is preparing to dismantle all existing protection .
The Council 's current position is an invitation to plunder and devastate the Western Waters , flying in the face of the scientific reports that conclude that there is an urgent need to restrict , rather than extend , access to the waters , it ignores the positions and interests of fishing communities and will , if adopted , inevitably lead to an unprecedented disaster .
Commissioner , I should like to remind you of the answer you gave to my parliamentary question on the validity of the current regulations .
You said at the time , Commissioner , in Question No 26 : ' ? the Commission has a clear understanding of the validity of Regulations Nos 685 and 2027 .
Unless amended or repealed by the Community legislator , the rules established by the regulations will continue to apply . '
This is the opposite of what you have just said here !
I fail to understand how your opinion can change completely in only three months !
I should also like to clarify the following point : the rules for the accession of Portugal and Spain to the European Communities expired in 1995 .
We are not in a transitional period !
A new set of regulations was adopted in 1995 to apply thereafter , with the agreement of everyone !
This is what you now want to blow out of the water , to call into question in order to ruin Portuguese waters .
This is completely unacceptable .
I wish to conclude , furthermore , by saying that equality between those in completely different situations is nothing but humbug and not equality at all .
We want to see equality between situations that are equal , not a pretence of equality that serves only to cover up a policy of destroying our resources .
For this very reason , I wish to support the rapporteur and to call on all Members to vote for Amendment No 20 of this report tomorrow .
Mr President , I would like to focus on the Fava report and then make a brief point on this absolutely fascinating debate on the Irish Box .
Commissioner , I would like to ask you to clarify a few points regarding Mr Fava 's report , if possible , since you have said that you essentially endorse the proposals it contains .

Mr Fava 's report - which we will support tomorrow - states that the data on which your proposals are based is not up to date and is therefore not particularly reliable : the forecast of 12 000 jobs losses is underestimated and the retraining of the workforce envisaged is virtually impossible given the level of education of the people concerned .
Mr Fava has pointed all this out today too , and yet you say that you are essentially in agreement .
I fail to understand how you can support the report considering the proposals made .
Then the Committee on Budgets points out that there is not enough money and that the constraints are such as to exclude additional funding .
Well then , if you , with your imagination , could manage to dream something up , we would be truly delighted .
I would propose , and I am anxious to hear your opinion , in view of these budgetary difficulties , giving some of the responsibility back to the Member States - we are going to call for this in another report - allowing them , for example , to apply the de minimis rule to fisheries too , a rule with which you are quite familiar since it is employed in agriculture as well .
As far as the other issue under consideration is concerned , I confess I am a little disappointed by the debate .
The excessively nationalistic overtones make me genuinely of the opinion that there is no longer any point in having a common fisheries policy .
Whether we are talking about Portuguese , Irish or Spanish waters , clearly the scope for debate is reduced by such attitudes .
During these periods of genuine difficulty - I am thinking of the serious issues affecting fishermen and their families - the only certain point of reference is the law .
By respecting the law , we will be able to reconcile environmental sustainability with rights , the Treaties and the agreements . It is our only safeguard against shifting towards national policies and the only guarantee of our being able to pursue a common policy in this sector .
Mr President , I am going to talk almost exclusively about the maintenance of the Irish Box , since it illustrates the poles of opinion dividing clearly defined parties ; despite this , Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries had managed to adopt a report which I believe clearly combines the interests of the different parties since , on the one hand , it responds to the concern of a majority to protect sensitive areas from irresponsible fishing , and on the other , maintains that it is necessary to eliminate any discrimination suffered by Community fleets of any Member State .
The maintenance of the Irish Box is not justified from either a scientific point of view or a legal point of view ; it consists of a political concession granted to a country 18 years ago , to make it possible to reach an agreement on the accession of Spain and Portugal to the European Union .
The restriction of access to a fishing area cannot be extended indefinitely , particularly if it affects a specific fleet .
Several judgments clearly indicate that the rules relating to equal treatment laid down in Community legislation not only prohibit explicit discrimination on grounds of nationality , but also prohibit any disguised form of discrimination by means of the application of differentiation criteria which have the same effect in practice .
The transitional period for Spain 's accession to the European Union ended in December 2002 , and from January this year all restrictions should have disappeared .
From a scientific point of view , any measure for the conservation of resources is justified , provided that is not discriminatory .
In the case of the Irish Box , the measures advocated by some people go even further than the initiatives recently taken to protect cod stocks , a species whose situation cannot be compared with the situation of angler fish , hake or john dory in the Irish Box .
The Act of Accession to the European Union by Spain and Portugal contains the explicit decision to remove all restrictions of access to Community waters in December 2002 ; legally , for reasons of legislative hierarchy which everybody , from the legal expert to the uninitiated in law , understand , the Regulations of 94 and 95 cannot replace the Act of Accession .
All fishing areas considered sensitive , without exception , must be protected and dealt with in the same way by means of technical measures , including by means of bans , but without discrimination .
Those of us who vote against Amendment No 20 tomorrow , Mr President , want sustainable fishing resources , but also equality for all countries , discrimination against nobody and we are opting for Europe .
. ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , many thanks for all your contributions to the debate .
I have followed your arguments carefully and would now like to comment on the individual amendments that have been proposed .
I will start with the Hudghton report .
In Amendments Nos 1 and 3 , you draw attention to errors in the references in our proposal .
Thank you for pointing this out .
We will of course correct these mistakes .
As regards Amendment No 2 , we prefer to set out the provisions on the use of combinations of towed nets of more than one range of mesh size in a single Commission regulation , as this opens up more options for discussion and technical consultation with the experts from the Member States .
Amendment No 4 concerns industrial fishing , where by-catches of undersized fish and other species undeniably occur , that is true .
However , I should remind you in this context that in this fisheries sector , a maximum of 5 % by-catch is permitted , and controls carried out primarily by ICES have revealed that in practice , the by-catch falls well below this 5 % limit .
Amendments Nos 5 , 8 and 10 on the regional advisory councils , as I have already pointed out , are redundant here , in my view .
The new framework regulation already states that we will consult these regional bodies where there is a regional aspect to a proposal .
Amendments Nos 6 and 7 are redundant because their content is already included in the new framework regulation on the common fisheries policy .
I can accept Amendment No 9 to the extent that I can take up the reference to the new framework regulation .
Finally , I would just like to clarify one point , because Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna asked whether I was referring to the first or the second Commission proposal .
There is only one Commission proposal .
There is also the report on the proposal , and my statement .
What you mean , perhaps , is a non-paper which the Greek Presidency presented for discussion , but it is not a Commission proposal .
Let me turn now to the Stevenson report .
The proposals relate to the western waters .
I am happy to accept Amendments Nos 2 to 5 as they are entirely in line with the objectives contained in our proposal .
However , I cannot accept Amendment No 6 as it would delete the recital which sets out the basic concept underlying our proposed regulation , namely to ensure that there is no increase in the overall levels of the fishing effort in the western waters and that the fishing effort is calculated on the basis of the fishing effort actually deployed to date in these fisheries .
I can endorse Amendment No 10 in principle , although the right place for this text is in the recitals , not in the enacting terms of the regulation .
I do not think that Amendment No 17 is necessary , as we are safeguarding the monitoring of the fishing effort through the proposal 's other provisions .
The inclusion of a clause on changes to the system is acceptable , however , so I endorse Amendment No 19 .
Unfortunately , I must reject Amendments Nos 20 to 29 .
I would like to make it clear at this point that the Irish Box is a thing of the past .
There is no going back .
Free access to the waters beyond the 12-mile zone is a fundamental principle of the common fisheries policy .
It can be restricted if stock conservation measures warrant such a measure .
However , such restrictions must then apply equally and without discrimination to all Member States .
Amendment No 30 concerns relative stability .
This principle is already contained in the new framework regulation for the common fisheries policy and therefore does not need to be rolled out again here .
As regards the outermost regions , I can accept Amendments Nos 8 and 13 to the extent that we should also restrict access to stocks other than tuna and related species , in order to protect the interests of local fisherman more effectively .
However , this need not apply to the whole 200-mile zone .
This should be looked at in more detail .
With regard to the pelagic stocks , I must unfortunately reject Amendments Nos 11 , 12 , 14 , 15 , 16 and 18 .
If practical problems arise due to the migration of stocks between the various ICES areas or sub-areas , the areas for the maximum permissible fishing effort can be extended without any difficulty to several sub-areas or to the whole western waters , instead of applying per sub-area .
However , we cannot resolve potential problems of this kind by removing the pelagic species from the regulation altogether .
However , I am happy to accept your Amendment No 1 regarding the adaptation of the text reference to the new framework regulation on the common fisheries policy .
The same applies to Amendment No 7 , which relates to scientific and biological surveys and Amendment No 9 on satellite monitoring systems .
This brings me to the Fava report on our Action Plan to alleviate the social impacts .
As regards paragraph 11 of the resolution on the inclusion of employment and health and safety conditions at work , I should point out that these objectives are already taken into account in the common fisheries policy .
I am happy to comply with paragraph 5 of your resolution to the extent that we can always update the Action Plan when the Member States supply us with information on the socio-economic impacts for any future stock recovery plan or multiannual management plan .
We have already fulfilled the demands set out in paragraph 13 on consultation with Member States and the fisheries sector .
With regard to paragraphs 7 , 8 and 9 , let me say that I reminded the Member States , at the Fisheries Council on 26 May , that they should supply the Commission by 15 June this year with precise details of the additional funds needed to deal with the socio-economic impacts of the stock recovery plan for cod .
To date , only the United Kingdom has provided more precise data , but it has indicated that it is seeking to cover the additional financial requirements from national funds .
However , no other Member State has provided any data as yet .
I also asked for information to be provided to us on whether and how the Member States wish to revise their original programme planning in order to boost support for socio-economic measures .
Without this information from the Member States , we will all - the Commission and the Parliament alike - have difficulties in complying with this year 's European Parliament resolution .
We will also be unable to convince the budgetary authorities of the need to make as much as EUR 150 million in additional funding available via the flexibility instrument to alleviate the crisis in the white fish sector if no such demands are forthcoming from the Member States .
Mr President , I should like to ask for clarification of the Commissioner 's remarks in relation to regional advisory councils .
In his earlier statement he said that RACs had been established in the basic regulation , that they can be consulted , but there was not a general obligation and indeed there are legal obstacles to that .
Now he has said that regional advisory councils will be consulted where there is a regional aspect to a proposal .
In general , whose prerogative is it to decide when and on what RACs will be consulted .
In particular , does he accept that technical measures , if they are to be meaningful , must be tailored to regions , and that therefore there is a regional aspect .
Therefore will or will not regional advisory councils be consulted on this technical measures report ?
I am very grateful , Mr President , but I believe the Commissioner should tell us what the truth is : is it what he stated in his answer to Question No 26 - which is that the regulations are in force - or what he has just stated , which is that the regulations are no longer in force ?
The Commissioner must clarify the situation and say which is true : his previous statement or the one he has just made .
.
( DE ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to reply to Mr Hudghton 's question on the regional advisory councils .
The question whether it is meaningful and necessary , or regarded as necessary , to consult such a body must arise from the given situation .
What I drew attention to is this : the basic regulation provides for the option of consulting the advisory councils , and it is therefore not possible to transform this into obligatory consultation in a secondary provision .
However , I can solemnly pledge , on the Commission 's behalf , that we will always consult the relevant advisory council , if one exists , as a matter of course where there is a regional aspect to a proposal on a region of the sea .
After all , we ourselves have an interest in obtaining the greatest possible range of clear and detailed information on the meaningful deployment of technical measures .
As regards Mr Casaca 's comments : yes , of course , what was said in the answer to the question continues to apply .
However , you do need to consider one thing : you said that the provision of the Accession Treaty automatically continues in force .
Perhaps this was not translated quite correctly .
This certainly cannot apply , as this provision of the Accession Treaty , as is well known , has already expired .
Currently , the situation is this , to be precise : according to the Commission 's Legal Service , the legal basis has expired , but legislation is required to repeal the relevant provision of the regulation as well .
It does not become invalid of its own accord .
However , there is a view in the Council 's Legal Service that due to the expiry of the legal basis , this provision of the regulation also forfeits its legal force .
There are therefore two conflicting legal opinions here .
As would seem logical , I informed you about the Commission 's legal opinion in my reply .
Thank you Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Wednesday , at 12 noon .
. We support the rapporteur 's proposal to reject the initiative .
However , we do this for very different reasons .
We believe that expulsions and deportations from Member States are wrong .
They do not take account of the underlying reasons forcing people to flee from their countries and often involve sending people to countries where murder , torture and inhuman treatment are not just a threat but bitter reality .
It is also no secret that , again and again , people being deported die because of the actions of security staff .
Expulsions and deportations from Member States are often cruel , inhumane and unjust .
Apart from this , asylum procedures in the EU are often grossly unjust and arbitrary , leading to dramatically varying recognition rates between Member States .
In such a situation , and as long as the global misery of capitalist exploitation , war and violent conflict and disrespect for human rights continue , nobody should be deported from Europe , and there should be no mutual recognition of deportation orders .
In view of all this , we demand a total halt to deportations , the immediate release of all people being detained pending deportation and a permanent right of residence for all undocumented immigrants .
Welcome
We are joined today by a distinguished visitor in our official gallery , the Speaker of the Parliament of Finland , Mr Paavo Lipponen .
I should like to welcome you , Mr Lipponen , to our House .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the Thessaloniki Council will bring a particularly difficult six months to a close and pave the way for the procedure of European integration to continue .
The Council plans to focus on five important entities .
First , how to advance the matter of the institutional changes which the European Union needs and which the Convention on the Future of Europe has been processing since March 2002 .
Secondly , foreign policy and defence issues , with particular emphasis on the points of transatlantic relations , the formulation of a strategic perception on Union security issues and the issue of weapons of mass destruction .
Thirdly , immigration , asylum and external border issues , which you know the Greek Presidency has an interest in , and their increasing importance to the Union over the last five years .
Fourthly , issues relating to the strategy on employment and the Lisbon strategy in general , which the Council needs to address , and a fifth entity for the day after the Council , in other words Saturday 21 June , which concerns the Union 's policy on the western Balkans .
Of course , over and above these five entities , the Council will not omit to discuss and take appropriate decisions on a series of other issues .
However , I shall confine myself mainly to the thematic entities I have mentioned .
Ladies and gentlemen , the first thematic entity concerns the institutional changes which are being processed by the Convention and the steps which need to follow .
As a result of enlargement , the Treaty for which was signed in Athens on 16 April , there is the urgent problem of the changes which have to move forward so that the European Union does not fall into the ugly trap of having inflexible institutions which are unable to operate efficiently and creatively .
That is why the issues of the Convention on the Future of Europe are major issues for the Council and the Union in general .
As agreed at the informal Council in April , the Convention , through its chairman , is expected to present the results of its work , which has lasted about 15 months .
The Greek Presidency has managed , following special , multiple agreements , to ensure that the timetable given to the Convention by the Copenhagen Council is kept to .
Ideas and proposals have been submitted .
The dialogue can continue , but at some point we must conclude .
This conclusion will obviously not happen under the Greek Presidency , but we expect the leaders to exchange views and decide on the order for the Intergovernmental Conference , and for the bridge to the final stage to be completed under the Greek Presidency .
The final product of the Convention will therefore be submitted to the Thessaloniki Council .
It is not the Council 's role to take material decisions ; its role is to decide how the order will be given to the Intergovernmental Conference to start up work , so that we have a result which is accepted by everyone , which will be a common denominator and will constitute the institutional framework which will determine the course of the Union for several years to come .
We need to make sure , when the time comes , that this common denominator is not a lowest common denominator , is not a change of limited importance , but is a denominator that will guarantee a dynamic course for an enlarged Europe .
The Greek Presidency plans to hold a discussion on the material aspects of this item so that there is an exchange of views , so that a picture of national positions is formed before the Intergovernmental Conference and , of course , so that decisions are taken on procedural issues relating to the subsequent stages of the procedure .
The timetable of work for the Intergovernmental Conference is an important issue .
In order to determine the timetable , account must also be taken of the obligation of certain Member States to hold an internal dialogue on the outcome of the Convention .
We estimate that , around autumn , this procedure should have been completed , the Intergovernmental Conference should proceed and its work should be completed on time so that the period between the date of enlargement , in May 2004 , and the entry into force of the new institutional framework is as short as possible .
In all events , progress with the work of the Convention allows me to express certain views on a series of points .
The debate on the institutional architecture of enlarged Europe started by identifying the need for greater efficiency .
Everyone is convinced that we need to adapt the institutional structure and operations to the needs of a bigger Union , while maintaining all the principles on which the European unification endeavour is based .
The drafting of a Constitutional Treaty is a quantum qualitative leap which is due in large part to the efforts made in the Convention .
However , we must say that it also expresses the will of the European citizens .
Its strength depends on two basic elements : on its more democratic functioning and on more efficient decision-making .
I should particularly like to welcome the fact that , during the work of the Convention , a significant degree of agreement has been noted on a series of basic issues , such as , for example , the strengthening of the role of the European Parliament , the introduction of a single international legal personality for the Union , the incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights in the Constitutional Treaty and the further communitisation of the area of freedom , security and justice .
The view that we can achieve better democratic credentials for the Union without creating new institutions or bodies was also broadly accepted .
An enlarged Europe should result in a stronger international presence .
This means finding solutions , such as a more coordinated way of using foreign policy resources and the creation of a person who will unite the responsibilities of the High Representative with those of the Commissioner responsible for foreign policy .
As you know , ladies and gentlemen , this debate is under way .
Over and above the various approaches expressed in plenary at the Convention , it is , I think , important for us to maintain a balance between the Union 's institutions , to safeguard the equality of the Member States , to make further use of the advantages of the Community method and to strengthen the democratic character of a Union of states and peoples .
In all events , I think that the Convention has been a success , taking decisions on a series of difficult issues outstanding from previous Intergovernmental Conferences .
It goes without saying that the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference will have to take account of the decisions on which there was agreement and it is important in the final stage of work for there to be a spirit of compromise , for the authority of the Convention to be preserved and for the strong result which the Union so badly needs to be guaranteed .
As I mentioned earlier , a second important area of work for the June Council has to do with developments over this entire period on the particularly crucial issue of foreign policy , which includes the question of relations between states .
The EU / USA summit will be held in Washington a few days after the Council .
It will be an opportunity to discuss issues which are important to both sides , to cooperate and address serious issues concerning international and / or bilateral developments and to overturn the climate which has often prevailed over all these recent months .
Relations between the European Union and the United States depend on traditional ties , the weighty role of the two sides on the international stage and their dynamism , despite the fact that over recent months they have been put to the test by a divergence of opinion on a series of issues .
All we Member States , however , consider that what unites us is more than what divides us and that it is in everyone 's mutual interest that we work together .
At the last meeting in Gymnich , we had a very useful discussion .
We believe that the image of our relations with the United States should improve and should better reflect the real state of our relations .
That is why we are working hard to ensure that the next summit , the agenda for which will be discussed at the Thessaloniki Summit , will be an important step in the further development of our strategic relations , so that we can meet the challenges of our times together .
The issues of Iraq , transatlantic relations and international developments in general recently created new challenges in the field of the European security and defence policy .
In this sector , we will need to be in a position to develop a common perception of the new security environment and be able to deal efficiently with new challenges and threats .
The Ministers for Foreign Affairs , at their informal meeting at the beginning of May , instructed the Union 's High Representative to prepare a general report on the new security environment , the challenges and threats arising from it and the ways in which the Union can deal with them , to be submitted for initial discussion at the European Council in Thessaloniki .
Similarly , the European Council expects to adopt the Presidency 's progress report on the European security and defence policy , together with the annual report concerning the implementation of the Union 's programme on the prevention of violent conflicts , which forms the cornerstone of the Union 's security mechanism .
The issue of weapons of mass destruction , which is linked with the foregoing , is also one of the important items on the agenda and , of course , I think that it will stay there , given that the proliferation of these weapons is a major challenge for the international question .
Following on from the conclusions of the European Council in Seville , the Presidency also intends to bring a series of issues concerning immigration , asylum and external borders which , as you know , were basic priorities of our Presidency , to the attention of the heads of state during the June Council .
Considerable progress has been made .
The Council managed to bring about political agreement on the directive on family reunification and we believe that we shall manage to achieve political agreement on the directive on long-term residents and the related directive defining refugees .
As you know , we sought a global review of the question of immigration in the sense of both legal and illegal immigration .
In an effort to formulate a single European policy on the issues of legal immigration and asylum , the Presidency also attached particular importance to the issue of the integration of third country nationals .
We intend , together with the Commission , to formulate conclusions for Thessaloniki on the basis of the Commission communication on the development of a common policy on illegal immigration , people trafficking , the issue of external borders and the return of illegal immigrants , again in conjunction with the question of dividing the burden .
The Presidency also intends to seek political agreement on including immigration as a necessary parameter in the evaluation of third country cooperation with the Union .
Following the spring European Council , which was held under difficult economic and political developments , measures also need to be taken to implement decisions reached within the framework of the Lisbon strategy in March 2000 , especially now that we are one third of the way through the process and a great deal still remains to be done .
At the March Council , we decided to promote the application of a series of policies on employment , innovation , entrepreneurship and other policies .
That is why one central issue in Thessaloniki will be the approval of certain guidelines , such as the revised European strategy on employment , recording progress made on various targets concerning , for example , public takeover bids , energy issues and environmental liability and the adoption of the package on the reform of the common agricultural policy , despite the fact that it is difficult today to forecast the final outcome of this issue .
That brings me to the western Balkans .
As far as the western Balkans and their relations with the Union are concerned , our programme targets a set of priorities , especially the strengthening of their progress towards European structures and European conditions .
The fact that the western Balkans have remained high on the Union 's list of priorities despite the adverse climate over recent months is an achievement on the part of the Union and also illustrates the major political importance we attach to the region .
This interest has been manifested in real terms through the stability and association process , as well as in the political sector and in the security sector , with the two operations in Bosnia-Herzegovina and the FYROM .
Reconstruction of the western Balkans has been based on regional cooperation and the role of the stability pact is important in this direction .
I shall refer in particular to the Presidency 's initiative , within the framework of the south-eastern Europe cooperation process and the stability pact , to create a crisis and conflict prevention and early warning mechanism which will mainly emphasise the importance of economic and social development as a deterrent .
The stability and association process remains the basic element in the Union 's policy in the countries of the Balkans and , in our efforts to support this policy , stock was recently taken in Croatia of what has been achieved under the stability pact , the main objective being to coordinate actions under the pact in order to complement the stability and association process .
Democratisation , reconciliation and regional cooperation , on the one hand , and the rapprochement of each of these countries with the Union , on the other hand , constitute a single entity .
Our objectives for the western Balkans have been agreed by the Commission and the Member States and the five countries in the region .
The Council and the Commission are working to implement these objectives with specific operational conclusions .
The relevant decisions are due to be adopted at the General Affairs Council on 16 June .
The European Parliament will approve these decisions and , in this way , we look forward to marking a crucial point in our relations with the western Balkans , with a text of conclusions not only expressing the political will to support the European prospects of the countries in the region , but also containing an operational outline for this purpose .
At the same time , the European Council will confirm that the European future of these countries lies mainly in their own hands and in their commitment to implementing the necessary reforms .
The stability and association process , an integral part of which is the principle of conditionality , continues to give us the necessary institutional framework .
Enriching this process with elements of the recent enlargement experience will reinforce the evaluation , reform and control mechanisms on the basis of the 1997 conditionality and the Copenhagen criteria .
In this spirit of further development , the Commission has proposed a specific means , the European integration partnerships .
Inspired by the pre-accession procedure and adapted to the requirements of each country , they will indicate priorities and obligations which need to be honoured on a regular basis and will act as a guide for financial support via CARDS .
The decision to adopt this mechanism is again expected to be taken at the General Affairs Council and the European Council .
Of the operational actions that will be discussed at the summit , particular importance is also being attached to the questions of justice and internal affairs , especially combating organised crime .
We are seeking an evaluation of the achievements of the countries in the region in order to draw up lists of their specific obligations on these issues for the future . Specific actions will also be proposed on other horizontal issues , such as the return of refugees , the fight against unemployment , the liberalisation of trade and the protection of religious and cultural monuments .
An important precondition if we are to achieve efficient stabilisation in the region consists of strengthening European funding and placing greater emphasis on development measures .
The decisions taken by the Thessaloniki Council will also be reflected in the Thessaloniki declaration which is expected to be signed by the interested parties on 21 June .
Within this political forum , which follows on from the Zagreb summit in 2000 , we intend to renew a political dialogue which will complete the existing framework and will also emphasise the responsibility of the countries of the western Balkans in the overall process .
Over and above these basic parameters which the European Council will address , I might refer very briefly to certain other issues which are of particular importance .
Following the historic ceremony of the signing of the enlargement treaty on 16 April , new impetus was given to this process and a basic stage in its overall course was completed .
The ratification procedure for the 10 countries is proceeding smoothly , as is reinforced monitoring of the application of the acquis .
At the same time , accession negotiations with Bulgaria and Romania are making satisfactory progress .
With Turkey , we are in the process of completing the accession strategy in accordance with the Copenhagen decisions .
It is therefore expected that the European Council will take note of the progress which has been made and will adopt the necessary guidelines .
I shall not refer to other matters which will obviously occupy the Council on a running basis .
I should just like to point out that , in an effort to bring European citizens closer to European developments , the Greek Presidency is dealing with the proposal for European political parties as a matter of high priority and is making every effort so that negotiations in the Council will be completed before the Thessaloniki European Council .
I am particularly pleased that an overall consensus on organising an agreement on better legislation was reached yesterday and , consequently , we shall also have the presentation of this agreement to the Thessaloniki Council .
I should like to close by noting that the Presidency has tried and will make a final effort to see if perhaps a solution can also be found to the question of the MEP statute .
We shall see how this develops .
I cannot prejudge anything .
.
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr Yiannitsis said , the draft Constitutional Treaty , drawn up by the European Convention , will be the focus of the forthcoming European Council in Thessaloniki .
As the event is so important , my intervention today will be entirely devoted to this subject , and I am certain that the ensuing debate will provide much encouragement and many suggestions for the final , extremely delicate , stages of the Convention 's work .
Firstly , with just a few days to go before the Convention closes , I would like to thank all those who have represented this assembly at the Convention .
Your commitment has been , and will be decisive for the future of this delicate process .
I would also like to thank President Simitis and Mr Yiannitsis , as well as their team , for their patient mediation work which will culminate at Thessaloniki and I hope the results will be positive .
It was not so long ago that the Commission and Parliament strongly propounded a Convention on the future of Europe .
Today we have the opportunity to establish our first true Constitution from a democratic debate taking place in the full light of day .
Together , ladies and gentlemen , we sought the Convention and together we must strive for its success .
The Convention must put forward a balanced text with no alternatives , a text that lays the foundations for Europe for many years to come , guaranteeing our presence and independence on the international stage .
If we did not achieve this , the risks would be enormous .
If we leave the decisions on a number of crucial issues to the intergovernmental conference , we risk a rerun of the sorry experience of Nice .
That would be an ironic turn of fate because we wanted the Convention precisely because we were not satisfied with Nice .
Let me remind you of the original ideas behind this great reform of our policies and our Institutions .
In December 2001 , the Laeken Declaration established the Convention and gave it the task of preparing the ground for the Intergovernmental Conference as broadly and openly as possible .
The Laeken Declaration sets three main objectives : firstly , a better division and definition of European Union competences ; secondly , simplification of our legal instruments and action ; thirdly , making the Union more democratic , transparent and efficient .
The basic aim is to assert the values pursued by the Union , define citizens ' fundamental rights and duties and clarify the relationship between Member States within the Union .
The Convention , therefore , came into being with a Herculean task , an extremely difficult task ahead of it .
Nevertheless , we must also admit that in almost half a century we have built up an astonishing wealth of institutional and lawmaking experience and we have developed a style of politics that is unique on the world scene and of which we should be proud .
So the Convention 's brief is clear : it must define more clearly who does what in the European Union .
This means striking a new balance between the Institutions so that Europe can play its part in a globalised world , but a balance that is easy to grasp for our citizens .
Parliament and the Council must have joint legislative power , requiring the general extension of codecision ; the Court of Justice must hold judicial power , and in this respect I am in favour of extending its jurisdiction to foreign policy and to the area of justice and home affairs ; lastly , in addition to clarification of its legislative power , the Union needs a single executive : the Commission .
Under the control of the European Parliament and the Council , the Commission should apply legislation , implement policies and represent the Union externally , except in matters relating to the Common Security and Defence Policy .
Duplicating the executive would not provide European citizens with the necessary transparency and accountability , and the executive would escape your control , Parliament 's control .
There is one point , however , that I must stress as being of prime importance : the general application of majority voting as a decisive and determining element of the political will to act with democracy and efficiency .
Without this we will lack democracy and efficiency .
The latest version of the draft Constitutional Treaty , published by the Convention , contains some , perhaps many , good proposals : the Charter of Fundamental Rights is firmly enshrined as Part Two of our Constitution ; the scope of the codecision process has been extended , although not far enough ; lastly , it is now clear that we will have a Foreign Minister to represent the Union at international level .
We must continue to push ahead on other issues , however : firstly , the requirement for unanimity has not been repealed .
I must stress this point too : this is the basic issue on which the whole future effectiveness of the Institutions depends , because the right of veto can only bring deadlock in the Union .
The best solution - there may also be second best solutions - is double simple-majority voting - that is , half the Member States and half of the population : easily comprehensible , straightforward and clear .
This is the system we prefer because it reflects the dual legitimacy of the Union which - I would remind you - is based on agreement between the States and the shared will of the peoples .
I repeat , the fundamental point is to eliminate the right to veto , for which we are paying an unacceptable political price , both in internal and international policies .
Secondly , the issue of a stable Presidency of the European Council is still unresolved .
The solution put forward in the latest draft of the Constitution has three drawbacks : first of all , there is the fundamental problem of legitimacy , of accountability , as it is unclear to whom such a President would report , which is fundamental for democracy ; in addition , it weakens your role , the European Parliament 's role , because this assembly rightly has power of control over the Commission , but not over the Council or its President .
So this philosophy is asymmetrical ; it is a weak kind of democracy that we are considering , that this draft is considering .
We cannot accept this !
Last , but certainly not least , it would create another executive within the Council which would end up generating confusion between Community competences .
So no simplification of instruments here , and even less clarity about who does what within the Union .
Keeping that picture and these three basic objections in mind , we are open to various solutions , ranging from maintaining the rotating Presidency to creating a post of Chairman , purely and simply ' Chairman ' , to make the Council more efficient technically .
More generally , what counts is laying the basis for effectively combining what cannot go beyond intergovernmental cooperation today and our firmly established Community mechanisms , something which does not , however , come out of the draft .
This cannot be achieved by dividing and fragmenting these two dimensions , but rather by interlinking them , and providing for possible future development towards more unitary formulae , such as that of a future President of the Union .
We need to be creative , imaginative and have a sense of time and the future .
Today we already have the Union 's Foreign Minister as a practical example to work with .
The person holding this post will represent the Union for the Common Foreign and Security Policy , while we want the Commission , as I just said , to continue to represent it in all other areas .
This explains the proposal for a dual nature of the Foreign Minister and why he must be a Commissioner if the idea is to work , albeit a Commissioner with special status as regards the CFSP .
The Foreign Minister will therefore need to work closely with the College and , in particular , with the President of the Commission and must have the backing of a genuine European service .
This structure must be linked administratively with the Commission so that it can work together with the other Commission departments in order to make optimum use of knowledge , resources and action in all sectors linked to foreign policy in the strict sense .
The Union 's external representation will thus be truly unitary and able to utilise Community and intergovernmental instruments effectively , and this will give us the international influence and role we should have .
This , ladies and gentlemen , is a practical example of how the intergovernmental and Community dimensions should be combined .
The events of the last few months have taught us one thing : until we put an end to our divisions , we will continue to be an economic giant and a political dwarf on the world stage ; indeed , when you are a political dwarf for too long , you cease to be an economic giant .
Before closing , I want to raise one last point : we need the right institutional instruments to strengthen our economic policies , precisely to prevent us being sidelined on the economy too .
In this context , one can legitimately wonder whether one option for a workable combination of today 's intergovernmental and Community mechanisms would not be for the Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs to chair the Eurogroup and represent the euro area externally in international institutions .
This calls for a strong person , someone who will continuously represent the Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , that sums up what I wanted to say today .
There are many things I could add , but I have sought to confine myself to the essential points so that there is more time for debate .
I would just like to say a few , final words to thank the Greek Presidency . They have shown determination , effectiveness , understanding and sensitivity to the various points of view - a model of how we should work together .
This leads me to make a further remark - which may seem ill-disposed but which on the contrary is sincere , indeed absolutely sincere - that is , that institutional engineering formulae may provide a rational explanation why the rotation system cannot function .
I repeat : perhaps they can explain it , but no formula can replace the enthusiasm and intelligence of policy-makers who put their national cultural heritage at the service of Europe 's common interest .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted that the President of the Commission received such warm applause , because he has really earned it .
He deserved that warm applause for his comments , which were based on the Community method , and I too would like to focus my contribution on the Convention .
I would first like to thank all our representatives to the Convention and its Chairman , Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , very sincerely for all the work they have done up to now , although we have not reached our goal yet .
If such clear progress had not been made over the past week , we might have found ourselves concerned about the risk of failure today .
But I no longer have any such fears .
Nevertheless , we need to make still further progress .
My group firmly believes that there should be an agreed and definitive draft for the constitution , without any options .
We do not want a proposal to emerge from the Convention that could be reopened by the Intergovernmental Conference . No , we want a final draft , a definitive programme , which we hope will then meet with the agreement of the governments .
And there is one thing that we want above all : the preamble refers to our Greek and Roman heritage and to the Enlightenment , but we must insist that our Christian heritage is also referred to in the preamble of the European constitution , forming as it does part of our identity today .
We as the European Parliament demand equal rights in framing all European legislation , and we also demand that we should share budget rights with the Council , including medium-term financial planning .
As regards the Commission , we want a strong Commission , and we welcome the suggestion that the President should be proposed by the Heads of State and Government on the basis of the election results , and that Parliament should then choose the President of the Commission .
We want a strong Commission , because it , together with Parliament , and of course with the European Court of Justice , forms the heart of the European Community .
We are also calling for the Convention to find a solution as regards the size of the Commission , a solution that ensures that the Commission is able to act , but one that also ensures that all the Member States of the European Union are represented in the Commission . I say that because all Member States , large and small , want a place at the Commission table .
It is quite possible to think of mechanisms , including both rotation and junior Commissioners , that allow not only the large Member States but also the small ones to have a place at the Commission table .
This is of great psychological importance for our common European project .
We are also calling for the European Foreign Minister , who is at the same time to be the Vice-President of the Commission , to be subject - together with the entire Commission - to a vote of approval by Parliament .
A situation in which the Foreign Minister has no link with Parliament is not acceptable .
He too needs to have Parliament 's approval and confidence , and that is why we want him to be linked into the Commission as a whole , which will then have to be approved by us .
As far as the Council is concerned , I can very largely agree with what the President of the Commission and of course with what the President-in-Office of the Council has said , not in every detail , but in their broad thrust .
In instances where the Council is acting as the legislature , we need genuine transparency , and , as a legislature , the Council must as a matter of principle take decisions by majority vote .
That brings us to the issue of the presidency of the European Council . The Convention Praesidium 's proposal contains a formula according to which the President of the European Council should not belong to another institution .
This is just a personal opinion , but I believe it would be a good thing if this sentence were to be deleted .
We need to keep open the option that one day , if we can reach that point , the President of the European Commission can also be the President of the European Council .
That is why I hope that this sentence , which still figures in the proposal , will finally be deleted .
( Applause )
I am happy to give my full support to the proposals for the European Court of Justice , for which I would specifically like to thank you , Mr Prodi .
All or virtually all actions of the European Union must be subject to European law , because only if they are subject to court rulings will European actions be based on law rather than political opportunism .
That is why it is so important that most areas of common European action , with very few exceptions , should be based on law and subject to control by the European Court of Justice .
Only in that way will we become a genuine community of law .
The same should apply to home affairs .
I would like to thank you , Mr President-in-Office , for saying that the Greek Presidency will endeavour to achieve a result as regards the Statute for Members of the European Parliament .
Mr President-in-Office , if we cannot achieve a result in the Council , then I fear that there will never be a Statute for Members .
I think that we have now been wrestling with the issue of the Statute for Members for 15 years , and by finally reaching a decision yesterday , by reaching a decision today , we will have fulfilled our parliamentary obligations .
I hope that you will manage to fulfil your own obligations .
If you should fail , the Council will bear a great burden of responsibility .
I therefore wish you every success in adopting the Statute for Members .
I hope that you will also manage to adopt the European party statute , because it is very important indeed for all Europe 's party political families , large and small , that we should have a party statute that ensures transparency and an ability to act , and I would very much encourage you to take this to heart .
In conclusion I would like to make a comment about foreign policy , which will have a major role to play .
Yesterday we had the President of Algeria , Mr Bouteflika , here with us .
These days we naturally tend to look towards Eastern Europe .
This weekend , this Saturday and Sunday , we are encouraging our Polish partners to vote ' Yes ' to Europe in their referendum , to say ' Yes ' to membership of the European Union .
I had a wonderful experience last Sunday in Warsaw during a pro-accession demonstration , when we were shouting out : Tak dla Polski !
' Yes ' for Polish membership of the European Union !
It is now time , however , not only to look towards the east , but also towards the south , towards the Mediterranean area .
We should really be injecting some substance into the Mediterranean dialogue , because up to now it has largely consisted of rhetoric .
We should not lose sight of the Mediterranean area , because if we are concerned about border security - and we need to be , both in relation to countries in the east as well as countries in the south - we do not want to erect a new wall .
No , we need to help the countries of the Mediterranean area , in North Africa , so that people there , and particularly young people , have opportunities in life .
That is why we need to redouble our efforts .
I wish you every success at the Thessaloniki Summit .
If you take this decision , you will have my group 's support .
I wish you , the Greek Presidency and all of us in the European Union good luck !
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , please allow me first of all to congratulate the Greek Presidency on its courage and determination .
Like Ulysses , you have navigated through turbulent waters , and there were perhaps times when you should have tied certain members of the crew to the mast when the transatlantic Sirens began to sing , but we do have time to improve the situation .
The central issue in this debate is the future of Europe , and it is within this framework that the Convention is working .
I would also like to welcome the speech by the President of the Commission and to reaffirm , on behalf of my group , that we , who are working for the Convention , and who are participating actively , believe that it should produce a draft Constitution , and not just a list of options .
This is an absolutely fundamental point .
We also believe that to affirm the secular nature of the Europe we are building is a positive element , because it demonstrates our respect for all religions and for the complexity of our history .
Consider , for example , that in Thessaloniki , until the Second World War , there lived the largest group of Sephardic Jews expelled from my country , which has a Greek , Roman , Christian , Muslim and Jewish history .
It is a good thing that we are affirming Europe 's secular role in this way .
With regard to external personality , it is also important , as the President of the Commission has said , that we genuinely affirm the fundamental principles and the criterion of majority as a working system .
The Greek Presidency has indicated that the stabilisation and integration of the Balkans is an absolutely essential issue .
And we must remember that , when we launched the CSFP , our first failure came when we were unable to reach agreement amongst ourselves .
And that is what exacerbated the Yugoslavian tragedy .
When we began to work together in Kosovo and Macedonia we were able to improve .
With regard to the final work of the Convention , I would like to point out firstly that the important thing is that no possibilities are ruled out , in other words , that the constitutional text allows us to evolve , because the text itself will not be able to change reality , but rather we must be able to continue with the Community method .
And this involves certain fundamental issues .
Firstly , the question of the Commission .
If we say that the President of the Commission must be elected on the basis of the result of elections , this means , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that you must make the Statute on European political parties an essential issue on the agenda at Thessaloniki , because without protagonists we will not be able to create a genuine democracy , in which the President of the Commission has democratic legitimacy , and I must say that it does not appear that the Council attaches great importance to this point at the moment .
Secondly , with regard to the composition of the Commission , I would say that this is an open debate within all political families but , in any event , what we must do is strengthen the Commission 's capacity as a college and the authority of its President .
With regard to the establishment of a Council Presidency of a dual nature , President Prodi is well aware , as we all are , that such dual systems are not stable .
There must be one body with executive power .
We must support improvements in the Council 's internal organisation , but an organisation based on two institutions which , to a certain extent , overlap , will not be stable .
The very important issue for Parliament is the need to enshrine the power of the law , of shared legislative power , which means that the Council must also act in a democratic and open way and , at the same time , we must maintain the institutional balance .
With regard to the Statute for Members of the European Parliament , I would like to insist on one point , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , and I would also like the President of the Commission to give his view on it during this debate .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , this issue does not relate to Parliament 's internal system .
It is an entirely constitutional issue and therefore what you have to do at this point is not to resolve the problem , but essentially not to oppose the solution we have offered , which furthermore justifies and supports the need for majority decision-making .
Remember one thing : in relation to taxation , Nice decided on unanimity , and this is producing entirely negative results .
Everybody must face their responsibilities , and you have responsibility in relation to an entirely constitutional issue .
Mr President , please allow me to refer very briefly to two important issues .
One is the economy .
There has been a G8 Summit , in which the President of the Commission has participated .
I would like you to be a little more explicit with regard to the development of the Lisbon strategy and also the euro , which is an issue of concern us , above all because the European economy is not working as a motor .
Finally , with regard to the transatlantic Summit at the end of this month , it is very important to demonstrate the will of both sides to once again take up our responsibilities within a multilateral context , particularly at a time when there are signs of hope in the Middle East peace process and an opportunity to work for the future of the United Nations .
Mr President , we must say to our American allies - and I am thinking of the extradition treaty - that they must treat us with equality , respecting our own legislative capacity and , above all , they must give us explanations - this is an important point - with regard to the entirely unacceptable situation of certain European citizens , in that law-free zone known as the Guantánamo base .
This is also of importance in terms of our future relations .
In any event , it is very important that you take a significant step , respecting and supporting the results of a Convention which leads us to a European Constitution .
Mr President , European Liberal Democrats in this House hope that President Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing will present to the Heads of State and Government a draft Constitutional Treaty which commands a broad consensus .
It must dampen the fires of the increasingly bitter disputes we have witnessed in recent weeks .
However , it is for the Convention , not its President , to confirm the existence or not of a consensus , and if the Convention needs a little more time to complete its work , so be it .
Mr Giscard d 'Estaing likes to say that his Constitution will last unchanged for 50 years , but unless a durable consensus is reflected in the final text and Member States are given the time to debate it we are likely to have to revisit the matter in the very near future .
The latest proposals provide hope that the Praesidium is now in listening mode , but there is clearly still much listening to do .
Even with the restrictions on his role in foreign policy , European Liberal Democrats remain unconvinced of the case for a full-time chairman of the European Council .
We are suspicious that the larger Member States seek to unpick the seams of the Community fabric .
A double-hatted approach for Europe 's new Foreign Minister commands widespread support , so why not take the same approach and integrate the roles of European Commission and European Council Presidents ?
Must we risk years of conflict , of turf wars , of duplication of effort before we recognise the sense of this approach ?
At the very least we must leave open the door to an integrated presidency in a few years time .
President Prodi spoke - and I have sympathy with much that he said - of the national veto .
In the name of preserving national sovereignty , the veto all too often promotes international anarchy .
Unless we are capable of thinking in new ways about the concept of sovereignty , we will continue to fail our citizens on the major challenges we face .
While I welcome the proposed extension of Parliament 's powers of democratic control over the budget and European legislation , I am concerned that an imbalance remains between the powers of Parliament and Council in other areas , such as concluding agreements with third countries on crucial security matters .
Mr President-in-Office , another item on your agenda in Thessaloniki will be the debate on High Representative Solana 's recommendations for an overall strategy in foreign and security policy .
It is vital for the European Union to develop a doctrine which enshrines the central role of international law and of institutions such as the UN , the WTO and NATO .
Europe also urgently needs a framework for deciding under which conditions we should commit troops to military action , including conflict prevention , peace enforcement and humanitarian crises .
Congo is a welcome step forward but our current embarrassment over Bosnia-Herzegovina is a setback .
And to prevent the European Union fracturing again as it did over Iraq , we need to start debating and planning now our approach to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
I hope that the summit will discuss Europe 's approach to North Korea and Iran and not leave it until a crisis erupts .
In the area of Justice and Home Affairs , I commend the President-in-Office for the progress made thus far under Greece 's stewardship .
I hope that you will continue to seek to balance repressive measures against illegal immigration with a generous approach to refugees and an emphasis on human rights and fundamental freedoms .
I would also appeal to the President-in-Office to make every effort to conclude three important proposals concerning third-country nationals who are long-term residents , minimum standards for qualifying for refugee status and minimum standards for the granting of such status .
Mr President-in-Office , you touched on the subject of a Members ' Statute .
I fear that the proposal we adopted yesterday will not make your work any easier , but I hope you will be guided in this , as in other matters on your agenda , by the advice of your philosopher , Socrates : remember that there is nothing stable in human affairs , therefore avoid undue elation in prosperity , or undue depression in adversity .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , the Greek Presidency has been characterised by particularly seminal deadlines for the future of the Union , such as the signature of the accession treaty by ten new countries and the probable conclusion of the Convention 's work .
I would like to focus , however , on a third major event , which is more important than any other : the sudden appearance of the Union 's identity crisis .
What do we want to do together ?
This existential question remains , more than ever , unanswered , certainly with regard to our internal ambitions for the Union .
Do we genuinely want to set ourselves the objective that the praesidium of the Convention proposes should be included in the future Constitution of the Union , namely balanced economic growth and social justice , full employment , high living standards , social protection and equal opportunity for all ?
In that case , why refuse to open the debate on a change in the priorities of the European Central Bank ?
Its priority should no longer be price stability , at a time when there is a risk of recession , but instead protection of jobs , training and pensions for all women and men , the funding of useful infrastructures , such as large-scale piggybacking , and , more generally , genuine , fair , sustainable development .
Why confine public services to the precarious status of a derogation to the rule of free competition , instead of making the promotion of high-quality services of general interest a priority of the Union , one consequently included in the Constitution ?
Why continue to block any possibility of taxing the movement of capital and financial income ?
This kind of blatant contradiction between the statement of objectives corresponding to expectations and the rejection of means that would enable us to achieve them is at the heart of the lack of trust felt by our fellow citizens with regard to the European institutions .
What do we really want ?
We must respond frankly and take responsibility for our choices so that Europeans can participate in the debate in an informed manner .
As Albert Camus wrote : ' Mal nommer les choses , c 'est ajouter au malheur du monde ' ( ' To name things wrongly is to add to the misfortune of the world ' ) .
This identity crisis is equally obvious with regard to the role of the Union in the world .
This has become only too clear since the war against Iraq .
Before the conflict , contradictory , but frank , voices at least enabled public opinion to be clear on the matter and become involved in this confrontation of choices .
They did so in such a spectacular manner and so uniformly from Western to Eastern Europe that this sudden crisis , in our opinion , represents a real hiatus in the history of the Union and the only hope of future change .
On the other hand , since the show of force by the world superpower , against the law and will of the international community , it seems as if the European Union is rebuilding its unity on the basis of resigned or enthusiastic subordination to the fittest .
Paul Wolfowitz admits that the crusade to eliminate weapons of mass destruction in Iraq was merely ' a bureaucratic pretext to gain acceptance for the war ' .
This tremendous deception has called forth no indignation among the Fifteen , let alone among the Twenty-five .
This was confirmed this morning , and I regret it .
George Bush decides to monopolise the management of the road-map for the Middle East , with all the risks entailed by his complicity with Sharon and the latter 's reservations on the very substance of the commitments to be made ; the European Union , despite having jointly initiated this fragile hope of peace , allows itself to be ousted from the scene with no resistance .

The United States rejects the International Criminal Court , maintains special military courts , detains - as Mr Barón Crespo pointed out - European citizens in a law-free zone in Guantanamo Bay ; the Council nevertheless prepares an extradition and mutual legal cooperation agreement with Washington , turning a blind eye to all these broken rules .
Our US partners relaunch their attack for the moratorium on GMOs to be lifted in order to protect US agriculture ; Europe instantly starts to waver , holding back from applying the trade retaliation measures that are authorised by the WTO itself against the thoughtless tax advantages granted to exporters in the US .
For all these reasons , Mr President , my group considers that the Greek Presidency would serve Europe well by raising this entire problem clearly at the Thessaloniki European Council : what do we want to do together and what means are we providing ourselves with in order to achieve our objectives ?
In any case , in our societies , the question has now been raised and that is a very good thing .
Earlier , I quoted a French author .
For good measure , I shall end my speech by quoting the great German , Hölderlin : ' Where there is danger there is also salvation ' .
It is clear where the danger lies for Europe .
Let us be among those who seek to save it .
Mr President , I too would like to acknowledge the Greek Presidency 's work over the last few months and say how pleased I am with yesterday evening 's work to conclude the agreement on better regulation .
In particular , I am grateful to the President of the Commission for having reminded us of the origins of the Convention and what our objectives were , given that at times we forget them , when we see that some members of the Praesidium and especially its Chairman want to pose more as members of the Intergovernmental Conference than Europe 's founding fathers .
The Convention , Mr President , must retain control of the process of reforming the European Union .
If it does not manage to conclude its work by 20 June , we must allow it to continue working to reach an agreement , which is perfectly feasible provided that the Convention plays its full part as a constituent or para-constituent assembly , does not give in to blackmail by the small numbers of eurosceptics who have no interest in seeing it succeed - this needs to be said and reiterated - and asserts the value of an open , parliamentary working method which is very different from the intergovernmental method that is based exclusively on power politics .

It is true that the President and the Praesidium have clearly miscalculated , intentionally prolonging the concluding period of debates without ever setting out in black and white which points had achieved a broad consensus , thereby deluding themselves that they can control the Convention at will and giving the wrong impression that the Convention is divided on everything ; but today the governments which are anxious to see this constitutional reform succeed - and they exist , I am sure , and I am also sure that your government , Mr President , is among these - cannot simply pull the plug on the Convention if it does not conclude its proceedings to the satisfaction of the majority of its members .
We consider that , if the Convention offered options at Thessaloniki , this would prove that its job is unfinished .
In my opinion , there are at least three issues where we need to send out a signal of progress , democracy and clarity , which can be seen directly by all the citizens : direct access to justice for citizens in the event of breaches of the Charter of Rights ; the simultaneous extension of codecision and Council majority voting , in particular with regard to taxation and foreign affairs .
We will not be able to act as a global player , committed to the values of multilateralism and democracy , if we are blocked at every turn by vetoes and counter-vetoes and if all of this sector remains , as it is today , totally free of any form of parliamentary control .
The third and final point is that the reform process cannot maintain unanimity and cannot allow once again - and this really is an astonishing situation for 2003 - the European Parliament to be excluded from the ratification process .
Turning to the Seville programme which you , Mr President , referred to : we have often condemned the great imbalance in the strategy agreed in Tampere , between the repressive aspects of the fight against illegal immigration and the forced repatriation policy and the positive aspects , such as the creation of legal , controlled immigration channels , the softening of the visa policy and integration measures for third countries based on the non-discrimination principle .
We hope , Mr President , that the Council will heed the loud and clear message that Parliament sent out yesterday : no signing of the extradition treaty between the European Union and the United States without clarification of the situation of the European Union citizens in Guantanamo .
We are referring to Union citizens not because the others do not concern or interest us , but because we consider that , by taking this approach , we can legitimately intervene on the entire issue of the existence of a part of the world where no laws exist .
Mr President , the Laaken Summit asked the Convention to bring the EU closer to the people .
With the Praesidium 's draft constitution , Chairman Giscard d 'Estaing will instead put a greater distance between the EU and the people .
A French sun king is leading the Convention in contravention of all the democratic ground rules .
We are unable to have proposals translated and debated .
The EU rules on transparency do not apply to Chairman Giscard d 'Estaing . He is not content with leading the meetings ; he also tells us what to think and is apt to draw conclusions that are clearly opposed to the views of the majority .
He does not permit any votes that might upset his so-called consensus method , the same consensus method that he now wants to introduce , in place of unanimity , as the European Council 's form of decision-making .
The draft constitution is not progress but a large step backwards in history to the time before the introduction of democracy when the king asked for advice but took the decisions himself .
Chairman Giscard d 'Estaing 's draft constitution may be likened to a large removal firm .
It would transfer power from the electorate and elected representatives in all the countries to officials , ministers and lobbyists and from the legislature to the executive and judiciary , with the EU Court of Justice becoming the supreme interpreter of the constitution .
Power would also be transferred from smaller countries to larger ones and from medium-sized countries to the largest ones . It would be transferred from ordinary party members to transnational party bureaucracies and from living democracies to a stronger Commission , a stronger European Parliament and the strongest power federation of all : the prime ministers of the largest Member States who would be at the very centre of power in the form of a directorate revolving around a French-German axis .
They would be given power because of their countries ' size , not because we had elected them .
None of them were elected for saying what their plans were for the EU .
The prime ministers would , then , meet after each election to the European Parliament and divide the posts among themselves .
When Mr Blair could no longer be elected in Great Britain , he could become President of the EU , and Mr Fischer could become the EU Foreign Minister when his prospects in Germany dwindled .
Mr Aznar could be made President of the Commission , or Vice-President with responsibility for justice and home affairs . Someone else could become the EU minister of finance and economic affairs , and a third person could become supreme commander of the armed forces .
The constitution would create good jobs for outgoing prime ministers when they could no longer be elected .
It would not be the electorate that would be given power over the institutions and their top people , as in federal states such as the US and Germany .
In our case , 13 prime ministers could vote down 12 in the European Council , and the prime ministers of the three largest countries could vote down the 22 others in one go on the basis of what is termed their double majority , in which countries with 40 % of the inhabitants are given the right of veto .
The electorate in countries large and small would lose all power over the laws .
Our democracy would be reduced to something very local .
We should no longer be able to reward or punish our elected representatives at the next election , for most laws would be adopted behind closed doors by a working party under the aegis of the Council of Ministers or by the Commission , which would be given increased independent legislative power .
Our national governments and parliaments would be like large , powerless local authorities in an EU writ large .
Voters would be able to go to the polls in elections to the European Parliament , but it would not be possible in this way , either , to change the laws of the EU or replace the people running it .
The European Parliament would obtain the right of codecision in quite a few areas , but it would not gain all the power lost by the national parliaments .
The Commission would be given the sole and exclusive right to table many more proposals and to prevent others from being tabled .
That power would be taken away from voters and elected representatives in all the countries .
Officials and Council ministers would assume most of the power , for without their consent it would not be possible for any laws to be made .
The power that , in all democratic countries , resides with the electorate would , in the case of the EU , be apportioned through an inscrutable power game involving prime ministers , meetings of the Council and of the Commission and a European Parliament potentially dominated by powerful supranational party bureaucrats .
As for the electorate , it has an extremely remote role to play in the draft constitution to be debated at the Thessaloniki Summit .
Greece was the cradle of democracy , Mr President-in-Office of the Council . The Thessaloniki Summit ought not to become a burial chamber .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I personally feel that Mr Bonde 's wonderful speech - although a friend asked me whether he was announcing the end of the world - is like a carefree drawing produced by an unhealthy imagination like that which created Goya 's monsters .
If we follow the Convention experts , the mixture of Community and intergovernmental , the distribution of legislative , executive and so on , we will find ourselves in a period of total decadence , where we do nothing but destroy any remnants of the classical which brought us to this point .
I hold up to you the Europe of Altiero Spinelli and Ernesto Rossi .
Why ?
Because these Europeans conceived the European federation inside Fascist prisons .
This is just one name : the prisons were Fascist , Communist , Nazi , Clerical , Counter-reformist , of all kinds .
Their dream was to eliminate the monsters of nationalist degeneration , of minority groups which wanted to establish themselves on a legal basis to the detriment of others .
Mr President , I would just like to make one , very brief point : this debate is an affront to the parliament which has chosen to hold it .
We should have discussed this on 18 June during the mini part-session .
The President-in-Office of the Council could have given us hard facts then , and we would have known what they would actually have discussed at Thessaloniki .
Today , they are simply telling us what is in the papers .
Parliament is demeaning itself .
We should have refused to hold a debate when it is not known what the proposed decisions will be , and I am very disappointed that none of the other Members have made this point .
We would have met on 18 and 19 June , and the Council would have taken place in Thessaloniki on 20 and 21 June .
Things sometimes happen better by chance than by Europe 's political logic .
This time I greatly appreciated Mr Wurtz 's speech , for the first time in 20 years , I think .
When he said that ' we are facing an identity crisis ' , he was right .
But what defining parameter does the identity crisis refer to ?
How do we define our identity ?
Either we place ourselves in the history of continental Europe , which over the past 100 years has unceasingly produced all kinds of monsters , including our institutional monstrosities , which bear no relation to the transparency of the rule of law and its functioning , or if not , you are already creating a new anti-liberal , anti-democratic , anti-humanist monster out of this Europe of counter-reform and of a thousand violent and murderous tendencies .
It was not by accident that we , or rather you , found yourselves on Saddam 's side in actual fact , as regards Iraq .
Let us admit that Mr Solana still sees Mr Arafat , despite the fact that there is another possibility , that of Mr Abu Mazen , created by Mr Sharon and Mr Bush .
As in the forties , you are the heirs of a Europe that the England of the past and America freed .
We need to free ourselves of you , and we shall !
Mr President , I too want to focus solely on the contribution that the Thessaloniki Council can make to a positive outcome of the Convention and hence to useful preparation for the Intergovernmental Conference .
At the moment , it is not easy to foresee at what stage the Convention will have reached on the eve of Thessaloniki , what text the Chairman , Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , will submit to the Council or what level of consensus will have been reached in the Convention .
I do not think that everything will be clarified and settled before Thessaloniki and , in any case , it is down to the Council to provide further stimulus towards fully attaining the objectives set by the Laeken Declaration of December 2001 , the main points of which have already been listed by President Prodi .
For my part , I would like to recall the content and tone of that declaration , especially in relation to the duties that the European Union must perform and the challenges that it must meet .
It would be worrying if the conclusions , firstly of the Convention and then of the Intergovernmental Conference , did not live up to those expectations .
I feel that I need to sound the alarm here : were the questions raised by the Laeken Declaration on the European Union 's global role or on greater coordination of economic policies and so on , merely rhetorical questions ?
Beware !
If we failed to meet the expectations that these questions raised among European citizens and world opinion , we would bear a heavy responsibility .
The risk exists now , and it can be inferred from the text adopted thus far by the Praesidium of the Convention , yielding to the growing pressure from certain heads of government of the larger countries , particularly with regard to the Chapter on the Institutions , the Council 's decision-making procedures and also the future procedures for reviewing the Treaty .
In various regards , it would perhaps be instructive to reread the Treaty for which Altiero Spinelli was rapporteur , which was adopted by Parliament in February 1984 .
President Prodi has already said a great deal in very clear terms regarding the serious contradictions and the shortcomings of the text adopted so far by the Praesidium on institutional matters .
I would just like to reassert the positions expressed by Parliament , which as an institution has not kept quiet , has not relied solely on its 16 representatives at the Convention - unfortunately only 16 out of 105 - but , through the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , it has made many contributions and sparked major debates during which - I want to stress this above all - a clear position was taken against the idea of a full time President of the European Council .
In order to strengthen the authority of the European Council as a college , we have put forward other proposals , without excessively customising them and not just concentrating on having a President-in-Office for two and a half or five years .
Mr Poettering pointed out that we must delete the idea of incompatibility envisaged between holding the mandate of President of the European Council and holding other European mandates .
It is essential to remove the idea of incompatibility with holding a national mandate too , because if we establish a full time President of the European Council - albeit calling the post ' chairman ' or trying to draw up a restrictive job description - all the elements of duplication , or dualism in the leadership of the Union , which have been condemned for being extremely confusing with regard to executive functions , will inevitably come about .
Lastly , as Mrs Frassoni and Mr Bonde have already said , it must be stressed that Laeken did indeed appoint a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman , but it granted a collective mandate to the Convention as a whole .
I believe that the Thessaloniki Council must issue a warning in this respect , so that we do not take a path where the personal opinions of the Chairman of the Convention or the compromise opinions of the Praesidium override majority opinions , supported by a broader consensus in the Convention plenary .
Mr President , I wished to begin my speech by congratulating the Greek Presidency on the work it has done in very complicated and difficult circumstances .
I am glad that during this Presidency the Parliamentary Conference on the Stability and Association Pact in relation to the countries of South-Eastern Europe has been able to take place since it has allowed us to improve our neighbourly relations with the Balkan countries .
Winston Churchill said that the Balkans had a very great and very full history which hardly fitted within its territory .
I believe that the European Union must manage and improve this relationship , and promote cross-border cooperation between the Balkan countries , as a method for preparing them for their future integration into the European Union .
This cross-border cooperation is based on knowledge , understanding and trust in one 's neighbours and eventually on cooperation with them .
To be able to work on the creation of a free trade area between states , firstly by means of unilateral agreements , progressing towards the disappearance of visas between states and eventually also the disappearance of visas with the European Union .
These countries must be integrated into the common foreign and security policy and they must be able to participate in programmes such as Socrates or Leonardo , in order to bring their integration into the European Union closer .
The Balkans is a complex region .
At the Thessaloniki Summit the European Convention will also be presented .
I believe the Convention has not dealt with the complexity of certain European Union Member States , which are not nation states but rather multinational states .
We must establish mechanisms to allow these nations without a state , as in the case of Catalonia or the Basque country , to be represented in the bodies of the European Union .
In this regard , I believe that Mr Napoletano 's report has been very positive , but certain points , such as the right to bring cases before the High Court of Justice , do not appear in the draft Convention .
I believe this is necessary so that the citizens in question can feel directly represented within this European Union , which must be a Europe of the citizens , but also a Europe of the peoples it contains .
Mr President , if I could make a wish in this debate it would be for Mr Simitis to stay in the Presidency for another six months , to stay for the second half of 2003 as well .
I would make the same wish if Mr Karamanlis , the leader of the opposition , happened to be president-in-office , in the face of the concern which I truly feel at the advent , not of the Italian Presidency in general - I have a great deal of respect for the Italian people - but of Mr Berlusconi .
I think that this is not the time to transfer American kitsch to the European Union and for us to become even more farcical than we were on the issue of Iraq .
I want to say that the Greek Presidency , in my opinion , has been methodical and has made serious preparations .
I wish to congratulate Mr Yiannitsis on the way in which the Presidency has behaved in cooperating with the European Parliament ; I think , however , that , despite this , there are serious political problems , especially on the major issue which has arisen , the issue of relations with the United States and the war in Iraq .
The Greek Presidency followed a ' foot in two camps ' policy and I think that the Presidency is closing with Europe in confusion .
Which precise stance are we following ?
The stance expressed by Mr Blair , the stance expressed by Mr Schroeder , the stance expressed by Mr Aznar or the stance expressed by Mr Chirac ?
It is a huge problem and I think that it is a new given which will not allow us to start building on sand , because I hear everything being said about what we are going to build as regards our foreign policy , Ministers for Foreign Affairs etc. and I wonder on what ground , on what policy , we are going to build them .
Before I finish , I shall just say that I believe that the Greek Presidency , because there was the Iraqi dossier , the most important and difficult dossier dealt with , should demand explanations , just as explanations are being demanded in the United States and in the United Kingdom about the weapons of mass destruction , which was the basis for the invasion of Iraq and was supported by eminent members of the European Council , such as Mr Blair , Mr Aznar and others .

Mr President , Presidents of the Commission and of the Council , I wish , first of all , to offer my congratulations to the Greek Presidency for the intelligent and useful work it has undertaken .
We have once again seen proof that the presidencies of the European Union 's small- and medium-sized States are better and more pro-European than those of the larger countries .
I wish to congratulate the Greek Presidency in particular on the way it acted during the crisis triggered by the war in Iraq , launched by the United States and the United Kingdom and supported by the government of the Spanish State .
The presidency did its best to achieve peace and to combat the idea that transatlantic relations must involve the subordination , and even the humiliation , of Europe by the United States , a prospect that is all the more dismal because that country is currently governed by the militaristic far right .
Accordingly , we hope that the Convention presents the European Council with a draft Constitution that continues constructing a Union that is respected on the world stage as a body working for peace and solidarity , unlike the militarism that currently prevails .
I hope that the Constitution will give this Parliament all the democratic powers that it needs , including codecision and a role in electing the president of the Commission .
We are , therefore , in agreement with President Prodi 's ideas on the Council presidency .
In any event , we must be able to have confidence in the future of the Union .
Only recently , following the failure that was Nice , just one small group in this Parliament was calling for the Union to have a Constitution .
As a European and as a political representative of a nation-state such as Galicia , of course I want the Constitution to respect the national and cultural diversity that constitutes the fabric of Europe .
This is what we are calling for because Jacobin tendencies clearly still exist on our Continent .
We must ask ourselves why Slovakia , Luxembourg , Estonia and Malta are recognised as European nations , but Galicia , Scotland and Catalonia are not .
I shall make one final observation : I hope that the Union 's institutions are courageous enough to end the criminal chaos that dominates international maritime traffic and which leads to disasters such as that involving the Prestige .
We must prevent the appalling deaths , such as those that occurred the day before yesterday just off the Spanish coast , of illegal immigrants seeking work in Europe .
We must ensure that joint policies such as the CAP and the CFP or cohesion policy are fair and non-discriminatory .
We hope that this will happen , so that everyone can benefit .
Thank you , President-in-Office of the Council , for attending today and for the information you have given us .
The forthcoming Thessaloniki Summit is of considerable importance for the future of the Union , both in the medium and the long term .
It is important to lay the foundations so that Europe , or rather the Union , soon to complete an enlargement process which is unprecedented in its history and in the history of the world , can increasingly combine economic power with political dignity .
It is to do justice to the latter that I would like to talk about the policies neglected by that same Union , something which is even more serious as it grows in importance .
Health , for example , is one such policy .
With reference to Article 152 of the Treaty of Amsterdam , I acknowledge national autonomy for health issues , but a Europe which is heading for enlargement to include 25 countries cannot underestimate the impact which the social and healthcare problems of these countries will have on the political and social economy of the Europe of the future .
This is why the UEN Group recently met in Turin and discussed precisely these enlargement-related social and healthcare issues , producing a document that has already been submitted to the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi .
The results of this work were not reassuring , so much so that our hope is that , during the six-month Italian Presidency , public health will be included among the Union 's priorities as soon as possible .
The globalisation process could see ill people and diseases knocking loudly on Europe 's doors , finding us lacking , as has already happened with regard to SARS infection : a situation which tested our health coordination and cooperation abilities , a matter which the forthcoming Italian Presidency must address if it truly wishes to prevent emergencies and tackle the health service divide that the individual nations are experiencing and which will induce people to travel en masse to countries with health service facilities and centres of excellence , which , in turn , might be in danger of paralysis .
I hope that the Union will decide to give consideration to this and that the next Presidency of the Union will put forward proposals in this respect .
Mr Yiannitsis , you have been the recipient of many compliments this morning and I should like to agree in one specific regard : I compliment you on the way in which , in the midst of all the right and proper attention to the Convention for example and transatlantic relations , the Greek Presidency has succeeded in preventing the Western Balkans from sinking into oblivion .
That would be quite wrong and extremely foolish .
Your starting point is , I think , correct .
The question is not if the countries of the Western Balkans will ever join the European Union , but when .
Before they can join however there is much that needs to be put right .
This conclusion is in itself nothing new .
In 1999 , after the Kosovo war , the European Union set up the so-called stabilisation and association process , based on an analysis of the problems in the 1990s : ethnic violence , extreme nationalism and the need to develop democratic structures .
This approach has - as we have said here many times - been a success .
Think of European Union action in Macedonia .
But we have reached a point where the European Union 's policy cannot simply be based on an analysis of the 1990s ; it must also be based on an analysis of the current and the future problems of the countries in the Western Balkans .
These problems are increasingly resembling a problem the present Member States are also having to face , namely socio-economic stagnation .
In my opinion this means that we must retain the good points in our current policy in respect of the Balkans .
The return of refugees , still exceptionally important , the tackling of organised crime - think of the murder of Djindjic , unfortunately still very topical , active cooperation with the International Criminal Court in The Hague , these are all elements that we must retain . Other elements must be added to them however .
As I see it , these are elements from the pre-accession strategy as the Union has known it to date , such as the strengthening of the unilateral trade benefits for the countries of the Western Balkans , the opening of a number of European programmes which has often been mentioned such as the education programmes Leonardo and Socrates and the introduction not only of the logic , but also of the methodology of the cohesion funds as we currently know them .
This too is possible in the Western Balkans , as is the step-by-step introduction of the change in visa policy , which Baroness Ludford has previously mentioned .
The Greek Presidency has rightly begun with an exchange of students , which is a good start , but it is not enough .
What we need is not a repeat of the way in which we have so far drawn the countries of Central and Eastern Europe into the European Union .
We now need a tailor-made strategy with elements of our old policy and elements of the new policy that must be added to it .
This - and I say this direct to the Council - this needs money .
My appeal to the Greek Presidency therefore is to ensure that the new policy , which I warmly support , is feasible in financial terms as well .
The trick will be in not creating any new illusions , but bringing the Balkans closer to the European Union .
If we fail to do so , we shall regret it dearly later on .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I welcome the Greek Presidency 's statements about the Balkans , and unlike Mr Alavanos I am also pleased that in the second half of this year the Italians will have an opportunity to pursue this excellent policy further .
There are in fact two neighbouring countries that have a vital interest in seeing stability in the Western Balkans , that is to say in south-eastern Europe .
It is a fact that these countries - Croatia , Macedonia , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia , Montenegro and Albania - are at very different stages in their development .
They will ultimately have an opportunity , as already promised in Zagreb and as will once again be confirmed in Thessaloniki , to become members of the European Union depending on their own individual progress .
The road they have to travel will be a difficult one , as the 10 accession countries have discovered .
It will place great demands on their citizens .
We recognise the different rates of progress that exist , which are chiefly due to the fact that these countries have all had different opportunities to develop .
Until just two years ago , Serbia and Montenegro still had Milosevic .
We therefore need to take into consideration those opportunities of which they were unable to take advantage .
Many of these problems are , however , common to all these countries , such as the fight against corruption and organised crime , and above all the fight against traffic in human beings .
In many of these countries the judicial system is still very poor and deficient .
Another cause for regret is that cooperation at regional level is not as good as it is always made out to be .
If an appeal is being made to us to grant these countries visa freedom , then , in my opinion , they should first come to an agreement between themselves to allow their own citizens to travel freely .
It is not that simple to get from Serbia to Croatia .
That is why I believe that these countries should first put their own house in order before they start making further demands on us .
I also believe that bilateral free trade areas are a good thing .
However , they can only be truly effective if they are extended to create a multilateral free trade area .
I would like to mention three points contained in our motion for a resolution .
It is reasonable for the Stability Pact to be closely linked with the stabilisation and association process .
It is important that the CARDS programme , for which ever less funding is available , should be given more money .
The money is available ; we do not need to create new funding .
The pre-accession aid has not been fully used , and I regret that the Commissioner mentioned a figure of EUR 200 million .
You probably do not want to exceed that figure , but I believe that we need more , because economic development is a prerequisite for our co-existence , for the development of this Community and for the ultimate solution of the problems of refugees .
I would like to touch upon one final issue , and that is the question of young people in these countries .
Without their youth , these countries will have no chance of developing favourably .
If they are not given a signal now that Europe will not become a reality just for their grandchildren , but now , for them , there will be problems .
They are all trying to leave these countries and to emigrate to other countries , such as New Zealand , the United States and Canada .
We must open up our Socrates and Leonardo programmes to them .
As the rapporteur for the Socrates programme , I know what a difficult business that is .
I appeal to the Greek Presidency to play an active role here in ensuring that we really give the young people of these countries a signal that they can take part in our educational programmes .
If I rightly understood the communiqué issued by the presidents of these countries on Monday , it contains many good things - many promises and many valuable insights .
I only hope that something will be done in Thessaloniki to give these countries a real incentive to translate those promises into action .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am the third or fourth Member queuing up to speak about the Balkans .
It is true to say that the Balkans are at present not in the public eye , that they are not hitting the headlines .
Thank goodness , you might say , because it is usually only bad news there that makes the front pages .
Nevertheless , there are far-reaching problems .
Growth in the Balkans is too weak for them to catch up .
They have high unemployment , low inward investment , and there are still open wounds from the armed conflicts that marked the end of the former Yugoslavia .
The process of refugee return remains to be completed and the process of nation building is still incomplete and uncertain - we only have to think of Serbia , Montenegro , Kosovo , Macedonia or Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Added to that , the area is characterised by international crime that is also spilling over into Western Europe .
It is therefore the job of the Presidency and of the Thessaloniki Summit , the ' Zagreb II Summit ' , to make a clear offer to these countries , but also to spell out the conditions very clearly .
We already have the Copenhagen Criteria , and there is no reason to bend the rules they stipulate .
But we also need to help these countries carry out their economic reforms .
It has already been mentioned that the CARDS programme alone is not enough .
We need to move towards pre-accession instruments and pre-accession aid , just as we did with the other enlargement countries , and secondly -as has also already been mentioned by others in the ' Balkans brigade ' - we need to build up the rule of law .
There can be no avoiding that .
This means that the refugee problem must be solved , and that respect for minorities must be clear in people 's hearts and minds and not just laid down in the law .
There needs to be consistent prosecution of all crimes , and in particular , it should go without saying , of crimes against humanity .
And there must be cooperation with The Hague .
Like my fellow Members , I regret the fact that the United States is giving ambiguous signals : on the one hand strong pressure for cooperation with The Hague and on the other hand equally strong pressure to sign Article 98 agreements in connection with the International Criminal Court .
That is untenable for us , and I believe and hope that the European Union - both the Council and the Commission - will make it clear to these countries that such agreements run counter not only to the spirit of the Common Foreign and Security Policy but also to the acquis communautaire that we have created in that area .
That is why I am hoping for three things from the Thessaloniki Summit . The first is to give these countries clear membership prospects , which is essential ; the second is to extend the support instruments not only quantitatively but also qualitatively , as part of preparations for an accession strategy ; and the third point is strict monitoring .
I agree with those fellow Members who have said that this is not about being particularly benevolent .
We need to be able to tell those countries exactly where there are still problems , but we also need to be able to tell them where progress has been made .
I hope - and this , Mr Prodi , is a job for the Commission - that Europe will react swiftly to the application by Croatia , the first of these countries to apply for membership .
In principle , we should be giving a positive reply , at least I hope that things are moving in that direction .
But there are also still certain things that Croatia needs to address , of course .
I therefore believe not only that the Thessaloniki Summit should be described as ' Zagreb II ' , it should also be a kind of pre-Copenhagen , that is to say a Copenhagen I , in that it gives clear signals .
Something can also be done as regards visa policy ; it can simply be made more flexible , without having to lift visa requirements at this stage .
Mr President-in-Office , I hope you will take on board that although we in this House are watching these countries with an extremely strict and critical eye , we also share the belief that we should give them reasonable European prospects .
If you do that in Thessaloniki , then you will be able to chalk up a great success .
Mr President , Mr Prodi , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , one very important point for the European Council in Thessaloniki : bring Europe out of the closed back rooms of governments and give it back to its citizens .
Mr Giscard d 'Estaing will soon be presenting the European Convention proposal for a European Constitution .
The Convention has achieved much over the past 15 months : agreement has been reached on a single European Constitution and ambitious proposals have been tabled in the area of simplification and the guaranteeing of fundamental rights .
With the finishing line in sight , however , intense discussions have now broken out about the details of the institutional framework .
Yes or no to a permanent President of the Council , yes or no to a European Commissioner for each Member State , yes or no to a Congress of Peoples .
These institutional questions are all very important , but in my view must really only come into play when we have reached agreement on the content of European policy areas .
Europe must become important for its citizens .
It must also ask these citizens for an effective policy in the area of foreign affairs , a policy in respect of social issues such as pensions , employment an economic policy , a security policy , a policy in the important area of asylum and migration and , let us not forget , an environmentally friendly and fair agriculture policy .
In all these areas we must move away from paralysing vetoes and towards truly effective decision-making .
Europe , that means making a policy for European citizens so that we can create an area of security , solidarity and prosperity for all .
Europe is about content and not about window dressing .
Institutional questions are very important , but first we must give Europe back to its citizens .
Only when we are sure that where European policy is needed it can also be effectively structured can we start the debate about the architecture .
It has to be simpler , more understandable , more effective and closer to the citizen - more democratic in other words .
That means a President of the Commission elected by the European Parliament and a troika presidency of the European Council that guarantees both continuity and the involvement of individual countries .
I call on both the European Convention and those government leaders who will shortly be attending the IGC to persevere and to opt for an effective and democratic , that is communal , Europe .
It is precisely in areas such as migration and asylum policy that we have seen the lack of results when policy is made by way of intergovernmental back rooms .
So , Mr President , make the policy communal , excluding the right of initiative for the European Commission and with decisions taken by both the Council , by qualified majority , and by Parliament .
Start by ensuring in particular that the content is in order and then provide for an adequate democratic structure through a debate about the institutions .
Only in this way can a credible Europe be created for its citizens .
Give Europe back to its citizens by allowing them to express an opinion on the European constitution through a referendum .
That will force the political parties and the public at large into an active and political debate about Europe .
I call on my Dutch colleagues in the CDA and the VVD to support this idea and to distance themselves from Dutch back room politics .
The European citizen deserves better , Mr President .
Mr President , if I have understood President Prodi correctly , Europe , by remaining a political dwarf , will eventually lose its status as an economic giant .
I personally do not dream of Europe as a great power in world affairs , becoming policeman and teacher to the rest of the world .
I dream of a world governed by international law , based on cooperation between all States , large and small .
Europe is currently experiencing a few problems .
Nonetheless , thanks to Community cooperation , our Europe is certainly the fairest , most egalitarian society in the world .
Our ambition should be to eliminate the last inequalities in Europe , enabling every individual to work and live decently .
To do so , we need to share : share within the Union , share with the new Member States , share with developing countries .
Politically , our Union must be able to speak with one voice .
This means that the most original institution of the Union , the Commission , must represent all the Member States .
The Commission must remain the driving force , with which each citizen must be able to identify .
This politically more united Europe , however , is not a goal in itself .
The aim of political action is to satisfy the economic , social , environmental and cultural needs of our citizens .
The Convention has devoted far too much attention to the institutional architecture , which will serve no purpose if we do not provide ourselves with the political means to achieve sustainable development and economic growth in order to ensure full employment .
Currently , the European Central Bank 's interpretation of Article 105 ( 1 ) of the Treaty is too restrictive , limited to the sole objective of combating inflation .
Although stability is necessary , the fight against deflation and for growth is equally essential .
Hence the need to specify the ECB 's mission as follows : ' the main objective of the European System of Central Banks is to maintain price stability .
While combating inflation and deflation , the ESCB should support the other economic and social policies of the Union ' .
This clarification of the mission of monetary policy is vital if Europe does not want to suffocate in formal stability , which , ultimately , is unproductive .
I shall end , Mr President , by thanking Greece for an exceptional presidency .
This shows , once again , that the smaller countries generally accomplish a better presidency than the larger , more conceited countries , which , out of personal vanity , want to abolish rotating presidencies .
Mr President , I would first of all like to join in warmly congratulating the Greek Presidency .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Thessaloniki offers you the opportunity to strengthen the Union 's immigration policies and to improve the measures for offering security to European citizens .
These are two essential , but different , objectives .
You must confront the new threats resulting from organised crime , whose tentacles stretch throughout and beyond the European Union , and you have instruments for doing so , such as the European arrest warrant and Europol .
Strengthen them and use them to combat large-scale international crime and also small-scale crime , the crime which fills our streets with beggars , children and prostitutes , victims of human trafficking , but please do so using the instruments necessary for each issue .
A member of Al Qaeda is not an illegal immigrant who indulges in terrorism , but an international criminal .
And you must manage immigration , which is a different thing , a complex social phenomenon which should be dealt with from different angles .
Do that , please .
Return to the global and integrated vision laid down at Tampere .
Return to the map drawn up by the Commission , adopt the legislative framework envisaged , apply the measures proposed by the Commission with regard to third countries , integration , employment , with regard to all the issues relating to this field .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the majority of illegal immigrants enter the Union legally .
The majority of illegal immigrants are domestic employees working in our homes .
A danger to the European Union ?
To whom ?
And above all , please , please call things by their real name .
If the leaders of the European Union are going to persist in mixing international organised crime with immigration we are going to have a problem .
If we tell the citizens that immigration , even if the adjective illegal is added , is one of the new dangers to be confronted by the Union , we should not be surprised if it leads to excessive reactions , we should not be surprised if it creates a problem with the citizens of the Union and their perception of immigration .
Mr President , there is a fundamental requirement that should always be made of a constitution , irrespective of whether it is a national constitution or the constitution of the European Union .
That requirement is clarity : clarity when it comes both to the distribution of power and to well-defined competences .
As a Swede , I have an unhappy experience of the devising of constitutions .
When the Swedish constitution - our fundamental law - was adopted , far too many questions were left unanswered .
The Swedish Parliament - the Riksdag - was given more or less unlimited power to take decisions on just about every issue on the basis of a simple majority .
Thanks to a unique Swedish tradition , freedom of expression and freedom of the press retained their strong position , but the political authorities were given the go-ahead to put their fingers into every pie .
This mistake of Sweden 's must not be repeated in a constitution for the European Union .
The most important thing must be to devise a clear catalogue of competences explaining which tasks are to be carried out by the EU and which are to be carried out at national , or some other , level .
There are proposals to make social issues with shared competence matters for the EU .
As I see it , that would be an historic mistake .
Such issues are best dealt with by each individual Member State .
Moreover , I see no other way of proceeding in an enlarged EU with a huge range of economic conditions from one country to the next .
In the same way , all essential aspects of economic policy must remain the responsibility of the Member States .
The euro is the Member States ' common responsibility , implying budgetary discipline .
Taxes and decisions on expenditure must , however , remain the responsibility of the individual nations .
There are large differences between one country and another , and flexibility is required .
Low taxes will be the new Member States ' only chance of gradually catching up economically with the current Member States .
On the issue of the distribution of power , it is important for us not to provide the EU with several presidents or institutional chairmen .
That would scarcely contribute to a more effective EU .
The rotating Presidency of the Council is also important if the Member States are to be able to feel they belong together .
It is also a unique opportunity for small Member States too to influence the work of the EU .
I therefore want to urge the Convention and the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference to be very careful in establishing the shape of the future EU and the way in which it is to operate .
Mr President , the Convention has made progress in many issues of political content .
Of particular importance is the fact that the fundamental rights of EU citizens are to be determined as a binding component of the work of the Union .
There are still shortcomings , however , in the organisation of the division of duties and responsibilities among the institutions .
It was the task of the Convention to put forward proposals to make decision-making more effective , clearer , more democratic and more transparent than before .
This mandate cannot include the setting up of new institutions .
The work of the Council does indeed need reforming , decisions must be taken openly and its work must have continuity .
This cannot happen , however , with a permanent president who is beyond democratic control , or by reducing the Commission 's power of initiative and its executive power .
Public support is absolutely essential for the future of the EU .
One very conspicuous institution in all Member States is the Commission .
In the name of equality , therefore , there must also be a Commissioner from all the Member States in the future .
The work of the Convention has gone in the right direction with regard to the development of EU legislation .
I support the appeal made today by President of the European Commission , Romano Prodi , that the right of veto should be relinquished when the EU is making a decision .
Using the right of veto does not achieve anything worthwhile as it only hampers and prolongs the decision-making process .
One EU priority this term has been food safety .
We have not succeeded in deciding where to locate the Food Agency , however , because the right of veto has been used .
At Thessaloniki it will be necessary to sort this out and decide that the permanent home for the Food Safety Agency should be Helsinki .
Helsinki is already totally equipped for the Agency to be able to start its work immediately after the decision has been taken .
Finally , I wish to say a special thank you to Greece , the country to hold the presidency , for the way it has helped the progress of matters to do with safety at sea .
.
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this has been a very heated , highly interesting debate ; I have noted all the issues raised , vital issues for our future : from the Balkans question to equality of the Union 's citizens , to safeguarding the Institutions .
During this brief reply , I will restrict myself simply to making an appeal , which I consider absolutely necessary and indispensable today when , at Thessaloniki , we will have to take fundamental decisions for our whole future .
I would like to appeal to the Convention to give us the response that many of you - starting with Mr Wurtz - have said that the Convention has not yet provided .
There is a very simple reason for this .
We decided to form the Convention during our institutions ' deepest crisis ; we decided on it all together after the night of debate at Nice , when we saw that the intergovernmental method of negotiations between States - precisely , during the intergovernmental nights of talks - did not provide satisfactory results ; we decided to take that path in order to restore to our people and our parliaments the sovereignty which befits them .
Now the Convention has got down to business : it was to be a finite process ; the Convention was to give the Intergovernmental Conference a finished product .
Instead , a parallel process has emerged : a kind of Intergovernmental Conference parallel to the Convention has come about , which has divided into various fragments and which is in danger , at this time , of further fragmentation .
I repeat what Mrs Frassoni said : currently a false impression is being given , a false message that the Convention is split on everything .
Therefore , my appeal is very simple : we want the Convention to carry out the Convention 's work fully , autonomously ; we want it to produce , as you have all requested , a clear , systematic draft , because the Convention Assembly represents all the citizens , all the countries , all the institutions of Europe .
We need its voice , we need it to carry out its role in full .
Over recent months , we have been divided over basic policy points and we have also suffered humiliation in our foreign policy .
Do we wish to deny ourselves the instruments we need to restore our dignity ?
Do we wish to deny ourselves the courage to advance proposals which are becoming instruments necessary for our survival ?
I can summarise with great satisfaction the contribution of all the leaders of the main political groups - whom I have the pleasure of seeing here before me - who , as one , have put forward coherent , courageous proposals on the coalition rules , on Parliament 's role , on the future dynamics of the Institutions .
They have put forward courageous proposals for both today and tomorrow , such as combining the President of the Commission and the President of the Council .
They have given us , all working together , a single framework of what they want for the Europe of the future .
And so , just as I am calling on the Convention to express a single , strong opinion and to present it to the Intergovernmental Conference ,
I am calling on you , chairmen of the largest European parliamentary groups , to tell our friends and fellow Members in plenary to speak out loud and clear , to make clear the conditions under which they will agree to sign the new agreement upon which Europe must be built .
This is my appeal to you , because , at this time , we all need the Convention 's voice for the new Europe .
( Loud applause )
Thank you , Mr President of the Commission .
I have received six motions for resolutions on this issue in accordance with Rule 37 of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , all morning we have been distressed by the news reaching us of a terrible rail accident which has taken place in my country , in my region of Castilla-La Mancha , in the town of Chinchilla .
Many people have been killed , but what is even more serious is that apparently 21 people have disappeared , burnt to death inside the train 's carriages .
In view of the anguish we are feeling in my country , and more specifically in my region , I would like to inform my fellow Members of this tragedy and ask the President to send a message of condolence and solidarity to the families and the regional government of Castilla-La Mancha , who are so seriously affected by this tragedy .

I would like to inform the House that written declaration No 4 / 2003 submitted by Mr Tannock , Mrs Villiers , Mr Helmer , Mrs McKenna and Mr de Roo on the live transport of animals from Member States and EU candidate countries had , by 3 June 2003 , been signed by the majority of Parliament 's component Members .
Consequently it will be forwarded to the addressees and published together with the names of the signatories .
Mr President , I just wish to thank all those Members of the House , across all nationalities , delegations and groups , who signed my written declaration .
It is a mark of a civilised society how it treats its animals .
This is a wake-up call to the Commission and in particular Commissioner Byrne , whom I now call upon to come before the House to make a statement on this issue .
It is dear to our hearts that we uphold high welfare standards in animal transport , in particular in the acceding countries , where there is no tradition of high welfare standards for animals .
I would also like to make the point that I am delighted that my amendment to the Corbett report , taking written declarations outside of the plenary , has now come of age .
I have seen a lot of interest today in both the piracy issue and Rugby League .
Let us hope that the Members of this House will sign declarations in future .
The next item is the vote .
Report ( A5-0162 / 2003 ) by Giovanni Claudio Fava , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the Commission communication to the European Parliament and the Council on the Action plan to counter the social , economic and regional consequences of the restructuring of the EU fishing industry ( COM ( 2002 ) 600 - 2003 / 2039 ( INI ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Proposal from the Conference of Presidents complementing the decision taken by the European Parliament on 9 April 2003 on the Calendar of the European Parliament , 2004
( Following the rejection of Amendment No 1 , the President declared the proposal of the Conference of Presidents approved )
Report ( A5-0193 / 2003 ) by Willi Rothley , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the adoption of a Statute for Members of the European Parliament
Before the vote :
Mr President , I propose that we should reject that suggestion , for the simple reason that in its opinion the Commission clearly spelt out that this is a very serious proposal .
We have now been discussing this subject for five years , and it would not make any sense at all to re-run all those discussions .
It is high time we made a decision on this subject , and I can only call on the House to reach a decision now and not to perpetuate this never-ending debate .
I therefore call on you to reject the proposal for referral back to committee .
( Applause )
Mr President , the Commission has certainly made a positive contribution here , for which I offer my sincere thanks .
Its support for the Parliament 's position is welcome .
There has , incidentally , been a misunderstanding about Article 33 that would not have arisen if we had based our discussion on the German text .
On the subject of misunderstandings , I would like to point out that the amendment tabled by my group to delete Article 5 of the resolution simply means that , as the Bureau has agreed the reform , it no longer makes any sense of course to call on the Bureau to adopt this particular reform .
That has been settled , and there is nothing more to it than that .
Perhaps you will permit me , Mr President , to make a further point . We are voting on the Statute today ; it is to be adopted today .
This is a decision under Article 190 ( 5 ) of the Treaty .
We are not voting on whether we want the reform or not , as some newspapers have suggested .
That is not the case at all .
We all want the reform .
But I would be grateful to those who are highlighting this aspect in particular if they would finally stop denigrating the majority of this House by suggesting that we wanted to block this reform by linking it with other , legitimate political objectives .
This is therefore a decision under Article 190 ( 5 ) .
Nevertheless , as far as taxes are concerned , we are open to the Council 's proposal that an additional national tax should be introduced for a limited number of Member States .
We are quite open to that suggestion .
Mr President , your speech yesterday following the vote was a very worthy one .
It was a fine speech that was a testament to your political wisdom .
It was also courageous , and I hope that this House will summon up the courage to accept its political responsibility .
There is a great deal at stake here today .
I implore you , ladies and gentlemen , in the interests of the peoples of Europe , those whom we serve , to summon up that political courage !
( Applause )
I would ask , for a quite specific reason , to take the floor under the rules of procedure .
I shall not , like Mr Rothley , talk in very elevated terms , but explain to him that the reason why the Group of the Party of European Socialists wishes to omit paragraph 5 of the resolution is simply that the Praesidium has already made a decision .
At the same time , however , there are some important principles contained in this demand that changes to the reimbursement of travel costs enter into force at the same time as the new Statute , if it ever sees the light of day .
There is one particular point , however , that ought to be clarified , and I should therefore like to table an oral amendment to paragraph 5 .
Instead of calling upon the Praesidium to take a decision , the wording might be in terms of taking note of the Praesidium 's decision . At the same time , an important addition should be made : namely , where the words ' enter into force together with the Statute ' appear , I wish to propose adding the words ' and with the same validity as the latter ' .
It may perhaps be a little difficult to grasp in translation , but the principle is that decisions taken on the reimbursement of travel costs must have the same legal validity as the Statute .
That is what I should like to propose .
Amendment No 7 , if adopted , would delete the paragraph , in which case the oral amendment would not stand because the paragraph it refers to would have been deleted .
In the event that Amendment No 7 is rejected , then I will ask the House if it wishes to accept Mr Krarup 's oral amendment .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , with the next three reports this House is voting on the package negotiated with the Council on the decision to create an internal energy market in Europe .
As acting chairman of the committee responsible , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , I am obliged to make a statement here before we continue . The House is voting on 50 amendments in three reports .
This compromise document is accompanied by two statements .
One is the statement by the Commission , which the Vice-President of the Commission presented to the House during Monday 's debate , and that is recorded in the Minutes .
It is also accompanied by an interinstitutional statement by Parliament , Council and Commission , and it has been agreed that this statement should be read into the Minutes of Parliament , that both statements should be published in the Official Journal of the European Union with the legislative text and that this arrangement should also be recorded in Parliament 's Minutes now .
I am therefore obliged to read out the interinstitutional statement here .
I can reassure you that it is not very long .
It reads as follows : ' The European Parliament , the Council and the Commission underline the need for Member States to ensure that adequate financial resources for decommissioning and waste management activities , which are audited in Member States , are actually available for the purpose for which they have been established and are managed in a transparent way , thus avoiding obstacles to fair competition in the energy market ' .
Mr President , I ask you to sign this statement on behalf of this House and to arrange for its publication in the Official Journal .
Mr Mombaur , I would be happy to sign that and ensure that it is duly published as a document of record .
Through you I congratulate your committee and the rapporteurs on what is an extraordinary piece of work and an example of politics at its very best .
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0136 / 2003 ) on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on common rules for the internal market in electricity and repealing Directive 96 / 92 / EC ( 15528 / 2 / 2002 - C5-0034 / 2003 - 2001 / 0077 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Claude Turmes )
Before the vote :
Mr President , Commissioner , within the context of votes on the directive at first reading , the Commission promised Parliament that it would submit two related directives : one on cogeneration , on which the Commission has kept its promise , and another on energy efficiency services , which is highly important in order to provide a framework for the market in this regard .
This directive was promised us , first of all , after summer 2002 , then for the end of 2002 .
It has still not arrived and today there is a faint possibility that this important directive might not be adopted during the current Parliamentary term .
Can the Commission assure us that this directive will be presented as soon as possible , preferably before the summer ?
Mr President , I would just make my fellow MEPs aware of the conditions governing this vote .
There is a political agreement between ourselves in Parliament , the Council of Ministers and the Commission whereby , through adoption , we can avoid conciliation .
We therefore have to vote in favour of the first block and against blocks 2 and 3 .
I would therefore urge Members to do just that .
We should in that way obtain most of what Parliament has wanted , at the same time as being able to avoid conciliation .
. ( DE ) Mr President , this report is about the phasing out as quickly as possible of old oil tankers , which have been responsible , for example , for the Prestige disaster .
We have reached an agreement with the Council and the Commission that what the committee has agreed is also a common decision , and that we can complete the first reading today .
I therefore urge all honourable Members to vote in favour of the committee 's proposals ; otherwise we will put the timetable at risk .
If we can complete the first reading , this regulation would come into force in the summer , allowing us to achieve a major improvement in maritime safety in our European waters .
Amendments Nos 33 and 34 have been withdrawn by the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reform Party , and I therefore hope that other Members will only wish to vote on the committee 's amendments .
Mr President , it is extremely important not only that we phase out the single-hull oil tankers , but also that we realise there will then be 200 to 300 ships out there somewhere .
Not only does Parliament have to accept responsibility for promoting the phasing out of these tankers , it must also accept responsibility for waste management , for the correct disposal and scrapping of ships .
I did try to incorporate this in this resolution , but I think that we will have every opportunity to include our need to accept responsibility for the dismantlement of these ships as well in the Sterckx report .
I feel that we must follow the fast-track procedure Mr Piecyk is proposing and I shall therefore withdraw my amendments .
Mr President , I should simply like to point out that there is a slight error in the Portuguese version of Amendment No 20 : there is a missing semicolon !
A missing semicolon in Portugal is an extremely serious matter and I would draw this to the attention of the services .
( Laughter )
Thank you for that , rapporteur !
I should like to point out to the House that the Portuguese version has already been corrected .
The semicolon , and order , have been restored !
Mr President , I wished to speak on a point of order in accordance with Rule 142 , observance of the Rules of Procedure , with regard to Rule 140 b ) and c ) , which relate to the admissibility of amendments .
Rule 140 b ) and c ) prohibits the presentation of an amendment aimed at replacing or deleting the whole of a text or which proposes amending more than one of the articles or paragraphs of the text it refers to .
According to the services , if Amendment No 20 is approved , all the amendments presented to Parliament will lapse and so will all those that have been presented in committee , and its approval would also mean that the legislative text of the Commission 's proposal in its entirety would lapse as well .
The Commission told us yesterday , through Commissioner Fischler , during the evening debate , that it was against Amendment No 20 , that it was against the other amendments by the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , from No 21 to No 29 , and said that they were contrary to the Treaty on the accession of Spain and Portugal .
Mr President , Amendment No 20 intends to extend the Treaty on the accession of Spain and Portugal , which I believe to be legally unacceptable since it contravenes the Community acquis .
Mr President , I would like the services to tell me what the admissibility of this amendment is based on .
I would like them please to speak to me directly , or , if not , write to me , because I believe we are violating Community law and taking a step backwards in terms of European integration .
Mr President , I can understand the frustration of Mr Varela and our other Spanish colleagues about this amendment , but what this amendment seeks to do , and I do not wish to reopen the debate , is to protect a key conservation zone , one of the most significant conservation zones in European waters .
If we are to be taken seriously as a House , if our Common Fisheries Policy is to be taken seriously , then we must insist that this policy is about preserving fish stocks , allowing fish stocks to recover .
That is what support for Amendment 20 would mean .
Trying to use the Rules of Procedure to stop this House having its democratic say on this amendment would be a serious error .
I would suggest to you , Mr President , if you are inclined to rule that this amendment is inadmissible , that the whole report be referred back to committee .
But I hope you do not rule that it is inadmissible and that we can go ahead with the vote .
( Applause )
Mr President , as a Portuguese Member of this Parliament , I simply wish to say the following : whatever opinion one has of Amendment No 20 , it is totally wrong and dishonest to claim that it has anything to do with the Accession Treaty , which has expired .
This was made perfectly clear in yesterday 's debate in speeches by some of my Portuguese colleagues , such as Arlindo Cunha , Ilda Figueiredo and , in particular , some very lively speeches by Paulo Casaca .
The comment that Mr Varela has just made on this point is , therefore , completely untrue .
The ruling I wish to make on this matter is that I believe Amendment No 20 to be admissible .
It seeks to insert text .
It is true that the effect of the insertion would cause the deletion of other parts of the text , but it is not an amendment that simply calls for deletion .
We have precedents for this .
I am not making an arbitrary choice .
I am following the Rules of Procedure and therefore rule this admissible .
The wisdom of the House will decide the matter .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
President .
That concludes the vote .
The Action Plan proposed by the Commission does not take account of the impact of the decisions taken by the Fisheries Council between 16 and 20 December 2002 and does not provide a response to the problems facing the sector or to the consequences of the restructuring ( scrapping ) measures and recovery plans which , according to the Commission , would entail the loss of 3 000 jobs per year until the end of 2006 , on top of the foreseen loss of 8 000 jobs per year resulting from the crisis in the sector and from fleet renewal .
The Commission 's proposal to fund the action plan by reprogramming Structural Funds under the FIFG and its suggestion that it might use the mid-term review of the Structural Funds to try to obtain further resources from other Structural Funds are unacceptable .
We agree with the rapporteur on the need for additional funds to compensate for the socio-economic consequences of the reform and the recovery plans , and the Commission must make use of the flexibility instrument or undertake a review of the financial perspective .
We agree with the rapporteur 's observation that attention must be paid to small-scale coastal fishing .
The Commission admits that ' financial aid measures in favour of small-scale fisheries have not had the desired effect of protecting the sector ' .
Hence our insistence , in the 2003 budget procedure , on creating a specific support programme .
. ( EL ) The report is correct in its comments on the dangers which will be faced by small-scale fishing ( which accounts for 75 % of Community fishing vessels ) with the application of the new common fisheries policy , which will result in a loss of 28 000 jobs , economic stagnation and the abandonment of coastal areas .
The report does not , however , dispute the policy which produces the hardships , which it confines itself to describing .
On the contrary , it takes them as given and is merely interested in moderating the consequences , in slowing down the rate at which they emerge and in ' countering ' the losses .
The rapporteur harbours delusions about the intentions of the Commission which he calls on to ? consider its options .
We do not harbour any such delusions .
The applied fisheries policy and the proposed policy , as it stands or with a few amendments , prove that the EU is heading straight in the direction of handing the exploitation of fisheries resources over to big business .
This is the direction being taken by the funding measures to scrap small and medium-sized fishing vessels in order to wipe out small and medium-sized fishermen and further reinforce the fishing capabilities of large vessels .
No reversal in the situation can be achieved with wish lists and appeals to the Commission 's better nature .
Only fishermen themselves and their fight can reverse these policies and prevent their extermination .
The fisheries sector appears to be sailing through calm seas at present .
As the fishery reform negotiations draw to a close , the professionals are drawing up the balance sheet for the next 18 months .
With regard to public aid : while the Commission was pushing for an end to public aid from December 2002 , the negotiations have led to the current scheme being prolonged until December 2004 .
Although the fishermen have been warned , the difficulties have not abated .
In Brittany , nearly 75 % of the fleet needs replacing .
The use of safe , new boats , equipped with the latest technology to make sailors ' work easier , should be widespread .
While hostilities in the public aid battle at Community level have been broken off for the moment , however , they will soon be resumed on the world stage .
The Commission has presented a proposal to the World Trade Organisation asking for a ban on all subsidies in order to prevent overfishing , on the pretext of maintaining the sustainability of the fishing industry .
With regard to restructuring plans , we have the example of the Scottish cod restructuring plan , whose consequences we know : the collapse of those fisheries which can no longer operate , increased pressure on other fishing grounds and stocks of other fish species , and more considerable pressure on markets .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Article 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
The failure frequently ascribed to the previous common fisheries policy ( CFP ) should make the Union as a whole realise how crucial it is to have a carefully considered assessment , potentially forming the basis of a new approach , and for this approach to be reflected , if possible , in the new CFP .
For this to happen , the desire to preserve fishery resources must be set against the repercussions that each CFP option has for tens of thousands of people , for their jobs and for their families .
This report focuses precisely on this issue and the action plan to compensate for the consequences triggered by the negative effects of restructuring in the fisheries sector is the appropriate basis on which this study should be undertaken .
With this in mind , I support the rapporteur when he :
considers the Commission 's assessment of the socio-economic impact of the CFP reform to be extremely theoretical and does not provide sufficiently concrete answers to the problems currently facing the sector ;
argues that the economically weakest fisheries , which might be hardest hit by the reform , warrant the European Union 's solidarity and support ;
insists on the need for a serious and in-depth debate on the fisheries model that the European Union should adopt and reiterates the importance of maintaining a positive approach .
I have therefore voted in favour of the report .
The vote of 9 April was nothing less than an attempted coup against Community law .
By illegally reducing the number of sessions for 2004 from 12 to 10 , a coalition of honourable Members , whose antipathy to the notion of Strasbourg as seat of the European Parliament has long been known , has seriously undermined the treaties .
These honourable Members have also , and no less importantly , undermined this town 's status as a symbol of Franco-German reconciliation .
The time has now come to redress the harm done by what can only be called an anti-Strasbourg plot .
To this end , my group has supported the proposal before the Conference of Presidents , calling for an extra week to be added to the draft calendar for 2004 .
This is the only course of action in keeping with the letter and spirit of the treaties .
Furthermore , however , as we approach the crucial moment of enlargement , the European Parliament should bring to bear the full weight of its vote in order to make a political statement of its desire to remain in Strasbourg .
. ( EL ) I voted in favour of the Rothley report , despite the fact that the amendments proposed by the GUE / NGL , Greens and Liberals were rejected yesterday , for the reasons mentioned by President Cox .
It is one naturally inadequate , step towards transparency and the settlement of an issue which insults the European Parliament .
The amendment proposed by the Socialist group to delete paragraph 5 referring to the Bureau 's decision on travel expenses etc. throws up questions about the real intentions of the European Parliament and confusion at the very least .
. ( NL ) One of the reasons why the Dutch Labour Party delegation voted against this report is the absence of a tax compromise .
The Dutch Labour Party delegation hopes that the Council will soon be prepared to negotiate and to examine the willingness in the EP to incorporate a facility for additional national taxes and to regulate with effect from 2004 .
The Dutch Labour Party delegation hopes that a Statute for Members for which it can vote does nonetheless come about .
. ( DA ) I consider Parliament 's adoption of the proposals in the Rothley report to be unlawful , since they would alter primary law .
Their adoption is particularly unwise , since it rejects the national taxation of European Parliament salaries and fails to put the travel scheme in order .
I have not been able to take part in the vote today , since I am to participate in the meeting of the European Convention in Brussels .
Unlike the rest of my group , I have decided to abstain from voting on this report .
The main reason for this stems from the decision to raise the honourable Members ' salaries by a considerable amount .
In the current social and political climate , not just in France but throughout Europe , this decision is unacceptable and unjustifiable .
We are , first and foremost , representatives of the people .
As such , our priorities are to promote the interests of our citizens and give concrete form to their expectations in Europe , especially in terms of increased democracy .
I have decided to abstain rather than vote against the report because I believe that adopting a single statute for Members is a positive step towards a more united Europe , towards a truly shared destiny , and towards achieving equality for all .
I would , however , have preferred to see the goal of equal pay , which this report attempts to impose from the top down , become a priority for European legislators through the adoption of a minimum European wage .
It would thus affect our fellow citizens first and foremost .
Taking advantage of the fact that decision-making in the Council on the ' Statute for Members of the EP ' has changed from unanimity to qualified majority as a result of the Treaty of Nice , the EP is once again insisting on a proposal that contains aspects with which we disagree .
One such aspect is that of establishing the same monthly parliamentary allowance for all Members , whichever country they represent .
Members of the EP are elected in national constituencies . Consequently they are , and must remain bound to these constituencies .
Establishing a single monthly rate of payment forms part of a federalist view of a Member of the European Parliament 's mandate , seeking to transform today 's national Members of the EP into future ' European MPs ' . This is a vision that we do not share .
Furthermore , as we have emphasised , the social realities in the countries of the EU differ greatly , making it inevitable that implementing this measure will lead to profound inequalities and differences between the salary level of workers and that of representatives and public office-holders in various countries , such as Portugal .
This would be quite incomprehensible .
Accordingly , the salary of a Member of the EP must be based on the salary of Members of the national parliament of the country in which they have been elected .
Hence our vote against the report .
. ( FI ) Ulpu Iivari , Reino Paasilinna and Riitta Myller , members of the Finnish Social Democratic Party delegation , voted in favour of the Members ' Statute , as we believe it is essential to have one , and voting against it would mean the present system would continue .
It has been our aim all along to have a system where travel expenses are reimbursed where actual costs are incurred .
A condition of final acceptance is , however , that the compromise allowing Finland the right to tax the pay of its Members of the European Parliament which arose during the Belgian Presidency be applied to the Statute .
We also hope that Parliament will be prepared in negotiations with the Council to abandon any designs it might have concerning parliamentary immunity that it is impossible for the Council to accept .
. ( NL ) The reimbursement of Members ' travel expenses must be based on the expenses actually incurred and all Members must receive the same salary .
Many of the things that Parliament is adopting with the Rothley report on the Statute for Members of the European Parliament , such as the late entry into force in 2009 and the subordination of future fellow Members from the accession countries , I do not like .
I would also have liked to see the majority of this House show a greater readiness to compromise .
It will now be very difficult to bring the governments and MEPs into line with one another .
We in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , however , are prepared to make compromises , because in the end statutory provision has to be made for these things .
Moreover , it is the last chance before enlargement to regulate the Statute for Members and with it a better travel expenses scheme .
All things considered I have therefore voted for the Rothley report because keeping things as they are is not acceptable .
No , this statute is not perfect .
Yes , this text is only a compromise .
No , this project does not provide a complete response to the lengthy battle fought over the best part of the last five years by the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ; but yes , I voted in favour : in favour of reform , in favour of the future , and in favour of setting the truly European aspects of this House in stone .
For that is what is at stake : finding an end to the odyssey on which we embarked in 1979 , in search of a common statute , a statute to do away with inequality and injustice .
How on earth can we continue to justify the fact that German and Italian Members earn four times the wages of their Portuguese and Spanish colleagues ?
That is why I congratulate myself on the agreement reached on Articles 16 and 18 .
The former establishes the principle of equal pay for all , and the latter confirms Community tax as the benchmark .
For all that , I regret the fact that this House did not , yesterday , state the rights and responsibilities of its honourable Members loud and clear .
Neither did it adopt a totally transparent system for the refund of expenses , particularly travel expenses .
The repeal of the effective compromise negotiated during the Belgian Presidency in October 2001 is also a bad sign .
That compromise gave Member States the right to impose an additional national tax , should they desire to do so .
These are all highly controversial questions , which threaten to delay the adoption of the Statute for Members until the twelfth of never .
. ( SV ) I have today voted against the European Parliament 's report on a new Statute for Members now that the Commission has issued its opinion following yesterday 's vote in plenary .
The proposal was nonetheless approved by 323 votes , with 167 against and 39 abstentions .
The new Statute would not lead to increased openness unless , instead of the current system involving flat-rate payments , there were a system for the reimbursement of travel costs whereby it was the actual costs that were reimbursed .
Certainly , Parliament 's Praesidium decided on 29 May 2003 to investigate how a new system for the reimbursement of travel costs could be designed , but that does not solve the problem .
A decision to refund actual costs should enter into force automatically at the same time as a new Statute for Members is brought into operation .
A new Statute for Members must aim at fairness , transparency and efficiency .
In the future too , I should ideally like to see the salary level of Members of the European Parliament set in relation to the levels applicable in the national parliaments .
Because MEPs live in , and represent , their Member States , tax should , in the future too , be deducted on a national basis so that account might be taken of different countries ' costs of living and social insurance systems .
. ( SV ) I have not taken part in the vote because I find it absurd that we ourselves must decide on our salaries and other financial conditions .
. ( NL ) For a century , the generation and distribution of electricity was largely kept out of the hands of commerce .
It is not a product that you are free to choose whether or not to buy .
Every household needs electricity and no one can run the risk of its non-availability .
Distribution takes place along lines under the public highway .
The public services too , such as hospitals , schools and trams , use a lot of electricity .
You cannot leave all this to a company whose primary interest is to make a profit ; it is best left to local or regional government monopolies , on condition that they are subject to democratic control by a chosen parliamentary body that watches over environmental and consumer interests .
In the Netherlands we now have wide experience of the transfer of the electricity supply to the private sector .
Environmentally friendly investments for the small-scale generation of electricity have been neglected or ruled out in favour of the importation of nuclear power .
Now all that counts is which electricity can be produced or purchased cheapest .
Payment for green power , which consumers are allowed to buy from a different producer from their traditional regional supplier , usually leads to chaos .
I support Mr Turmes , our rapporteur , in his attempt to counteract false information about green power or misuse of money for termination of nuclear energy , but that is insufficient .
Once again , the majority of EP Members are choosing to call for the total liberalisation of the natural gas sector and also accepting the positions put forward by the UNICE in relation to this aim of the so-called ' Lisbon Strategy ' .
One example is the EP 's proposal for the role of national regulatory authorities ( NRAs ) and of a ' European ' regulatory authority , which shall have the task of completing the internal market and of ensuring effective competition . This proves that the intention is to transfer to supposedly ' independent ' authorities an entire set of competences that should fall to national democratically elected institutions .
In other words , the EP feels that not even national States would have a regulatory role , with this being given to these so-called regulatory authorities and the European Commission .
This intention is so outrageous that it has met with the Council 's resistance .
In general terms , this is an attempt to impose competition rules on all sectors that involve public service , providing incentives for privatisation , calling into question the guarantee of security of supply , investment capacity , equal access to the best prices and to a high-quality service and will lead to the deterioration of employees ' rights in the sectors in question .
Hence our group 's motion to reject the common position . It is significant that our motion was rejected by the majority of EP Members , including those from the PS , the PSD and the CDS-PP .
Liberalising the electricity sector is another of the aims set out under what is known as the Lisbon Strategy .
As for the gas sector , the EP has acted as the spokesperson for the interests of the European employers ' confederation , UNICE .
Energy is a strategic sector that is crucial to the sovereignty of any state .
Guarantees of its integrity will be called into question as a result of the current liberalisation .
In a few years , the EU 's electricity sector - as the rapporteur states - will be dominated by between five and eight companies , obviously from the countries with the most highly developed economies .
This is an attempt to impose rules of competition and to encourage privatisations , calling into question the security of supply , investment capacity , equal access to the best prices and to a high-quality service and will lead to the deterioration of employees ' rights in the sectors in question .
This is why our parliamentary group tabled a motion rejecting the common position and various proposals for amendments seeking to mitigate the negative aspects of the recommendation , not least with regard to ensuring respect for public service obligations , for the environment , for the specific characteristics of the outermost regions , and for protection for domestic consumers and small consumers .
Significantly , the majority of EP Members , including those from the PES , the PSD and the CDS-PP , has rejected the motion to reject the common position .
. ( PT ) Some amendments that have been tabled suggest that the increase in installed nuclear energy capacity in Europe is crucial to compliance with the Kyoto Protocol .
This argument is irrational and lacks objectivity .
All the information available suggests that the opposite is true .
The European Union already reduced its greenhouse gas emissions by 4 % between 1990 and 1999 , and will be able to fulfil the remaining reduction quota by 2012 ( 4 % ) through low-cost measures .
According to data provided by the European Commission , it is possible to comply with the Kyoto Protocol by implementing measures costing less than EUR 20 per tonne of CO2 .
The measures proposed by the European Commission ( the European Programme for Climate Change and the Framework Directive on Emissions Trading ) contain no reference to promoting nuclear energy .
Unlike my political group , I have voted in favour of the amendments to block 3 .
I thought it was vital to support Amendment No 1 , as it introduces a reference to the precautionary principle .
Even though I understand the rapporteur 's desire to bring this legislative procedure to a close after the second reading ( and I would like to draw attention to his hard work and great receptiveness of mind ) , I am unable to vote against the reference to the precautionary principle .
I believe this principle to be essential and necessary for a debate as sensitive , and as far from a resolution , as the one on genetically modified organisms .
The Council has refused to incorporate this reference to the precautionary principle fully into its Common Position , mentioning it in the preamble .
That is the Council 's decision and I respect it .
I do feel , however , that the European Parliament should not assume the Council 's old stance against the reference to the precautionary principle .
The principle is , in any case , covered by Community legislation .
To reject it accords GMO a privileged status .
It sets a precedent which other occupational sectors might exploit in order to challenge future political proposals and guidelines .
It is a retreat via the negation of a principle , but it masquerades as progress all the same .
We are aware that this regulation , in conjunction with others , such as the regulation on traceability and labelling , constitute steps towards lifting the moratorium on GMOs .
The pressure exerted by the US , which has now lodged a complaint against the European Union at the WTO , and by the huge biotechnology multinationals seeking to remove the moratorium and to achieve free trade in GMOs , is becoming increasingly clear .
The proposals contained in this report , however , as at first reading , make significant improvements to the text .
An agreement in this field could be important to speeding up the process of ratifying the Cartagena Protocol on biological safety and biodiversity .
Furthermore , the proposals suggest that GMO imports cannot take place without the prior written consent of the importing country and that the signing of agreements and conventions cannot lead to a level of protection lower than that provided by the current regulation and by the protocol .
These proposals also require the exporter to comply with national regulatory frameworks and to guarantee the public right to information . These proposals consequently warrant our support .
As the report suggests , the precautionary principle must be observed , rejecting the subordination of this principle to commercial considerations , given the potential impact of GMOs .
Because there is no strong and integrated legislation on genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) that is able to provide guarantees for consumers and industry , the process of granting marketing authorisations at EU level has been suspended for the last three years .
I welcome the legislation on the traceability and labelling of GMOs , because it makes it possible to register and monitor GMO movements on the market and the movements of food for human and animal consumption produced from them .
This will help consumers to make their choices and will facilitate the process of withdrawing a product , should this be deemed necessary .
As everyone knows , the overall aim of the Cartagena Protocol on Biological Safety adopted on 29 January 2000 , consists of contributing to ensuring an adequate level of protection in the field of the safe transfer , handling and use of genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) produced by modern biotechnology , that may have adverse effects on the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity , taking also into account risks to human health , including cross-border movements in particular .
In line with the position of the Portuguese Government , however , I believe it is important that we now undertake this exercise at European level , in order to ensure the most important factor in this matter , which is a high degree of consumer protection .
I therefore welcomed the adoption of the Council 's common position - and the approximation of positions that avoided the need for us to continue with a conciliation procedure - and , as such , the forthcoming entry into force of a regulation that is clear , technically secure and able to put the EU in a different position to the one that culminated , as a result of the diffuse nature of regulations , in the anti-GMO moratorium that led the USA to lodge a complaint with the World Trade Organisation .
I voted in favour because , following the shipwreck of the Prestige off the coast of Spain and the huge ecological disaster , immediate protection is required from single hull tankers by imposing an immediate timetable for withdrawing them from circulation .
The governments of the 15 should support these measures and ignore the pressure from any shipowners who are opposed out of self-interest to a necessary regulation to protect seas and shores .
We voted squarely in favour of the Piecyk report .
We also supported the Commission 's new proposal to speed up the introduction of double hull oil tankers and withdraw single hull tankers , as well as toughening safety restrictions .
This report should have been adopted a long time ago , as Philippe de Villiers indeed requested .
After the wreck of the Erika in 1999 , the International Maritime Organisation ( IMO ) drove the Commission to cut corners , however .
The Council and Parliament were weak enough to follow suit .
It took another wreck , the Prestige , to wake everyone up .
Today 's text is sounder .
Its scope should nevertheless be broadened .
It should apply not only to ships sailing under the flag of a Member State or putting in at one of our ports , but also to any oil tanker sailing in our economic area .
It will also be necessary to monitor the performance of double hulls closely over time .
Moreover , as I said last part-session during the debate on environmental liability , we must remedy the International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund 's inability to provide adequate compensation .
It is also urgent that we put in place a compulsory insurance scheme operating on the polluter pays principle .
The safety of ships , crews and the environment cannot be effectively addressed with fragmentary measures , however important they are , such as the mandatory precondition of double hulls for tankers using ports in the Member States .
A real safety policy needs to combat the unaccountability of shipowners , apply substantive measures against infringements of the law , adjust operating positions to today 's enhanced requirements and help improve crews ' living and working conditions by safeguarding their rights and giving their trades union the power to intervene decisively .
Any arrangements must be introduced within the framework of the IMO and the ILO , which should play an essential role in international shipping , without accepting the philosophy of compromise with shipping interests .
A typical example of how such interests are served at the expense of the environment are the long transitional periods , without any real justification in terms of security of supply , and the exemption from the double hull requirement for ships over 500 - 600 tonnes .
The ? U is serving the unaccountability of shipowners in the best possible way .
One example is that the ship repair industry in Greece , a country with one of the biggest fleets in the world , has almost been wiped out .
Positive results against this policy will only be obtained by decisive fighting on the part of workers , seamen and interested regions , especially coastal regions .
. ( PT ) There is no shortage of substantial reasons and even imperatives for us to adopt increasingly stringent measures in the field of maritime navigation safety .
The occurrence , in a very short space of time , of two major disasters , the Erika and the Prestige and having to deal with the variety and gravity of their consequences showed us all how crucial it is for decisions to be taken in this field .
We have all become aware of the intolerable conditions under which many vessels still sail with dangerous and highly polluting loads .
For this reason , this new proposal is particularly appropriate given the much-vaunted requirement for double hulls .
Furthermore , and as the European Commission study was charged with demonstrating , rapidly eliminating single hull tankers , as is proposed , will not lead to a substantial reduction in capacity for oil and , as the rapporteur states , the capacity and international recognition of European shipyards could even benefit by having new vessels to build .
I also agree with the rapporteur 's assertion that we must extend the implementation of the proposals now proposed by the European Commission to the International Maritime Organisation , firmly promoting the necessary negotiations in this field .
I have therefore voted in favour of the report .
About time !
We have known since December 1999 , since the Erika disaster and its tragic economic , social and environmental consequences , that withdrawing single hull oil tankers was an inescapable and urgent priority .
Shortly before the Erika disaster , I requested the introduction of a timetable for scrapping all single hull oil tankers by 2010 .
At the time , I was told that was impossible .
All of a sudden , though , it has become possible , in the wake of the Prestige disaster ?
If it is to be effective , however , this measure should not be confined to the European Union .
Rather , the International Maritime Organisation should intervene to make it international law .
The Member States most threatened by oil spills , especially France , should make every effort to achieve this from now on .
They should not hesitate to exert unilateral pressure either , as France and Spain did so judiciously at Malaga .
I share the rapporteur 's concern to improve the fleet of ships carrying dangerous cargoes .
According to the Commission 's own figures , more than 4 000 ships are classed as hazardous .
We must oblige shipowners to withdraw these floating dustbins as a matter of urgency , and compel them to adhere to stricter technical and social codes of practice .
Nevertheless , in the light of the recent Erika and Prestige disasters , I think that the European Union is still shrinking back too much from the unavoidable battle for maritime safety .
The proposed waiting times are still unsatisfactory : the seaworthy age limit for Prestige-type ( category one ) oil tankers has been fixed at 23 years from 2005 ; for category two and three ships ( mostly built between 1982 and 1986 ) , the age limit is 28 years from 2010 .
Even with these provisions , the risk of disaster is still with us .
It would have been better if all dangerous ships had been prevented from putting to sea , and shipyard production shifted by public policy towards the construction and development of safe , modern ships .
The European Union should have been given new tools in its struggle against the laxity of the system .
Above all , the Member States should make genuine commitments to implementing existing legislation .
This is the minimum required to stop all the restrictions from sounding like a wish list .
The protection of juveniles is a priority for guaranteeing the conservation of fish stocks and their long-term sustainability .
Improving technical catch measures must therefore be seen as an essential component of the common fisheries policy and must be considered in conjunction with the other instruments for the fisheries sector .
We therefore agree with the rapporteur 's proposals , specifically when he states that , since it is fishermen who are the interested parties in these measures , and since no one knows these matters better than they do , they should be fully involved in the process of defining these measures .
In fact , we have always called for social dialogue with the sector to be improved , as demonstrated by our proposals in the opinion that we delivered under the 2003 budget procedure .
We still believe , however , that Regional Advisory Councils might not be the most appropriate instruments for guaranteeing this participation .
What is really needed is for the common fisheries policy to be properly decentralised .
We agree with the rapporteur 's assertion that technical mistakes in the drafting of this Commission proposal , particularly in a regulation for legislative consolidation involving extremely technical and sensitive matters , call into question the Commission 's technical competence in these matters and heighten the lack of confidence fishermen have in the Commission .
This proposal by the European Commission , consolidating existing regulations and to some extent introducing new measures , specifically with regard to cod and whiting , is important .
I think that we were on the right track when , in the technical regulation in force , Member States were authorised to adopt measures in certain emergency situations and in relation to their own vessels , with the proviso that they could not be less stringent than the requirements laid down in Community law .
Like the rapporteur , I regret the fact that this proposal does not retain these provisions . Like the rapporteur , I also hope that this omission will be rapidly rectified by the Commission , as well as the omission of any reference to the Regional Advisory Councils ( RACs ) .
The Commission must understand that a sustainable and viable fisheries sector is only possible if it has the trust and cooperation of the fishermen and pays attention to the points of view of the parties concerned .
In fact , this omission would run counter to what Commissioner Fischler promised fishermen in a speech in London , when he urged them to ' come and participate and make sure that they become full players in the fisheries management process ' .
The report would have been better if more of the amendments tabled in plenary had been adopted , but , for the reasons I have briefly summarised , I too ultimately voted in favour of it .
Mr President , on the issue of fishing , there is a constant tendency in this Parliament to confuse privileges with conservation .
I agree that there must be areas in which special conservation measures must be taken , and even that there must be no fishing in them for many years .
But this conservation has nothing to do with the fact that in certain areas there are States who enjoy the privilege of fishing and others for whom it is banned .
In this regard , the case of the Irish Box for example , or other areas in European Community waters , that is , continental waters , is not the same as the case of the Azores .
In the Azores , the problem is that they do not have a continental shelf , and those islands must be granted a privilege so that they can survive by means of fishing .
In the Irish Box or other areas , we are talking about a privilege granted to several States in violation of Community law .
In this regard , this confusion has been exploited to achieve a vote whose result I believe to be profoundly wrong .
A clear sign needed to be sent to the Council Presidency , because the proposal for a compromise , supported by the Commission and promoted by Spain , intended to create a single Atlantic zone to manage the fishing effort without dividing up the current conservation areas , not only fails to contribute to a sustainable policy in the field of fisheries , but would also have harmful effects , not least for Portugal , in terms of the conservation measures already in place and in socio-economic terms , both for the fleet and for regions that are dependent on the sector .
We therefore helped to ensure that Amendment No 20 to this report was adopted , and we are fully behind it , since it proposes to continue with the current regulations for a period of ten years , after which , the arrangements will be assessed once again .
I wish to state , despite the fact that all of the other proposals for amendments to the regulation have been rejected , that the Committee on Fisheries adopted our proposal to extend the limit of access to the exclusive economic area of the Azores and Madeira to 200 miles .
The Council must also take account of this proposal in its negotiations for a compromise .
The approval by a very large majority of Amendment No 20 was crucial , since it sends a powerful message from the European Parliament about respect for previously established basic principles and valid agreements . It is also crucial because it vigorously rejects murky political manoeuvres , disguised as clever legal tricks and clearly based on a false assumption , in order to serve the interests of one Member State - Spain .
This would clearly damage the conservation of fisheries resources in particularly sensitive areas of the European coast . Incidentally , it would be completely unacceptable if , through a revision of the Regulation , the great efforts to preserve resources made in these sensitive areas by some Member States , Portugal and Ireland , to be specific , were ignored .
It is , therefore , hard to understand the restrictions that have for a long time been imposed on the fishermen of these countries , paradoxically paving the way to the further depletion of fisheries resources .
I also strongly support Amendments Nos 8 and 13 , which gave appropriate treatment to specific problems facing the sea around the Azores , which are of interest to Europe in general and to the Azores in particular .
In the end , however , it was not necessary to vote for them .
I hope that the Commission and the Council heed - and respect in substance - the extremely clear sign given by Parliament and respect the voice of those who are elected by Europe 's citizens .
.
( NL ) Following the accession of Spain and Portugal to the European Union , a period of seven years was laid down in 1995 in which the fleets of these countries were denied access to , for example , the North Sea and the Irish Box .
Last December this restrictive measure lapsed .
In this report the Commission is coming forward with a new regulation to regulate the access of , for example , Spanish fishing vessels to the Irish Box .
The attempt by the Commission to eliminate discrimination between the Member States in fleet access is laudable , but it is the fish stocks that lose out .
On the accession of Spain and Portugal it was impossible to foresee what disastrous changes would overtake fish stocks .
Since 1996 the opportunities to catch fish in the area in question have fallen sharply .
The Commission is itself - please note - of the opinion that the maximum level of fishing in these areas requires urgent revision or reduction .
None of this is consistent .
Equal opportunities for all Member States is a fine starting point , but better still is a full sea in which there is enough to fish .
That must be our first priority .
A revision of the allocation formula can therefore only be considered when fish stocks have been restored to sufficient levels of abundance .
It is not acceptable either legally , morally or politically that an amendment in the European Parliament or a report during a consultation procedure can extend the provisions of a Treaty on accession to the EU such as the one relating to Spain and Portugal , as is the case with Amendment No 20 from the UEN Group or Amendments Nos 21 to 30 .
Furthermore , I believe that Amendment No 20 is inadmissible within the meaning of Rule 140 ( 1 ) a ) and b ) of the EP 's Rules of Procedure .
It is unjust , discriminatory and I believe illegal .
I have therefore had to vote against the report bearing the name of the Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries , Mr Stevenson , but in reality produced by Mr Ó Neachtain .
If the Council does not remedy it , it will be the Court of Justice of the European Communities that has to declare the report approved today contrary to Community law , and it will thereby be making the final decision , in the event that the opinion issued today by the EP is followed .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The session was suspended at 1.15 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Mr President , as far as Turkey as a candidate Member State is concerned , the door is open , but the road is hard .
That is the message of my report .
For the other candidate Member States that was really self-evident .
They and their citizens have had a lot of trouble in reaching the finishing line and up to the last committee meetings comments were still being made about them in clear tones urging completion of the work .
Turkey is no exception .
There is no reason therefore to give this country special treatment on account of its size or its strategic position .
Turkey does of course have quite different problems from the other candidates .
These problems are mainly in the area of the Copenhagen political criteria .
More than ever perhaps the emphasis in this report is placed on the background to or deeper causes of the political shortcomings which usually manifest themselves in violations of classical freedom rights and of fundamental human rights .
It is also to do with the fact that the Turkish State is based on a philosophy that was developed in the 1920s , a period in which Europe did not provide many pleasant examples from which to draw your ideas .
The criticism of Turkey concerns the structures of the State , the dominant political position of the army , the National Security Council , which is dominated by the military , the nationalism that leads to suppression of ethnic , religious and cultural minorities and the priority for collective security and collective interests over individual human rights , which again and again gives cause for complaint .
The army also has a very strong influence in education , broadcasting and the business community and it is very important that this is also recognised in part in Turkey 's latest reform packages .
In the contact with Turkey it is always a question of who are we talking to ?
Are we talking to the government and the majority in the parliament or are we in fact talking to the representatives of what people call the ' deep State ' , the high generals and the high established bureaucracy ?
Apart from these problems we also mention those on the borders , with both Cyprus and Armenia and possibly with Iraq .
The lack of a functioning social midfield is also apparent .
There is little room for the trade union movement .
Religious communities , even the Islamic , are under strict state control or are having a hard time .
Other candidates had leeway to make up here too .
The idea of candidate membership is that the country concerned develops into a Member State like the others .
It must not for example make any difference in legal position whether you live in Diyarbakir or in Rotterdam .
If that is the case , then it is impossible to sell membership to our citizens .
A directly elected parliament may see this more readily and with greater concern than a council of ministers .
We therefore invite the Council to be just as clear in its policy towards Turkey as this Parliament and not to cling to symbols and symbolic dates .
Clarity has been the express concern of this report .
It is not honest out of a need for appreciation to remain silent about a series of objections only to conjure them up again at a later date .
Turkey has to know where it stands now .
That means radical changes , as other candidates have also experienced .
Which is why we warmly applaud the plan to draw up a new Constitution , while expressing the wish that the political values that are supported in other Member States will be taken as a starting point .
Furthermore , the army must relinquish its present dominant position and be brought back to a form and function that is usual in other Member States .
This has consequences for the National Security Council and for the state security courts .
Amendments to the law that have in mind the conversion from a military nation , as people write to me , into a civil nation , must prove that their objectives are being achieved in practice .
This is a question of mentality and culture .
The Union must therefore focus its support on actual fulfilment of the political criteria , that is , on retraining and exchange programmes for government officials , especially those in the police , and of lawyers who are involved in courts of justice , and so on .
Torture , for example , must now really be over and the return of the expelled and refugees to their villages must not be obstructed by the so-called village guards .
Freedom of religion must not be a dead letter .
Numerous frustrating government measures can in fact be abolished in a short time and it is a constant source of amazement that this does not happen .
Cultural rights must not be recognised in dribs and drabs , but convincingly and generously .
For a while it seemed that the government would indeed be able to establish its authority and we had also hoped that it would , for example , be able to make good its intention to resolve the Cyprus issue on the basis of the UN plan .
That unfortunately proved not to be the case .
A renewed successful attempt will show whether the army is indeed finding its normal role .
Mr President , I am pleased with the broad support for the report that exists in this Parliament .
I have also cast a generous eye over the amendments and where possible given them a plus .
We have agreed with Mr Swoboda that we can accept an amendment from the radical and green corner , concerning the willingness of Turkey to fulfil its tasks under the reforms , as an addition , not as a replacement .
If it is not wanted as an addition , we shall vote against .
But if it is presented as an addition , then we can say , ' yes ' to it .
I otherwise hope that the open talk of the debate about religion , culture and politics is not smothered by deletions in paragraph 3 , as that is a paragraph that could simply bring this discussion to a tremendously good end .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to take the opportunity of the adoption of the O ? stlander report today in order to refer to relations between the European Union and Turkey and developments in the accession strategy for Turkey .
As you know , Turkey is an important partner of the Union , with which we have maintained contractual relations for a very long time .
You can go back as far as 1963 .
However , the turning point in this 30-year period was the European Council in Helsinki , when Turkey was acknowledged as a candidate country for accession to the Union on the basis of the same criteria that apply to the other candidate countries .
In Helsinki , the aim of the accession strategy adopted was to help Turkey on its course towards integration and included reinforced political dialogue , pre-accession aid and a procedure for analytical examination of the application of the acquis .
The cornerstone of this pre-accession strategy was the partnership of March 2001 , with principles , priorities and interim objectives which would allow Turkey to meet the Copenhagen criteria .
Within this framework , it is necessary to emphasise that important elements are not only the adaptation of legislation in relation to the Copenhagen criteria , but also its material application .
And the Commission has clearly underlined this point , mainly in the annual progress reports .
We have recently monitored certain important internal developments in Turkey .
A new government has taken over power , with strong support from the people .
The new prime minister , Mr Erdogan , has clearly stated that he intends to continue and strengthen the reform process , so that Turkey meets the Copenhagen criteria .
Recent surveys have also shown that this objective is shared by an important majority of public opinion in Turkey .
And I think that this political will is , you might say , reflected in actions and not just words .
At the Copenhagen Council , the Union itself recognised that the new Turkish Government was resolved to proceed with further reform and it urged it in particular to deal quickly with all the weaknesses which continue to exist in the field of political criteria , in relation both to legislation and to the application of legislation .
Within this framework , the Union encouraged Turkey to actively continue the reform process .
If the European Council in December 2004 , based on the Commission 's report and recommendation , decides that Turkey meets the political criteria of Copenhagen , the Union will renew accession negotiations with Turkey without delay .
That was , as you all know , a very weighty decision for the future of relations between the European Union and Turkey .
We hope that this prospect will act as a catalyst and encourage Turkey to adopt and apply the necessary reforms .
However , I should like at this point for us to see what the situation looks likes six months after Copenhagen .
Ladies and gentlemen , during the Greek Presidency , we have worked systematically to implement the elements of the accession strategy in accordance with the decisions taken in Copenhagen .
The revised partnership adopted by the General Affairs and External Relations Council in April 2003 is of particular importance in helping Turkey to deal with the main issues in its attempt to meet the political criteria .
A revised national programme for the adoption of the acquis , with clearly defined targets , is expected to constitute Turkey 's planned response to the new partnership .
Similarly , we have held three political dialogue meetings , one of which at ministerial level , when we had an opportunity to see exactly what is expected of Turkey up to the end of 2004 .
The Presidency and the Commission have planned another two meetings in the more specific aim of examining progress in meeting the political criteria .
The Association Council was convened in April at ministerial level and evaluated the progress both of the pre-accession strategy and the status of the partnership .
At this point , I should like , guided by the recently adopted revised partnership , to refer with greater clarity to the main issues that we expect Turkey to deal with up to its evaluation in 2004 .
Of course , this is not intended either to discount the Commission evaluation within the framework of this year 's , and more importantly , next year 's progress report , nor does it have to do with any other criteria over and above the Copenhagen criteria .
The partnership was the product of valuable experience from two years of helping Turkey to adopt political reforms .
This means that efficient account was taken of lessons from recent years , following discussion , both by the Commission and by the Council , which adopted it with slight changes .
What I want to say is that , as we see it , there are two basic issues for promoting Turkey 's essential candidature status .
First , democracy has to operate in this country without the obstacles of the past and , secondly , the institutional changes voted through by parliament need to be translated into real administrative and judicial practice .
Political control by the parliament and via a democratically controlled government of all the institutions and bodies of state is , therefore , a basic issue which Turkey will need to address effectively .
This also involves the simple legal adaptation of the rules and raises telling and very material issues in connection with relations between the elected government and the army .
The Union has also publicly referred to this issue and emphasised that there cannot be practices that result in deviations from the Copenhagen criteria and we have noticed that there have recently also been corresponding examples with reference to internal and / or external policy .
On the question of human rights and the rule of law , there has undoubtedly been progress , even in sectors which a short time ago were considered prohibited .
We must not forget that the abolition of the death penalty and the introduction of the right to use and teach minority languages are a big step forward .
And Turkey itself appears to wish to proceed at a fast pace and to achieve the start of accession negotiations by set deadlines .
It is important that we know this ambition , for the realisation of which quite a lot still needs to be done .
At the Association Council last April , the Union clarified the fact that basic outstanding issues in the field of political criteria require Turkey 's immediate attention .
These issues mainly include , by way of example , numerous accusations of torture chambers in the country , references to arbitrary arrests and practices of detaining people without judicial proceedings in south-eastern Turkey , contradictory judgments in relation to the punishment of those guilty of torture , court cases which demonstrate that there is still no uniform interpretation and application of provisions relating to the freedom of expression , and the regime concerning religious foundations and communities , which remains particularly restrictive .
We have already expressed our concern about the way in which religious foundations are treated and we continue to hope that the Turkish side will keep its promises , so that , with the necessary additional reforms , the problems that have arisen can be dealt with in accordance with international norms .
Nor has the right been safeguarded for all Turkish citizens , irrespective of their ethnic origin , to enjoy full cultural rights .
The restrictive nature of the recent regulations in the field of radio and television broadcasting and teaching in languages other than Turkish appears to be hampering the application of the August 2002 reforms .
There are also additional elements in relation to the human rights situation .
These are the recent attack by the security forces on the Turkish Human Rights Association , continuing deaths from hunger strikes in high security gaols and the uncertain outcome of the case pending against Leila Zana , which we have also discussed here in Parliament .
All these issues are elements in an imperfect reform process in which reforms formally adopted have not always resulted in practice in the improvement to the situation which had been hoped for .
I could also refer to the report by Amnesty International on Turkey , which paints a picture of a human rights situation with numerous problems , but there is no reason now to go into that in detail .
In addition , however , I wish to mention that there are important priorities which are reflected in the text of the revised partnership and which we expect Turkey to take into serious account .
They cover important sectors of the economic criteria and I think that they also correspond to the stated intention of the Turkish Government to improve the economic situation in the country .
They also cover the important chapter of justice and internal affairs , in which we are looking forward to improved cooperation from the Turkish side and are promoting the conclusion of a Community readmission agreement .
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to point out that there are another two basic priorities which also have an important position in the partnership .
They relate to Cyprus and Greek-Turkish relations .
Despite the fact that efforts by the United Nations Secretary-General to resolve the Cyprus problem ended in an impasse in the Hague , his plan is still on the table .
The Secretary-General has pointed out that , if a solution is to be found , there must be genuine political commitment to his proposals and a clear timetable for completing negotiations .
The spring Council expressed its regret that efforts by the Secretary-General had failed .
The Union vigorously supports the continuation of the good offices of the Secretary-General and of the negotiations on the basis of his proposals .
We have called on all the interested parties to spare no effort in finding a fair , operational and viable solution and , more specifically , we have called on the Turkish Cypriot leadership to re-examine its position .
Within this framework , the priority of the Turkish partnership to support efforts to find an overall solution to the Cyprus question through the good offices of the Secretary-General and negotiations based on his proposals continues to be of decisive importance .
The President of the European Council also referred to this matter in recent public statements .
The government of the Republic of Cyprus has demonstrated in practice its will to facilitate such a solution .
The protocol on Cyprus attached to the Association Agreement also allows a margin for this development .
But our common will is to achieve something along these lines by 1 May 2004 .
The recent opening of the green line constitutes material proof that the two communities on the island can and will live and progress together .
However , practical changes imposed from below , by society , are no substitute for institutional solutions .
These must come about and only thus will Cyprus safeguard the new horizon to which it is entitled after so many years .
The Union and we , as the Presidency and as a Member State , support the need to find a solution on the basis of the Annan plan .
As far , then , as the question of a peaceful solution to the differences is concerned , a change in the atmosphere of Greek-Turkish relations has already been noted in various sectors .
Exploratory contacts between the two ministries of foreign affairs started in March 2002 .
Discussions are continuing between senior officials .
The improved climate has resulted in increased bilateral exchanges and a series of agreements .
However , on the other side , the Turkish side , certain practices are being observed , such as by the Turkish air force , which are out of keeping with the aim of deeper relations between Turkey and the Union .
We are looking forward to further progress in this sector on the basis of the principle of a peaceful solution to the differences in accordance with the Helsinki conclusions and the relative priority of the partnership .
As decided in Helsinki , the Council will examine the situation in relation to the outstanding differences and , more importantly , their repercussions on the integration process , with a view to promoting their settlement through the International Court in the Hague by the end of 2004 at the latest .
In closing , allow me to welcome once again Parliament 's acute interest in the integration strategy for Turkey .
We shall continue to cooperate with a view to repeating here the clear success which accompanied the political message of enlargement : extension of the area of peace , stability and prosperity and the abolition of the dividing lines of the past .
We especially welcome the fact that the policy for the enlargement of the Union is continuing and is a basic incentive for countries , especially candidate countries such as Turkey , prompting them to further reforms in order to safeguard the values and principles I referred to earlier .
We also welcome the fact that this objective is also the stated wish of the Turkish people and the policy of its elected government .
We are looking forward to the necessary progress being achieved by the deadlines set , so that we can safeguard a positive and auspicious future for relations between the Union and Turkey .
Mr President , Turkey has won the Eurovision Song Contest , but has not yet scored enough points for the integration festival .
Our Turkish friends have undeniably made progress on very many fronts in recent years .
If the country meets the Copenhagen criteria , the European Union will have to keep to the promises it has made .
I am pleased that , in his well thought-out and sympathetic report , the Christian Democrat Mr Oostlander recognises that the universal values of democracy , constitutional state and human rights can very well be accepted and defended in a country with a clear Muslim majority .
It is crucially important for us that Turkey develops quickly into a fully-fledged democracy , in which the armed forces are subordinate to elected politicians .
It is for this reason that the Turkish National Security Council with its present powers and in its present form must be dissolved .
Many quarters point to the important role of the military in guarding the secular State .
It is said to act as a bulwark against rising Muslim fundamentalism .
I should like to point out however that it is not only the task of the military to keep Muslim radicalism at bay , but of all responsible leaders .
As far as necessary the structure of the State must be adapted to anchor all the democratic requirements .
We therefore support the reforms of the political and legal system the Erdogan government has in mind .
We are naturally very curious about the precise details of the new Constitution .
This is not a matter of more or less Kemalism , but simply of the compatibility with universal standards and the demands of EU membership .
We are glad that the Erdogan government has now tabled legislative proposals to strengthen freedom of speech and to permit the use of Kurdish in audiovisual resources and election campaigns .
Nonetheless I would , with Mr Oostlander , point to the fact that a successful legislative process is not sufficient in itself .
It comes down above all to its application in practice .
While the police remain free to torture prisoners and human rights continue to be violated , there is no way , as far as I am concerned , that the negotiations can begin .
A drastic softening of Turkey 's attitude to the Cyprus problem is also needed .
The failure of the Hague conference was attributable in no small part to the rigidity of the Turkish position .
Ankara should allow itself to be led more by the positive attitude of the Turks who live in Cyprus than by the negative pronouncements of their leader there .
Finally , Turkey will have to develop a policy of good neighbourliness with Armenia , which can then in due course lead to a political gesture of which the Armenians have such incredibly great need .
In December 2004 we are going to take stock , but there cannot yet be any question of accession in the near future .
There is still a very long way to go before the whole of Europe , away from the song festival , votes for Turkey .
Mr President , the most important work on Mr Oostlander 's report has already been done .
It was in fact done in committee .
Here what was - I have to say - an unbalanced report , whose tone was not always exactly upbeat , was transformed by radical amendments into one that is critical yet balanced , one in which a clear distinction is made between on the one hand what has been achieved and on the other the undoubtedly long , but concrete list of points that have still to happen .
Just three brief remarks about the text .
Mrs Uca , I am afraid that - if you listen - you have still not understood the precise implications of paragraph 3 .
In it the rapporteur in my view rightly makes a distinction between the Judaeo-Christian and humanist roots on the one hand , the universal values to which they have led on the other hand , and the fact that this is no barrier to the accession of an Islamic majority country - a formulation that I can share with all my heart .
My second remark is directed towards the Members from the GUE / NGL Group , whom I urge to stop doing the dirty work of the Armenia lobby .
In my eyes there is a carefully considered compromise on this question in the text and I honestly find the constant attempts to tighten the thumbscrews on this point increasingly irritating .
Finally , a third remark in response to the rapporteur 's proposal .
On behalf of my group I can agree to the addition to the text of Amendment No 11 instead of an improvement of the text .
Fellow Members , it is crucial in the debate to keep an eye on the background against which we are doing this now , the background against which this debate about the EU-Turkey relationship is taking place .
It is in fact one of a constant struggle between , on the one hand , the reformers - strong in the government and in Parliament - and on the other , the conservatives - strong in the army , the police and the judiciary .
In this struggle it is the task of the European Union , but also of the European Parliament , to - naturally - criticise the conservatives .
We are very good at this and we must carry on with it above all .
For example , if it is a question of banning the HADEP - unacceptable .
For example , if it is a question of descending on human rights organisations - indefensible .
For example , if it is a question of the refusal to give Layla Zana and her colleagues a really fair new trial .
An inseparable part of this criticism as far as I am concerned however is the support for the reformers and this we are occasionally inclined to forget .
For example , if it is a question of the new package of reform proposals that is now before the Turkish Parliament and in which , after long urging by the European Parliament , for example Article 8 of the Anti-Terrorism Act is actually deleted and in which Kurdish private media are actually being given the opportunity to broadcast .
We must take care to retain this balance and what I very much wish to avoid is to create the impression that in Turkey it was nothing , is nothing and never will be anything .
I believe that Turkey can implement the reforms , I think that they deserve our support .
Finally , Mr President , we will all have to answer the question of whether we want it to be successful .
Do we want the reformers to succeed ?
My answer is a heartfelt ' yes ' , because that is good for Turkey and for Europe .
Mr President , Mr Oostlander has written an honest , critical , as well as fair , report on Turkey 's application for membership of the European Union .
Political clarity is something from which , ultimately , all parties involved benefit .
I share the rapporteur 's view - and I would refer to paragraph 52 - that , at present , Turkey does not fulfil the conditions for the opening of accession negotiations .
The report underpins this frank conclusion in a convincing manner .
Three fundamental inconsistencies with the political criteria of Copenhagen - which are , after all , essential accession conditions - are all-important in this connection : firstly , the army 's dominant position in the Turkish state and society , for which , see paragraphs 7 , 8 and 9 ; secondly , the constant discrimination against religious minorities , particularly that of Christian denominations ( paragraph 39 ) ; and thirdly , the disturbing Kurdish issue , mentioned in paragraphs 34 , 35 and 43 .
Over the past few weeks , the dominant role of the Turkish armed forces was abundantly clear from the domestic media campaign about possible tensions within the army 's most senior ranks between those in favour of reform and critics of this necessary EU route .
The rumour machine says a great deal about the true relationship between civilian and military authorities .
The authority relationships in the EU Member States are completely different .
In summary , Brussels is outside Ankara 's military-political range for the time being .
Meanwhile , the governing AKP does claim freedom of religion for Muslims in its own country , but , according to Western Turkey experts , does not breathe a word about the self-same constitutional right for non-Muslims .
The urgent call on the Commission in paragraph 40 to draw up a comparative study between religious freedom in Turkey and the EU Member States is therefore opportune .
I would join the rapporteur in calling on the Turkish authorities to take the Kurdish South-East under their wing in earnest .
The Council and the Commission ought to give their 100 % backing to a comprehensive development plan for this seriously underdeveloped region .
A helping hand of this kind to Turkey would do the Kurdish citizens a world of good , both internally and externally , and I would add this for the sake of Mr Oostlander , even independently of EU relations .
Mr President , the situation of a country with the recognised status of candidate for accession to the European Union which allows old tubs full of illegal migrants to leave its ports , as happened a week ago , is peculiar .
How can a state which bears great resemblance to a police state , like the Turkish state , which is so effective at controlling political opponents and minorities , display such weakness and inefficiency when it comes to the traffickers of the highly powerful Turkish mafia ?
This is a point which warrants close attention on our part as we now prepare to assess the conditions for accession .
The report , which I consider to be very well-balanced , and I endorse the firm statement contained in paragraph 52 , makes no mention of the genocide of the Armenian people : this may be the result of intense lobbying , of pressure put on the Members of Parliament by the Turkish Government .
We must not forget the rights of the Diaspora - of the children of the victims of that holocaust - who are spread throughout Europe and are European citizens , just like us .
The situation , as described by the Human Rights Association , is certainly not encouraging : a political police which interrogates , tortures and rapes women , especially Kurdish women , and ongoing persecution of ethnic and religious minorities .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the report by Mr Oostlander on Turkey is one of the many which have been submitted from time to time to the European Parliament in connection with the various aspects of relations between this problematic country and the international community and the European Union in particular .
The Oostlander report , however , over and above its more general objective and balanced formulations , is mainly characterised by the clarity and frankness with which it notes and brands Turkey 's permanent weaknesses , shortcomings and imperfections in the fields of the rule of law , democratic governance , human and minority rights and its lawful international conduct .
In other words , something that should have been done a long time ago , instead of the practice to date of avoiding any candid description of reality for various reasons which serve political and other interests , by demonstrating a poorly conceived tolerance , by having two sets of weights and measures and by citing misleadingly labelled arguments , such as the strategic importance of Turkey , the beloved pretext of its trans-Atlantic protectors , or the alleged need to send positive messages to Ankara - as we heard for the umpteenth time just now - and so on .
The unproductive results of this essential beautification of what is a wholly reprehensible and censurable situation are now obvious and , with all due respect Mr President-in-Office , even the most dreamy apologists of the lenient treatment of and attempts at rapprochement with Turkey must be disappointed , because not even the positive messages which have been sent out for years have resulted in a correspondingly positive response from Turkey , nor has European tolerance been duly appreciated by the Turkish establishment which , on the contrary , has taken it - and perhaps rightly so - as encouragement and acceptance of its policy , whereas if the European position had been expressed earlier with the same courageous honesty of the Oostlander report , perhaps the prospects of the so-called European orientation of Turkey would be more auspicious and there would be fewer reasonable reservations and doubts as to the extent to which this country is legally entitled to be even a candidate for integration into the European family .
As it is better late than never , however , and with the even faint hope that Ankara will finally understand the real message of the European Parliament and will proceed accordingly in its choices , I unreservedly support the Oostlander report .
Mr President , I should like to take advantage of the debate on Mr Oostlander 's exceptional report on the accession of Turkey to the European Union to state once again that I remain a firm supporter of its accession .
This position on my part is based on the following reasons :
First , as a Greek I should like this neighbouring country of Greece 's to grow and develop the creative ability of its people within the democratic frameworks which the European Union safeguards all its members .
I believe that the Greek people and the Turkish people will have a unique opportunity to cooperate in the joint effort for a peaceful and prosperous Europe and mutually supportive , deeper bilateral relations between them .
Secondly , as a socialist , I should like to see a democratic Turkey safeguard institutional guarantees for all the freedoms of its citizens so that they can intervene creatively and unimpeded in the development of their society in accordance with the desires , expectations , inspirations and output of their work .
I believe that the economic and cultural development of Turkey as the consequence of the freedom of action of its citizens under the rule of law will have exponential benefits for Turkey itself to start with , for the European Union certainly and , without any shadow of a doubt , for rapprochement , understanding and cooperation on the part of the countries and peoples neighbouring Turkey .
Thirdly , there is a personal reason why I champion the accession of Turkey to the European Union .
I am convinced that the interventions of the military in the political life of a country , either directly or indirectly , do not solve any problems .
On the contrary , they cause problems and impasses to accumulate in their country .
I have no particular regard for or trust in nation-saving soldiers the world over , who see any free expression or action as a military target to be neutralised using every means , not excluding , of course , bans , imprisonment , torture and natural extermination .
Turkey 's European prospects therefore depend on the soldiers returning to their barracks and being supervised by the political leadership democratically elected by the people to govern them .
Thirty years ago , when a military junta took it upon itself to bring the Greek people to their senses from the excesses of their democratic excitement , the EEC , as it was then , froze the association agreement with Greece and that helped us considerably in restoring democratic normalcy to my country .
The personal reason I referred to earlier has to do with the fights and experiences of that era .
This is an opportunity for the Turkish people to enjoy a smooth transition , without sacrifice and tragic consequences , to a fully operational parliamentary democracy , a democracy with all its accompanying parameters .
The European challenge , therefore , also serves Turkey 's democratic prospects .
Turkey must interpret this challenge as a unique opportunity on its course towards Europe .
It is in its hands , its political leadership wants it and the Oostlander report lays down the preconditions for avoiding misunderstandings .
Mr President , Mr Oostlander 's report has been quite substantially modified at the committee stage , as other honourable Members have already commented .
It is now more balanced , and this is undoubtedly an improvement .
It is to be expected that a report like this one should make mention of a certain number of deficiencies and lapses , especially relating to issues of human rights and public freedoms .
On all these points , I believe one can only agree with the rapporteur .
On the other hand , I cannot agree as fully with one of the rapporteur 's personal preferences , which , though concealed for the most part by the amendments , is nevertheless latent and sometimes explicit .
I am referring to what I would term Mr Oostlander 's pathological aversion to secularism and the secular ideal .
This aversion also made an appearance in the brief oral presentation during which he mentioned what he called Turkey 's political philosophy .
Through a consideration of the historical context , he likened this philosophy to totalitarianism , one of the most monstrous forms of political oppression Europe has ever spawned .
In point of fact , Mr Oostlander , Kemalism was by no means a totalitarian system , and did not follow totalitarian models .
Kemalism , which was unquestionably a form of enlightened despotism , set out to modernise Turkey rapidly , drawing its inspiration to a not inconsiderable degree from Western European democratic models , most notably those of the separation of Church and State and secular republicanism .
You see , Mr Oostlander , as Turkey applies to join the European Union ( and it is natural for that application to give rise to discussion and even argument ) , any pride it can take today in its positive historical legacy is attributable to that very attempt to introduce our European secularism into a Muslim society .
For that , as some of the honourable Members have said , is the challenge , or one of the challenges , of the twenty-first century .
I do not think there is any justification for adopting the disgruntled attitude you have shown towards the secular ideal in recital G of your report .
Today 's Europe is rooted in that ideal , which stands out with great clarity , to my mind , in the Charter of Fundamental Rights we have accepted .
You ought to adopt the opposite stance , welcoming the secular ideal more warmly and valuing it more highly .
Mr President , Turkey had the right to apply for membership .
I believe that it will have the right to remain at the application stage for some time , for its progress is slow and must be monitored closely by us .
That does not give us licence simply to parrot the phrase ' some progress , but could do better if he tried ' , so beloved of schoolteachers .
We must not forget that application for membership of the European Union is akin , for Turkey , to the United States ' experience of the concept of the frontier at the end of the nineteenth century .
That kind of stirring , pioneering front provides the impetus to move further on .
From that perspective , we must encourage Turkey 's application .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Atatürk legacy is double-edged and somewhat ambiguous .
On the one hand there is the secular state , on the other the strong position of the Turkish army reflected in the power of the National Security Council , which implies military power over civilians .
In a real democracy , this should actually be the other way round .
How can the secular state in Turkey be maintained and democracy established ?
The army cannot be the ultimate guarantee for democracy , so far-reaching reforms are called for here .
As is abundantly clear from the Oostlander report , the country is not yet a democracy as long as human rights are violated and as long as the rights of minorities are not absolutely guaranteed .
Torture is a matter of daily practice .
The position of the Kurdish language , the exclusion of the Kurds from political life , or at least the attempt to exclude them , is evidence of the fact that they do not want a political solution to this important conflict of nationalities .
The threat of fundamentalism remains , although the AKP has adopted a reformist policy .
We recognise that major progress has been made in legislation , such as the abolition of capital punishment , but far-reaching reforms have not yet been carried out .
In paragraph 11 of the Oostlander report , it is suggested that serious work be done on constitutional matters .
Needless to say , this cannot be a condition , but it is still worthwhile to suggest that a new constitution be put in place , one that makes room for human rights , but also for the autonomous Kurdish community , and one in which the position of minorities is safeguarded .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Oostlander .
This is a splendid report , which lists all the critical points without offending Turkey .
It is fair and open , and I believe that anyone applying for accession has the right to be treated fairly and openly .
Second , I would like to contradict both of the previous speakers .
It is not - as is written in the minority opinion - about precepts of an almost parareligious nature ; clause 3 states specifically that fundamental European values , although based on the Judeo-Christian legacy , but also encompassing the values of the Enlightenment , do not stand in the way of the accession of a Muslim state in principle .
In view of what you , Mr Nordmann and Mrs Maes , have just said with regard to secularism in Turkey , I can only call upon you to inform yourselves !
There is no freedom of religion , and there is no secularism along French lines .
Secularism in Turkey means 130 000 state employees monitoring and harassing the non-Muslim minority .
There are no rights for Christian religions in Turkey .
Separation of state and religion is one thing , but guaranteeing freedom of religion is another .
It is an inalienable part of the European system of values that every individual should be allowed to live according to his or her religion and practise it .
In Turkey , this is not guaranteed .
Until 1954 , it was a punishable offence to provide religious instruction .
I therefore really entreat you to inform yourselves on this issue .
The other points mentioned were the role of the army , minority rights for the Kurds , the right to vote , in other words the fact that the 10 % hurdle is still in place , the imprisonment of persons motivated by political or moral conviction such as Leyla Zana , who will soon have spent ten years in prison for speaking freely , or the issue of the heritage of the Armenians and Syrians , which is not protected at present in Turkey .
It is a long list , and one that Turkey must work through .
That is its obligation .
I especially welcome the point made in clause 52 of the report that , in the light of the Copenhagen decision , this is not the start of negotiations .
For this to happen , the conditions must be met .
This will be reviewed at the end of 2004 .
I also agree with the fact that the review is not to take place now , but at the end of 2004 .
Furthermore , as an interim report , this report can in no way signify that Parliament has committed itself one way or another with regard to a later decision to approve or reject Turkey 's application for accession .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I truly hope - and I say this from the bottom of my heart - I truly hope that Turkey will one day be a democratic country , for then some people in this House will find it hard to formulate speeches .
My dear Mr Langen , I think very highly of you , but I have heard this speech often in the past , irrespective of what is happening in Turkey .
It will no longer be possible to make some of these speeches because they always say the same thing , no matter what is going on in Turkey .
In reality - and Commissioner Verheugen discussed this in some detail - we can see that a great deal is happening , but that it is not enough - quite right !
We want more , we criticise Turkey - quite right !
Please be honest , however , ladies and gentlemen ! For many of you - you have heard only four speeches - all the human rights and civil rights are nothing but a facade .
Many of you simply do not want Turkey . Just say it honestly , and then we will know where we stand .
Let us tell Turkey straight , and we can dispense with this performance !
Anything else really is just a performance .
As a Member of this House I am pleased that the Council and the Commission have a greater degree of competence as regards shaping foreign policy , because the Parliament of which I am a Member is not capable of doing so .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Nordmann expressed himself in the most eloquent terms .

Following the example of Mr Cashman just now , I would also like to declare my support for Mr Nordmann and , taking up his arguments , join him in expressing the conviction that there are many unspoken prejudices in this report .
Such prejudices should not figure in an objective account of the state of a nation .
Naturally , the political beliefs of all interested parties should be respected .
I subscribe , however , to what the honourable Member said about secularism and about a consideration of the very essence of the Kemalist state .
Such a consideration was entirely absent from the report , as was , by all appearances , any mention of the efforts of the current Prime Minister of Turkey to bind his country securely to Europe .
In this context , Mr Oostlander , if this Parliament had been given the possibility of producing a report as detailed as this one not only on the countries applying for accession , but also on the current Member States of the Union ( I am thinking here of my own country ) , the fact is that it would have taken not 56 paragraphs , but perhaps twice that , to deal with conditions in Italian prisons , the state of the Italian legal system , and many other areas besides , in which things are going badly .
In our countries too , ladies and gentlemen , or in some of our countries at least , there was a time not so long ago when people went to prison because they were Jehovah 's Witnesses and did not want to do their military service .
They were compelled to do it by force , or thrown into prison .
Our countries have experienced all of that .
Turkey must , of course , make significant progress .
We cannot have it both ways , however : either we offer Turkey a landfall on the coast of Europe , or else we refuse it .
If we opt for the latter , we not only make a catastrophic political and strategic error : we also point Turkey , push it , in a way , towards other coasts , other shores , which would be much more dangerous not only for stability but also , I believe , for the welfare of the Turks and their progress towards democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
To this end , my radical colleagues in this Parliament and myself , together with Members of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , whom I would like to take this opportunity to thank , have tabled an amendment designed precisely to avoid closing the door on Turkey , as the Oostlander report does .
The first draft of this report , whose tone brought to my mind the Battle of Lepanto more than anything else , has , of course , been improved in the meantime .
We have therefore tabled an amendment in which we declare ourselves convinced that the conditions for Turkey to be admitted to the accession negotiations will be fulfilled as long as the Turkish Government pursues its current programme of essential reform with steadfastness and determination .
The rapporteur has suggested that the amendment be included as an addition , showing a desire to compromise which I applaud .
It is in a similar spirit of compromise that I accept the rapporteur 's offer , following the example of the Verts / ALE Group .
In doing so , I hope that we can also come to an agreement on a message to Turkey whose dominant theme is not that the door is closed , but that we are waiting for real progress .
Obviously , when the moment comes , everyone will be able to take their own decisions .
Let us at least leave that door open , however .
With this in mind , I hope that the House will approve this amendment unanimously .
Mr President , Mr Oostlander has accomplished a huge , difficult task , endeavouring to reconcile the extremely diverse viewpoints expressed by Parliament on a controversial and much-debated subject such as Turkey 's accession .
The result is a resolution which is acceptable as a compromise but which we might have liked to be marked and inspired by greater optimism so as to send Turkey a more positive message , as Commissioner Verheugen advocated too , despite the fact that this country still has a great deal to do and many changes and innovations to make before it can hope to join the European Union , as the resolution rightly states .
We need to establish whether geography and religion are criteria which restrict the possibility of accession or whether Europe is conceived as a set of values and principles with the result that countries that share those values and principles of democracy and freedom have the right to apply for membership .
It is in this spirit that , to Article 52 of the report , which notes that the conditions for opening negotiations are not yet in place - which is undoubtedly true at present - we prefer the version contained in Amendment No 11 , to which Mr Dell 'Alba referred just now , which expresses the positive view , the confidence that the requirements can be met if Turkey carries out the necessary reforms .
I too am grateful to Mr Oostlander , who appears to be willing to accept this amendment , if not as a replacement for point 52 , at least as an addition to it .
Mr President , the Oostlander report has undergone a major face-lift , with 283 amendments tabled .
Certain extreme formulations , which would have compromised political relations between Parliament and Turkey , have been eliminated .
Although the report rightly points , however , down the road towards respect for human rights , along which the country still has to travel , it is nevertheless still a partial and ideologically charged report in my book .
It attempts to stamp Turkey with its own view of European values .
Paragraph 3 invokes a set of European values rooted essentially in Judaeo-Christian culture .
If this paragraph is not amended , it will be a slap in the face for an essentially secular country under Muslim government .
It will also be unacceptable to us Europeans , as it will mean the return of old scourges and the renewed influence of religion in political affairs .
If we must mention Judaeo-Christian values , why do we not also mention Judaeo-Christian crimes ?
A re-reading of The Gospel according to Jesus Christ , by the Portuguese Nobel Prize Laureate José Saramago , is necessary to remind us how many crimes have been committed in the name of our gods .
Well , let us take the gods out of the running .
Let us acknowledge once and for all that Europe is secular and contains many different religions .
Let us also deal firmly but fairly with Turkey 's application to join the European Union .
Mr President , it is important that we treat our Turkish friends with honesty and openness .
Of course , treating them honestly and openly also includes the right to be critical and to point out deficiencies .
We want to help Turkey on its path to true democracy and the rule of law .
Turkey deserves fair treatment , and Mr Oostlander 's report is fair .
It describes the remarkable progress that is being made , but also states in all honesty where reform is still badly needed .
In my opinion , what is important is that Turkey itself must want to make progress in terms of meeting the Copenhagen criteria .
It must not work on these reforms primarily to appease the critics in the EU , to do us a favour , so to speak .
Turkey must embed the necessary reforms deep within its own society , and the reforms must have an impact in real life .
Constitutional amendments on paper , or new laws on paper , will not be enough on their own .
Paper is patient !
What is crucial is to implement reforms in people 's daily lives .
So far , however , it is precisely this that we have yet to see .
Mr Oostlander 's report describes the many shortcomings that exist in all areas .
It notes that the conditions for opening accession negotiations have not yet been met at the present time , and calls upon the Council to take a clear and consistent position at last .
The Copenhagen criteria - and this must be stressed over and over again - are not negotiable .
This applies equally to all candidate countries , and so it also applies to Turkey .
Turkey must also be fair here for once towards the EU and acknowledge this fact .
Turkey must stop passing the buck to the EU and trying to exert pressure .
It was not us who promised the Turkish people rapid accession within a few years ; Turkish politics itself bears sole responsibility for this .
If Turkish politics now finds itself having to provide explanations and the population is becoming impatient , it is a problem of Turkey 's own making that must be resolved in Turkey and not by the EU by softening the accession criteria .
What Turkey can expect from us - and it really can - is honesty , openness , seriousness and fairness .

Madam President , I would like to express my thanks to Mr Oostlander for his report , and to the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Yiannitsis , and Commissioner Verheugen .
I feel that the Oostlander report is very well-balanced and frank .
The European Union is a Union of shared values . Thus , all the countries which have become Members in the past and those which are joining the Union now share these values and , in order to join the Union , have brought their institutional , political and economic systems into line .
This is the bottom line .
It is not the European Union which wants to become part of Turkey but Turkey which wants to subscribe to these shared values .
We must respect the diversities which make up the rich heritage of the European Union , but the limits are defined by respect for the Copenhagen criteria , for the principles of democracy and the rule of law , and these criteria and principles must not just be proclaimed but enforced and lived .
I would venture to say that the countries which intend to share our European culture may become part of the European Union .
Turkey is applying to join .
We are not opposed to this in principle .
We are waiting for the country to complete the process of adopting our cultural values .
The Erdogan government must be encouraged in the process of moving Turkey closer to the values of the European Union .
The ideological NATOists believe that Turkey 's role in NATO could be its trump card when it comes to joining the European Union .
That might have been so in the past , but we now believe that NATO , with the participation of Russia , will gradually have to assume , with a slightly more effective contribution from the European Union , an international policing role , serving a United Nations which has been reformed to safeguard human rights and democracy in the countries of the world .
I hope that Turkey will be able to act on these proposals , to resolve the Cyprus issue and to establish good neighbourly relations with all the countries on its borders , resolving longstanding conflicts .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is two oral questions ( B5-0094 / 2003 and B5-0095 / 2003 ) by Mr Brok to the Council and the Commission on a renewed transatlantic partnership for the third millennium .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Council shares the honourable Member 's deep concern about the state of relations between the Union and the United States .
Although these relations basically remain strong , it is clear that their modus operandi needs to be re-examined by both sides .
The Union has made it absolutely clear that it is dealing with relations with the United States as the main priority for its foreign policy .
Working together , we can help create a better world for everyone .
The issue for the Union is how this objective will be adopted on the basis of the already very broad cooperation taking place in the western Balkans , Afghanistan , the Middle East and in connection with North Korea .
Focusing attention on issues on which the Union and the United States differ very often conceals this cooperation , which is appreciated by both sides .
As the honourable Member of Parliament knows , the High Representative will submit a document to the European Council in Thessaloniki containing recommendations for a global Union strategy in the field of foreign policy and security .
A preliminary discussion of the subject could be held in the General Affairs and External Relations Council in June .
It is obvious that , although this will be a general strategy , it will also contribute to the development of EU-USA relations .
It is also presumed that it will be based on the existing Union policy in relation , inter alia , to the role of the United Nations .
The time is right , given that this will take place just before the EU-USA summit in Washington on 25 June .
Just as the development of the foreign and security policy is allowing the Union to deal more efficiently with recent events , including its cooperation with the United States in the Middle East , Afghanistan or the western Balkans , in the field of the European security and defence policy , improving European military capabilities continues to be a high priority for the Union , so that the Union can become a more efficient partner of the United States .
The Council continues to take the view that a multilateral approach is still always the best way to resolve the various problems that we face today in various parts of the world .
The Council has not expressed an opinion on the question of adding the principle of reinforced cooperation in the field of the ESDP to the new Treaty .
When we completed the New Transatlantic Agenda , we stated that we were committed to the objective of constructing a new European architecture in the field of security in which ? ? ? ? , the Union , the OSCE and the Council of Europe would play complementary and mutually reinforcing roles .
This was our position in 1995 and it remains our position today .
The New Transatlantic Agenda provides the most extensive framework for cooperation with the United States .
The action plan may perhaps now be outdated , but that does not apply to the New Transatlantic Agenda .
The dialogue we have with the United States is already intensive , with countless continual contacts at all levels .
What we need is not more meetings but perhaps to focus our attention more .
We hope that the development of an overall Union strategy will renew the dialogue with the United States and increase its usefulness to the situations developing around the world .
Cooperation is still an absolute necessity in order to combat the scourge of terrorism .
Following 11 September 2001 , our cooperation has extended beyond all expectations on both sides .
Over and above what is being said about differences , there is very often ignorance on both sides of the Atlantic about the essential and specific work being carried out jointly in order to combat terrorism .
The United States need Europe , just as we need the United States if we want to be successful in combating the challenges of this century .
The Council is fully aware of the fact that , if we are to succeed , we need to deal not only with the symptoms but also with the causes .
And this presupposes mobilising resources in many and varied sectors , in the economic , social and development as well as the political sector .
Finally , the transatlantic legislative dialogue is an exceptionally important element in transatlantic relations .
Whereas the Council 's contacts are to a great extent with the government of the United States , Parliament can play a vital role by reinforcing its dialogue with the members of Congress , in the aim of promoting an understanding of the concerns and priorities of the peoples of the European Union .
The Council is not authorised to dictate to civil society the role which it can play in this dialogue .
However , it has encouraged the development of the four specialist dialogues and maintains the view that , together with the numerous networks of universities , institutes , laboratories , ideas and so on , they can make an important contribution .
No more cooperation frameworks are needed .
What is needed in the dialogue with the United States is for each side to be carefully informed of the other side 's opinions and mutual action .
Madam President , our concern about the current state of transatlantic relations does not stem solely from the vicissitudes of the Iraq crisis or its possible consequences , but from deeper causes , and essentially the realisation that we are seeing a truly radical change , a truly extraordinary change in the United States ' foreign and security policy , under the neo-conservative banner .
Leadership by means of multinational cooperation has been replaced by a global unilateralist approach , the strategies of containment and dissuasion by the doctrine of pre-emptive attack and the restrictions imposed by participation in alliances and multilateral institutions by the creation of made-to-measure coalitions in which a form of subordination based on the notion that ' you are either with me or against me ' tend to predominate .
Many of us in Europe believe that this way of thinking , rather than producing a Pax Americana , may actually produce significant American chaos in the world .
Within this context , if Europe wishes to meet its responsibilities it must turn itself into an organisation capable of playing a significant role on the international stage and , in order to achieve this , European policy must permanently pursue the objective of multilateralising the United States - an objective which is not entirely out of reach if we consider that opinion polls indicate that almost two-thirds of the American public prefer multilateral approaches to unilateral ones .
Within a renewed relationship we must accept clearly that there are significant discrepancies , that there are many differences of perception and approach but there are also many shared views and potential points of agreement .
If we accept this contrasting situation we will be able to make progress .
I would finally like to say that I believe that positions expressed by the High Representative and Commissioner Patten , as well as the specific proposals presented by the Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , are aimed in the right direction and we will support them .
I would urge you not to let a reunified Europe become divided over Atlantic unity .
Commissioner Patten is right .
The most pressing world problems cannot , and should not , be solved by the United States alone .
Whether these problems concern weapons of mass destruction , human rights , poverty , religious conflicts or lack of democracy , it is vitally important for America and Europe to join forces .
Europeans must join Bush in showing the West 's neo-progressive face to the world .
The European Union can be Washington 's fully-fledged partner only if it acts like one .
If the French-German axis turns away from Washington , while the British-Polish axis moves towards Bush , we will end up not making any headway at all .
We must put the trauma of Iraq to one side and , as the European Union , draft a joint global strategy with the United States .
Two strategies are too many , and there is no room for either inflated national egos or conservative ideological agendas .
Let us now reunite Europe and America using a pragmatic approach , in other words the D ' 66 approach .
Madam President , I would firstly like to thank the representatives of the Council and the Commission for their speeches , and point out that when our delegation of MEPs visited Washington , Members of the US Congress asked us for help in neutralising and paralysing the neo-conservative and , in some ways , almost fascist , tendencies of the Bush administration .
In other words , they expressed their desire for a relationship between the US and European people which contributes to peace in the world .
If it is shown that the US State Department was providing misinformation when it said that there were weapons of mass destruction in Iraq - and we are seeing that this was merely a manipulation - and if we remember that in the document from that Department of 20 September 2002 , the UN , the European Union and international law were dispensed with and it is stated simply that the United States are going to dictate laws in the future , I believe we are facing a great threat to the world and also to Europe .
Fortunately , Europe is based on peace , international law and the peaceful resolution of conflicts , and must play a major role in order to make progress in that direction and prevent the new threats of this conservative Bush administration , thereby restoring the friendship between the American people and ourselves .
Madam President , I was not aware that idealism was the dominant philosophy in the European Parliament .
We cannot build transatlantic relations just by repeating over and over again that that is what we want .
In the past , transatlantic relations were determined by the stand-off between the totalitarian regimes of communist countries on the one hand and the West on the other .
This was the point made by Mr Patten towards the end of his speech .
This situation changed following the fall of Communism .
If , therefore , we want to have transatlantic relations , we need to redefine the relationship .
We need to ask ourselves whether the United States and Europe are bound to have the same interests nowadays .
Prior to the fall of Communism , that had to be the case , but is this still true today ?
Having formulated the question the answer becomes obvious .
The United States and Europe do not now share the same vision or the same interests .
This is true both in terms of geo-strategy and in terms of economics .
A new transatlantic relationship cannot therefore be built by repeatedly expressing our desire for it .
We need to come up with a completely new definition of our relations with the United States .
Let us take a very simple example .
We now have the euro .
If we are honest , the euro divides the European Union from the United States , as the euro is the dollar 's main rival .
Therefore , our strategic and economic interests differ .
If we want to reinvigorate our economies and re-launch Europe , we need to pose a question that is of fundamental importance for Europe .
At a global level , we must ask whether we are bound forever to pay for energy and oil in dollars .
Where is it decreed that we must pay in dollars for the oil and gas we buy from Russia , Saudi Arabia or Iran ?
We must have the will in terms of strategy and economic policy to make the euro a safe currency to ensure we have the funds to bring about economic recovery .
The United States is doing just this today .
A figure of USD 8 billion per day has been quoted .
The US needs investment to pay off its debts .
We therefore need to strengthen the role of the euro as a safe currency that rivals the dollar .
Ladies and gentlemen , if you want to discuss the subject of transatlantic relations , you must find the courage to put this problem to the United States .
The real stakes are these .
We will not succeed in building a new transatlantic relationship if we in the European Union do not have our own doctrine on all the strategic problems , on all the military problems , on our vision of the world and on what we want in the world .
We need to ensure that we define our interests .
Only then can we enter into discussions with the United States .
Madam President , I think of partnership as a strong mutual bond , one in which the key elements are mutual trust and close cooperation based on common values and objectives .
Regrettably , it is precisely these elements that have been absent from the transatlantic partnership over the past few months .
The most painful manifestation of transatlantic , and at the same time European , discord was the public controversy over Iraq .
We on this side of the Atlantic Ocean have all the more reason to first search our own hearts .
In short , how should we take the transatlantic partnership further ?
It is primarily the global safety situation that jumps out at you .
Terrorism - of whatever ideological or religious hue - calls for a joint transatlantic approach .
In concrete terms , destabilising forces in the Middle East may not play the European Union off against either one another or against the United States .
The West 's coordinated fight against terrorism makes association agreements and trade agreements with states from that region worthy of condemnation .
Do the Council and the Commission share this vision ?
After all , Syria and Iran are on the agenda ; is that not so , Commissioner Patten ?
There is a great deal at stake : the European Union 's political credibility - including in the eyes of my electorate - and the solidity and durability of the transatlantic partnership .
Militarily speaking , the European Union is now clearly the weaker partner in the transatlantic alliance .
What is more obvious than a more substantial input from the Member States within NATO ?
This would promote the transatlantic partnership .
European military alternatives , on the other hand , would erode the crucial bond of safety with the United States .
Moreover , I cannot see any reason why we should have faith in initiatives of that kind .
Let us in Europe be realistic and , above all , be reliable friends and real allies to the Americans .
Madam President , almost a hundred years of history shows us Europeans that whenever our continent has been in trouble the United States of America has always come to our rescue .
In the First World War that became the deciding factor in preventing the expansion of imperial Germany .
In the Second World War the US contribution was decisive in delivering Germany and France from Hitler 's yoke and the rest of Europe from his aspirations to power .
When the Cold War ended in the break-up of the Soviet Union and the liberation of countries that had been under the yoke of Central European communism and the Soviet Union it was decidedly the result of President Ronald Reagan 's arms race , which the Soviet economy and its social system could not bear .
When we say today that relations between the United States and Europe have reached a crisis it is more about a crisis in Europe 's internal relations and a crisis in relations between certain individual countries and the United States .
The way certain countries go in for unilateralism in EU internal affairs shows we are still light years away from a common foreign and security policy in crisis situations .
Most of the 25 European countries supported the approval of the UN Security Council regarding starting a war with Iraq .
Most do not accept America 's insistence on being able to take up a position outside the international organisation in matters of war crimes .
We disagree over the importance of the Kyoto Agreement and each day there are talks to resolve differences of opinion on economic matters .
All this notwithstanding , the basic values we tend to share and considerations of security common to us both , where Europe is becoming more and more the recipient than the provider , are a firm basis for looking to the future and supporting the transatlantic partnership and genuinely constructing the kind of action programme that my colleague , James Elles , just mentioned .
We in Europe can no longer catch up with the United States in the area of defence technology ; and perhaps we do not need to .
We can and must , however , resolve our differences and aspire to a common foreign and defence policy .
Only in this way will we be a worthy partner in matters that unite us and in those we disagree with the United States over , a partner that is sufficiently strong for our views to be heeded in the United States , whose largest trading partner we are , as we heard concerning US investment in Europe .
That shows that for the United States the positive development of our relationship is important , but for us it is vital .
We can accept the boycott on French wines in America if as a counterweight America places an order for a hundred Airbus planes , as was the case just a week or so ago .
Madam President , I think that everyone will agree that there is a need for a serious debate within the European Union , but also between the European Union and the United States , about the role of the security policy in transatlantic relations .
However , for that to happen , a better foundation is required at this side of the ocean .
Above all , we need to try to establish what we ourselves want and not get bogged down so much by what we do not want the Americans to do .
I think that this will be a very decisive factor indeed in future .
If we in the European Union want to leave our own mark on this discussion , we will once again need to define together what is essential to us .
I hope that the strategy that Mr Solana will shortly be tabling will make a significant contribution to this .
The European Union itself must be able , and have the courage , to take more responsibility .
This can be done most effectively by continuing to build on our own defence identity in a dynamic manner , but also by carrying out security tasks independently , in - for example - Macedonia , and soon in Africa too .
We must learn to make more efficient use of our defence capabilities , but not avoid a possible discussion about higher defence outgoings .
The EU must be committed to a wide range of security , conflict prevention being its key priority .
Experience in this field and the instruments that the European Union has at its disposal must be better coordinated and used more effectively .
Involvement in multilateral frameworks , such as the United Nations , forms part of this .
Security is sustainable only if it is founded on international cooperation .
This is the core message , I think , to the Americans , who go all out for their country 's military power .
NATO can play a bridging role , but only if the opinion which many Europeans have about security is done justice .
We want political equality in transatlantic relations , but there is little point in asking for it if we remain divided ourselves .
Madam President , just hours after the Evian G8 meeting , which a growing number of citizens see as illegitimate , I feel it is essential to come up with answers to a number of questions , before attempting to consider the nature of the transatlantic partnership .
As I do not have a great deal of time , I will only touch on some of these questions .
First , there is the question of Iraq .
Can we really say that the issue of the war has been dealt with when the European Union has given its blessing to the United States having complete control of Iraq ?
Should we engage in a war against terrorism instigated by the bellicose stance of the United States that seeks to dominate , not to share power ?
This is just increasing the threat .
Should we then allow ourselves to be engulfed in a genuine currency war , started this time by the United States ?
Should we give in to President Bush 's decrees yet again by setting aside what remains of the European social model ?
Should we set aside the provisions on retirement , for example , in the face of wholesale opposition as exemplified by the large demonstrations in France and Austria ?
Lastly , what use will the meeting of the WTO in Cancun be if the European Union does not stand up to the United States ' continuing failure to move on certain issues , especially that of allowing poor countries to access generic medicines ?
The European Union is at a crossroads .
It may choose to hide behind the strategic doctrine entitled ' for a new American century ' .
Alternatively it may choose to adopt a truly independent policy .
If we choose the latter , how can we achieve such a policy without addressing the huge expectations of the southern hemisphere and without freeing ourselves from the ultraliberal policy that exacerbates inequalities and frustrates all attempts to promote development ?
We must listen to the people of Europe .
They do not want Europe to be a poor relation of the United States .
They do not want Europe to be overcautious .
They are hoping and praying for an independent and responsible Europe .
They long for a Europe that promotes the interests of all in working for a world that is safer because it is more humane .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in my view , this debate must allow us to reflect on our foreign policy relations , and therefore our economic relations too , with NAFTA and , in particular , with the United States and in the context of transatlantic relations .
With regard to the famous CFSP , I hope and believe that the Convention will resolve the political gap , appointing a Minister for External Affairs and avoiding losses of international credibility such as that which we have suffered as a result of the Iraq crisis .
With regard to the economic sector , however , I think the best solution is not so much to intervene via any WTO agreements as to draw up a single list which addresses the issues in terms of tax and trade concessions , for that will allow us to avoid further instances of bureaucratic chaos .
Otherwise , I cannot see us achieving anything .
The so-called partnership agreements relating to what is our primary market in terms of both investment and trade will play a major role if we are able to reinvigorate them , simplifying the issue by compiling a list , an agreement that could be concluded by the Commission with NAFTA , first and foremost .
On the eve of enlargement , I believe this is a significant way of boosting our economy and the political content of our foreign policy .
Madam President , Commissioner , as has already been said , I believe it is desirable for Europe and the United States to work together in partnership .
It stands to reason .
All this rhetoric about partnership should not mean , however , that we evade the choices Europe has to make and the difficulty we are faced with at present .
Contrary to what some honourable Members have said , we in Europe are not responsible for the erosion of the type of historic links we have with the United States .
We are having to deal with a very particular type of administration .
It was extremely unilateralist from the outset .
Initially , however , it did not adopt a particularly interventionist line .
One section of the administration used the trauma of 11 September to impose its own unilateralist and extremely interventionist agenda which predated those terrible events .
Faced with this situation , Europe has a decision to make .
On the one hand , it could be argued that nothing can be done to counter the will of the United States , given the power it has on the world stage .
In that case , there would be nothing to do except to give in to the United States and to go along with them , even when it comes to lies and exposing ourselves to ridicule , just like those who tried to make us believe that intervening in Iraq was justified because weapons of mass destruction posed an imminent threat .
If we were to go down that road , Mr Elles ' proposal would make sense .
It amounts to a free trade zone or in other words a new version of the Transatlantic Market Place .
We must , however , bear in mind that this would mean setting aside the Union 's common external trade policy .
The creation of this huge market would amount to the United States annexing the European Economic Area .
Decisions would be taken in Washington .
The United States would not be willing to allow Europe to have its say in decision-making on this issue .
On the other hand , we could take the view that Europe has things to say on the world stage and a vision to promote of a world order based on the rule of law .
This vision would entail fairer relations between the North and the South .
In our view this is important if we are to create a world order that offers everyone greater security .
If this is what we want to do , this is not the time to toe the line .
It is the time to promote a common foreign and defence policy .
There is a paradox here in that Mr Elles said we need to strengthen the common foreign and defence policy while at the same time suggesting we make certain concessions to the United States .
In my opinion , if we believe we should promote the statute of Rome and an International Criminal Court , if we believe that we should argue for the Kyoto agreements , the non-proliferation treaty and the end of atomic testing , we must assert our independence .
Relations between the European Union and the United States must be rebuilt on the basis of this independence .
Our American friends will have to accept this .
The current US administration will not last forever and I believe that our friendship will win out in the end .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 19 June 2003 .
The next item is a statement by the Commission on elections in Nigeria .
Madam President , I have the honour today of presenting the EU Observation Mission 's final report on the elections in Nigeria , which is being handed out as I speak .
The report is very extensive and contains a lot of information and many recommendations .
There is far too much information to sum up in three minutes , but it is all in there for you to read up .
I would like to mention a few conclusions .
First of all , it is , I think , important to establish that the Nigerian population , and many of its socially active organisations , greatly value this modern instrument of external EU policy .
I am in total agreement with the Commissioner on this point .
It is an effective instrument to promote peace , stability and democracy .
The EU should be proud of this ' soft power ' .
Secondly , the mission , invited by the Nigerian Government , was the longest and most extensive mission which the EU has ever accomplished .
I had the privilege of working with a very proficient core team , efficient departments in Brussels and with an enthusiastic observation team comprising over one hundred members .
The findings of our mission have been widely discussed , both worldwide and within Nigeria .
The main thing was that we identified the election fraud we discovered for what it actually was , rather than putting it into perspective or concealing it .
We did not mince our words .
This , quite simply , was what we owed to the Nigerian electorate .
Ultimately , we established extensive systematic fraud in six federal states during the governor and presidential elections on 19 April and we discovered serious shortcomings in another five federal states .
The same happened on 3 May , but then there were seven instead of six .
Our findings correspond to those of 10 000 national election observers .
Simply to call this fraud Nigerian fraud is unacceptable and an insult to the Nigerian population .
It is , in fact , evidence of the over-organisation of those in power and not of underdevelopment .
If we realise that about half of all the states have electoral problems , this brings into focus the significance of the legal cases which are now being brought before the specially instituted election tribunals .
It remains a very serious matter that meanwhile , the central and regional INEC - the election council - was unwilling , not allowed or unable , to do anything about the election fraud that was discovered .
It was , and still is , their task .
I would ask the Commissioner actively to promote the EU , via the local EU delegation - under the excellent leadership of Leonidas - with the backing of local lawyers ' organisations , being given the opportunity of actively following these election tribunals - without any involvement of course , for that is not up to us - and to inform the Council and Parliament accordingly .
Finally , I should like to ask the Commission to reconsider its aid contract with Nigeria , which affects many states , in such a way - and I am not at all in favour of sanctions or similar action , for that would be wrong - that it becomes possible to shift , as it were , the resources for federal states which will not obtain a democratic structure or new elections - such as the federal state of Ogun - to civilian projects of democratic states .
May I finally say to the Council that its statement contravened the facts .
There was a low turnout and few women took part .
Results showing a high level of participation had simply been falsified .
The Council should have taken a more professional stance .
It should speak with one voice .
This would really be more helpful than engaging in external foreign politics .
In connection with this debate , I have received five motions for resolutions submitted in accordance with Article 37.2 of the Rules of Procedure
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0097 / 2003 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Mr Ortuondo has the floor for one minute for a point of order .
Mr President , I would like to refer to Articles 6 and 7 of the European Union Treaty , which indicate , respectively , that that Union is based on respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and the Rule of Law .
And that , on the proposal of Parliament or the Commission , the Council can note the existence of a clear risk of serious violation of these principles on the part of a Member State .
All of this means , from a legal point of view , that the possible violation of freedoms and rights on the part of a State is the competence of the European institutions .
So I would like to vigorously condemn and protest against the anti democratic and illegal abuse I have received from Mr Pat Cox , President of Parliament , who has refused to include in this part-session two questions which I have presented in relation to two possible violations of the Rules of Law , of human rights and fundamental freedoms by Mr Aznar and his Spanish Government .
Firstly , because of an apparent lack of respect for the separation of powers , in view of his public statements telling the Spanish Supreme Court that it should agree to the annulment of 240 electoral candidatures which had been legally admitted by the ordinary electoral courts , and secondly for creating a law prohibiting Basque prisoners from studying and taking examinations at the Public University of the Basque Country , the only university that offers education in the Basque language , which may be a violation of the right to linguistic diversity .
Mr Ortuondo , you will note that you have the right here to raise a point of order which seems to me to be inappropriate given the issues you wish to raise during a Question Time ; and I must point out to you that President Cox has decided to comply with the Rules of Procedure , and several paragraphs of the Rules , in relation to Question Time , make it very clear that questions must not contain statements or judgments , which in some cases are rash to say the least .
I will offer an example which is less dramatic than the one you have chosen to give today ; as in football , we have Rules of Procedure ; we must obey the Rules of Procedure , because otherwise we are caught off-side .
There are channels for raising everything you wish to raise , but in accordance with our democratically established Rules of Procedure .
You may respond , as you request , but please be very brief .
Mr President , I agree with what you say about the Rules of Procedure .
I believe I have obeyed them to the letter .
The President tells me that this issue does not fall within the competence of the Council , but Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty indicate that it falls within the competence of the Council and of Parliament .
That is why I put the question .
Secondly , I would like it to be noted that my questions did not contain statements of any type .
They are simply questions and the text is there to be read .
I would like it to be noted that I agree with President Cox 's approach , and I believe he has acted in accordance with parliamentary law and the Rules of Procedure .
Question No 1 by Sarah Ludford ( H-0291 / 03 ) :
Subject : Trafficking in human beings
EU Ministers in the Council and Heads of State and Government have again urged action against people-trafficking in the declaration of the European conference in Athens on 17 April 2003 .
Why have all Member States not ratified the Protocol to prevent , suppress and punish trafficking to the UN Convention against transnational organised crime ?
Why has the Council not agreed the proposed Directive on a short-term residents ' permit for trafficking victims while they cooperate with prosecution to put the criminal gangs behind bars ?
Why do some Member States take up to a year to respond to requests from Eastern European countries for legal assistance with prosecutions ?
Why are there immediate deportations of victims , which catch the countries of origin and international organisations like IOM unaware , as opposed to a coordinated policy of assisted returns ?
? he Council would remind the honourable Member that , although combating people trafficking is a very important issue to the European Union , it is not expressly mentioned in the declaration by the European Council on 16 April 2003 .
In her question , the honourable Member touches on certain points on which the Council would comment as follows :
In its Athens declaration of 16 April 2003 , the European Council reiterated the values on which the European Union is based and confirmed its intention to continue to defend fundamental human rights , both inside and outside the European Union .
The European Council specifically undertook to continue to fight against all types of discrimination , as can be seen from the work which is under way in connection with the fight against racism and xenophobia or even the trade in human organs .
The ratification of the additional protocol to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime signed in Palermo in December 2000 is a matter of national sovereignty for the states which sign it .
The Council therefore invites the honourable Member to contact the relevant authorities directly .
The proposal for a Council directive on short-term residents ' permits granted to victims of organised illegal immigration or people trafficking who are working with the competent authorities is the focus of the Council 's attention .
The examination of the directive has commenced and work will continue in conjunction with the various priorities set by the European Council , and the resources available .
As for the final question , the Council would note that it is not competent to reply on the methods used by the national authorities of the Member States to repatriate persons who have fallen victim to this sort of trafficking .
Despite the fact that there is no new question , I should like to point out that all the efforts being made at Council level and on the part of the European Commission to develop the policy to combat illegal immigration and organised crime either at a general level or in the case of specific countries , I refer to the Balkans and to other countries too , obviously also has as one of its basic reference points the phenomenon raised by the honourable Member .
Consequently , through these policies , the objective is precisely to combat these sorts of phenomena , which the Council also accepts are particularly problematic in Europe today and we must do what we can to combat them .
The Presidency has raised the question of the need to coordinate the Union 's policies on illegal immigrants with asylum policy and the need for an integrated policy .
Decisions have been taken one step at a time over recent months , as they were during the previous Presidency .
This is a new policy area for the Union .
We support it and we hope that the issues relating to this phenomenon will also be dealt with efficiently by successive Presidencies .
Mr President , I would ask you to grant me the minute of patience I require to explain my position in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .
Today 's agenda contains a question by Mr Sacrédeus - which I support - on the violation of human rights in Cuba .
It is clear that taking measures to free the political prisoners in Cuba does not fall within the competence of the Council .
That is clear , but this question has been allowed .
However , I firstly presented a question on the deaths of protesters caused by US troops in Iraq - thirteen deaths in an Iraqi town - and I was told it contained value judgments .
I amended the question , in order to remove the value judgments , and once again I am told that it is not admissible , because I asked whether the Council was concerned about the death of protesters , particularly in view of the fact that the US troops are supported by Member States of the European Union .
I am wondering why a question on Iraq is not admissible but a question on Cuba is - although I consider that question to be legitimate since it is a universal issue .
Mr President , it seems to me - because this is not the first time this has happened - that there is censorship on Iraq , which is unacceptable .
In any event , I demand a reply , because I am finding it impossible to raise universal problems in this House which affect us directly .
In any event , I would like to ask you to explain why this discrimination has taken place , Mr President .
Mr Nogueira , the President for the sitting does not make any judgment and does not enter into a debate on the questions put by the honourable Members and admitted according to procedure ; I am not therefore going to compare your question , which does not appear on the agenda , with the question by Mr Sacrédeus .

The President of Parliament has taken a decision , you have written to him , you have spoken in plenary about this issue , you have received a reply and you can contact the President of Parliament if you believe it appropriate to do so .
Iraq has been discussed thoroughly in this Chamber , you refer to the issue ; it has been discussed without any censorship ; there has naturally been complete freedom of expression for all political groups and Members in the presence of the Council and the Commission , and I would ask you not to turn a point of order into a point of disorder .
You have said what you believed should be said , you have expressed your view and your words will be recorded in the Minutes .
Please now allow the Members asking questions to put them .
This is not a debate about which questions are admitted and which are not .
It is a debate on the questions which are on the agenda .
You have 15 seconds to say your final word .
I would firstly like to ask you to communicate my comments to the President of Parliament and secondly I spoke about the second reply , which is new , and which is for this sitting .
It is not the previous one , it is a new one , they have rejected a modified question for the second time .
In any event , I would ask you to communicate my comments to the President of Parliament in their entirety so that he may act accordingly , because I do not wish to create any disorder here .
I defend the Members ' legitimate right to deal with the problems affecting them and , in any event , affecting humanity .
The President will be aware of your words from the most worthy source : from the Minutes .
I will not act as messenger ; he will know the Minutes and will know exactly what you have said , just as he knows his letters .
Question No 2 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0292 / 03 ) :
Subject : Network for epidemiological surveillance
Decision 2119 / 98 / EC
The Extraordinary Council on Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs held on 6 May 2003 approved conclusions in which , having carefully examined the situation regarding Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome , both inside the European Union and world-wide , and the different measures taken to address it , confirmed the importance of a quick assessment of the situation and review of future action .
The Council considers that the network for the epidemiological surveillance and control of communicable diseases in the Community has provided a very effective basis for the rapid exchange of information within the EU and for a coordinated response , in which the acceding countries have fully participated .
The Council recalled that the application of health protection measures falls to the authorities of the Member States , and confirmed the benefits of effective coordination of such measures through the epidemiological surveillance Network Committee .
It also endorses the orientations for immediate and future actions agreed on 10 April by the epidemiological surveillance Network Committee , which are summarised as follows :
rapid detection of all suspect cases of SARS through good surveillance ;
protection of those at risk of infection from the cases through effective isolation of SARS patients in hospitals , including measures to protect carers ;
particular attention to be paid to air travel , which has been an important factor in the spread of SARS , notably through standardised screening of passengers leaving affected areas , onboard advice to passengers and effective information at ports of entry from affected areas and
the particular importance of raising awareness among professionals and the public and the timely and accurate reporting and sharing of information with other countries , in particular the ? EA / ? FTA countries , acceding and candidate countries and with the WHO .
Cooperation should also be developed with other partners , such as airline companies .
The Council urges the Member States and the acceding countries to implement effectively the orientations for immediate and future actions by the Network Committee and contribute actively to setting up a specific expert group on SARS under the Network Committee to develop common modalities and advice on health measures across Europe .
The Council underlined the need for continued cooperation between the Member States , the Commission and the WHO and called on the Member States to ensure , inter alia :
prompt and effective identification of all suspect and probable SARS cases , and their appropriate isolation in hospitals ;
appropriate protection of hospital personnel treating the patients ;
provision of guidance and information to health care workers and the public ;
measures , consistent throughout the European Union , to provide and acquire information and traceabilty of international travellers arriving or in transit from affected areas ;
timely and accurate reporting and sharing information with the Commission , WHO , other countries and other partners ( for example , airline companies ) .
Finally , the Council encourages the Commission to
continue coordinating EU action on SARS ;
keep the orientations for immediate and future actions under regular review , notably in the light of advice from the WHO ;
consider developing a general preparedness plan on communicable diseases and health threats ;
coordinate and network laboratory expertise ;
financially support research and development of validated diagnostic tests , therapeutic interventions , and vaccines .
The Council reviewed the situation and developments at its meeting on 2 June 2003 , took note of the Commission 's progress report on recent developments in connection with SARS and exchanged views on the current situation .
All the Member States approved the Commission report and the initiatives taken or planned in this area .
The Presidency emphasised the importance of coordinating the exchange of information at European level , given the cross-border nature of SARS .
Thank you , Mr President .
My question was put before it had even been decided to convene the Council of Ministers for Health in May and I wish to say that the President-in-Office 's reply was so full and extensive that it obviates the need to ask a second question .
Question No 3 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0300 / 03 ) :
Subject : EU / Ukraine
How does the Council view the current state of relations between the EU and Ukraine , and what initiatives has the Presidency undertaken to intensify cooperation with the Black Sea states ?
The Union is closely monitoring developments in the Ukraine and recognises Ukraine 's achievements over recent years in establishing itself as an independent , democratic European country with a market economy .
The Ukraine is an important strategic partner and will soon become a neighbouring country of the ? U. The Union is dealing positively with Ukraine 's European aims , but underlines that the development of relations between the ? U and the Ukraine depends , among other things , on the favourable outcome of continuing internal reforms .
The new coalition government and cooperation between the majority and the opposition in the Ukrainian parliament in certain legislative sectors can be seen as positive signs .
The government and the parliament are working together to adapt national legislation to the acquis communautaire .
However , a great deal still needs to be done .
In particular , reforms are needed in the fields of the mass media and the judiciary .
The situation regarding arms exports , including Kolchuga , still needs to be clarified .
Ukraine 's candidacy for the WTO is an important step in the development of the country , but the rules of the WTO need to be kept and applied .
Within these frameworks , policies and important structural reforms are still outstanding .
Cooperation between the ? U and the Ukraine is based on the partnership and cooperation agreement which introduces the legal framework for cooperation in a broad range of sectors ; I would especially mention , among other things , energy , trade and investments , justice and internal affairs , legislative rapprochement , the environment , transport and regional and cross-border cooperation .
The ? U will continue to provide assistance within the framework of the TACIS programme , based on the priorities agreed between the two parties .
With the ' Wider Europe ' initiative , the ? U has made an important step as regards strengthening cooperation with the Ukraine , which is a neighbour following enlargement .
Within the framework of this initiative , a clear action programme is defined as regards medium-term neighbourly relations with the Union , with a view to promoting policies for political rapprochement and the gradual joint completion of social and economic structures and increasing political , economic and cultural momentum , on the basis of common values .
The competent Council services are drafting specific measures in order to implement this initiative .
The Union vigorously supports regional cooperation in Europe and beyond and is urging the Black Sea states to promote good neighbourly relations through the Black Sea Economic Cooperation pact .
This regional organisation provides important momentum , thereby contributing to a considerable degree to the implementation of the stability pact for south-eastern Europe .
By promoting economic cooperation as a means of preventing conflict , this organisation seeks to resolve conflicts peacefully on the basis of the principles of the OSCE .
The Union notes these developments with satisfaction and supports the integration of the participating states in the European economy .
Mr President , thank you for your very sound answer .
Even before the disintegration of the Soviet Union , Bavaria maintained a close partnership with Ukraine and my colleague Mr Radwan and I have just given a massive boost to trade with Ukraine .
Trade and business need a framework , however .
For this reason , I would like to raise two quite specific questions : first , to what extent is the TACIS Programme being intensified , with a focus on institution building and training up a new , younger generation of executives to work in the government , the judiciary and the administration ?
This , after all , is where the shortage is greatest , and the reason why the economy is unable to function .
The framework for the rule of law is not functioning .
My second specific question , Mr President , concerns the geostrategic situation that you mentioned .
Here , of course , the countries in the southern Caucasus play an important role , although they will not be direct neighbours of the EU .
I wanted to ask you what the role of the southern Caucasus is in terms of cooperation with the Black Sea states ?
Institution building is indeed a very basic element for progress and reform in these countries .
However , I hope that the honourable Member understands that institution building also has to do with internal efforts by each country to respond to the needs of reform .
A programme such as TACIS or any programme can , at most , have an auxiliary role in this direction .
I cannot give an answer straight away as to whether it will be intensified from the economic point of view .
I gladly reserve the right to reply in writing .
As far as the Caucasus is concerned , the Presidency has noted the particular importance of the countries in the Caucasus and the need for us to develop our cooperation and our relations with these countries .
However , these countries have a great many problems and closer rapprochement with the countries in the Caucasus is a long-term plan , I believe , in the Union 's foreign policy .
I trust that this effort will be made by successive Presidencies , just as we have made certain moves in this direction during our Presidency , because we really do believe it is of value .
I wish to ask the Greek Presidency how the Council views the fact that Ukraine is a dangerous country for journalists to operate in .
I also wonder how the Council views the fact that the fate of ten journalists , including that of Georgij Gongadze who is critical of the government , remains unknown and uninvestigated .
As you know , we have no knowledge of the fate of certain journalists in the Ukraine .
I cannot answer generally as to whether it is dangerous for journalists to work there ; however , it is particularly worrying that such incidents occur .
It is an issue which was also noted in the public statements made at the press conference which I gave together with the High Representative , Mr Solana , when we visited the Ukraine within the framework of cooperation relations , during the meeting we had at troika level a few months ago .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what is your assessment of Ukraine 's efforts with regard to the World Trade Organisation ?
I cannot proceed to evaluate efforts by the Ukraine in relation to the World Trade Organisation .
Please submit your question to the Commission .
Without wanting to pass judgment on the questions you put , I would ask all the honourable Members to put supplementary questions , which are strictly related to the question asked , because some of them do not seem to be supplementary , and the President-in-Office of the Council knows that , in the event that they are not supplementary , he is not obliged to reply .
Question No 4 by Ioannis Marinos ( H-0309 / 03 ) :
Subject : Problem of funding GALILEO
According to a report published in the Financial Times on 28 April 2003 , GALILEO - the ambitious European satellite programme - will be delayed further because of a funding dispute .
The report states that on 25 April 2003 there was a European Space Agency ( ESA ) meeting which failed to agree on the release of EUR 550 million from the ESA for funding the project .
How can the Council convince the peoples of Europe , among others , that the EU has the political will to achieve ever more ambitious and expensive objectives , such as the Union 's common defence policy , when programmes such as GALILEO , which is supposed to have been planned in order to make the European Union independent from the USA 's satellite infrastructure , continue to suffer from deadlocks ?
The Council attaches particular importance to the implementation of the Galileo programme under optimum conditions .
The Council welcomes the agreement which has finally been reached between the Member States of the European Space Agency and which also puts an end to the Agency 's difficulties to date as regards the cofinancing of the Galileo programme , thereby making it possible to continue the programme and allay the concerns of the partners that have proceeded to make , and will continue to make , important investments in time , manpower and financial resources for studies , designs and programmes at the pre-development stage .
Similarly , the Council wishes to point out that it is not authorised to intervene in decisions by an intergovernmental agency such as the European Space Agency , even if the large majority of the countries which participate in it ( 13 out of the 15 members ) are also members of the European Union .
Mr President , I asked this question before this agreement came along , which paves the way for the implementation of this very important programme , and I am delighted that this has happened under the Greek Presidency , given that I am Greek , and I also have a great deal of respect for the President-in-Office who has replied to me .
As this obstacle has been removed , I should like to ask the honourable President-in-Office to tell us what he calculates will be the amount invested in Galileo , if all the Member States of the European Union will take part in it and in what proportion , when the procedure to promote implementation will commence and when he calculates that it will start to provide its services , which is the most important , and if they will be of only European and / or worldwide range .
Similarly , I should like to ask him to tell us if the objections of the United States have been answered and if , in fact , as the American side maintains , there will be a danger of Galileo interfering with the American GPS frequencies , which in fact give priority to military requirements .
I cannot reply to all these details straight away .
These are Commission issues .
There are various evaluations which have been discussed from time to time and evaluations by independent researchers .
I would ask the honourable Member to put this question to the Commission .
I will gladly forward in writing any information which the Council has at its disposal , which answers the question he has raised .
Mr President , I hope my question is addressed to the Council , because Member States still have authority over matters of foreign and security policy .
I would like to point out at this juncture that although GALILEO is primarily a private-sector project , and one in which we also want to have private-sector services , in a common project for a stronger European Union foreign and security policy we should be setting the course now to ensure that in future infrastructure services and information services will be available and can be purchased at European level .
Up to now , unfortunately , we have not had the infrastructure .
We talk about a rapid reaction force , and in order to be able to act in future in the area of foreign policy , we must be able to rely on GALILEO .
This is why a line should be made available here , and this is certainly something that is also in the interests of the Council .
I agree that Galileo also has a political dimension , which is why it has also been promoted by the Council .
Nonetheless , the Galileo programme also has a very strong commercial dimension and I would like to point out that the Council is , nonetheless , interested in its progressing , its being able to withstand competitive and economic conditions on the market and its remaining viable .
Question No 5 by Paulo Casaca ( H-0312 / 03 ) :
Subject : List of terrorist organisations
As the person responsible for the disarmament of the Iranian armed resistance , the People 's Mujahedeen , General Odierno declared ( Agence France Presse on 11.5.2003 ) that the group 's cooperation with the US forces and its commitment to democracy in Iran meant that its status as a ' terrorist organisation ' in Washington would have to be reviewed .
He added that an organisation which gives up its arms in favour of the alliance is clearly cooperating and that this should lead to reconsideration as to whether or not the Mujahedeen are a terrorist organisation .
This is further confirmation of the fact that there are no grounds for considering the People 's Mujahedeen a terrorist organisation .
When does the Council intend to remove the People 's Mujahedeen from the list of terrorist organisations ?
I agree with Article 1 , paragraph 6 of common position 2001 / 931 / CFSP on the application of special measures to combat terrorism .
The names of persons , groups and agencies included on the list are re-examined by the Council at regular intervals of at least every six months , in order to confirm that there are reasons for their inclusion on this list .
During the last re-examination , I can inform you that the Council confirmed the inclusion on the list of the Iranian organisation Mujahedeen-e-Khalq , also known as the People 's Mujahedeen .
I thank you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , but you have only said what we all knew already .
What you did not explain , and what I would like you to explain now , is how an organisation that has never been found guilty or even accused of any terrorist crime or any other crime on European soil can be included on this list , whilst Iran , for example , one of whose diplomats has already been convicted by a German court for committing a terrorist attack , does not appear on the list and is actually encouraging the proscription of organisations that oppose it and naming them as terrorists .
This is the problem and I would like the Council to give its opinion and an explanation to Parliament and to Europe 's citizens .
The Council has judged , on the basis of an evaluation of all the factors , that this organisation should be included on the list .
Similarly , I should like to point out that this evaluation was based on information given to the Member States in accordance with the procedures provided for and that there is a collective decision on this matter .
The Council 's response is of some interest in that it is rather hard to understand the criteria the Council uses to judge whether or not an organisation should or should not be deemed a terrorist organisation .
I think that the rules of due process , of fair legal proceedings , should at least allow the various organisations to have the right to resort to the courts .
Parliament is entitled to be informed of the dossier the Council used to make its decision .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I therefore have some very specific questions for you .
Would the Council be willing to supply the European Parliament with the documents detailing the charges levelled against all the groups you consider to be terrorist organisations ?
Would you also be prepared to define the criteria you applied in establishing whether or not the group was a terrorist organisation ?
As we are aware , Russia has just requested that three Chechen groups be added to the list of terrorist organisations , although two of these groups are in fact completely non-existent .
This is a particularly interesting case , incidentally .
The common position to which I referred makes provision for all the criteria which are taken into account in order to enter names , agencies or persons on this list .
I should like to remind you that decisions on who is to be included on the list are taken by officials of the judiciary who are independent of each Member State of the European Union and who provide all the guarantees of a correct judgment on the matter , because this is indeed a very delicate matter .
Mr President , this second response is wholly unconvincing : we know full well that there are absolutely no clear procedures for inclusion on the list of terrorist organisations .
Mr Dupuis has asked quite clearly to be informed of the procedures which exist for appealing against inclusion on the list .
The truth is that the only criterion for either inclusion on or removal from the list is political judgment .
We therefore need to ask the question again .
We are simply asking the Council to give an opinion on this political judgment , this new political development : is it such a major political change as to really justify reviewing the role of the organisation ?
I have nothing to add to what I have said .
The criteria and procedures are provided for and are clear .
The competent agency judged that it should remain on the list and , consequently , I have no criticism to make of that .
Question No 6 by Lennart Sacrédeus ( H-0313 / 03 ) :
Subject : Violation of human rights in Cuba
In March this year , 78 opposition figures were imprisoned in Cuba .
Summary trials with no chance of a proper defence or the presence of independent individuals were held in April , followed by sentences of 15 and 28 years .
The prisoners are now serving their sentences under inhuman conditions , in solitary confinement or together with hardened criminals , most often so far from home as to make visits by relatives impossible .
These conditions are clearly a violation of human rights .
What does the Council intend to do to secure the release of political prisoners in Cuba ?
What is the Council doing to ensure that the treatment of the Cuban prisoners improves and that they are moved nearer to home ?
What steps will the Council take to support the prisoners and their relatives ?
What consequences will these jail sentences have in terms of further negotiations concerning Cuba 's possible membership of the ACP ?
As the Council replied to question ? -0243 / 03 at Question Time during the May part-session of the European Parliament , as soon as the recent wave of arrests came to light , the Presidency , on behalf of the European Union , issued public statements and proceeded with intense demarches towards Havana .
In their bilateral contacts with the Cuban authorities , the Member States also protested strongly about the arrests and executions .
The Council welcomes the resolution by the European Parliament of 10 April reinforcing the Union 's clear stand against these measures .
At its meeting on 14 April , the Council approved the following conclusions :
' The Council condemns the recent actions of the Cuban authorities , notably the executions , the large-scale arrests of dissidents , the unfair trials and the arbitrary and excessive sentences imposed .
It calls for the immediate release of all political prisoners .
These latest developments which mark a further deterioration in the Human Rights situation in Cuba will affect the EU 's relationship with Cuba and the prospects for increased cooperation .
The Council will keep the situation under close review . '
The Union also supported resolutions on the human rights situation in Cuba passed within the framework of the 59th session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights .
As a general comment , the Presidency of the Union issued the following declaration stating that the ? U condemns the large-scale arrests , the unfair summary trials and the arbitrary and excessive sentences imposed on numerous dissidents for peacefully expressing their political , religious and social opinions and because they were exercising their right to take full and equal part in public life .
Consequently , the ? U demands that those persons , whom it considers prisoners of conscience , be released without delay and also calls for the immediate release of all political prisoners .
It is also deeply concerned at the continuing repression of members of the opposition .
The ? U roundly condemns the recent executions of Cuban citizens carried out following summary trials and expresses its regret that the moratorium on the death penalty in the country has come to an end .
These latest developments , which mark a further deterioration in the human rights situation in the country , will affect the ? U 's relationship with Cuba and the prospects for increased cooperation .
The ? U will monitor violations of personal and political rights , which continue to affect the Union 's relationship with Cuba , very closely .
The ? U will continue to keep the situation under close review , especially as regards the possible exercise of legal recourse for the 78 persons convicted .
I should also like to point out that the Union is continuing to make efforts to get the political prisoners released immediately and to ensure that , in the meantime , they are not suffering or being treated inhumanely .
As far as Cuba 's application to accede to the Cotonou Agreement is concerned , the Cuban Ministry of Foreign Affairs withdrew its application on 17 May .
I have nothing further to add .
I have taken note of the honourable Member 's proposal and we shall see if this can be done .
I thank you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
One month ago we held the same debate , and I would now like to take it a little further .
After more than a month , the repression continues in Cuba and the situation remains more or less the same , which is proof that we must go beyond statements of condemnation .
These are important but are not enough and we have a particular responsibility because we awarded the 2002 Sakharov Prize to Osvaldo Payá .
This is the time for us to show that the Sakharov Prize is not a nice school prize ; it is not a moment of ' glamour ' like the Hollywood Oscars . It represents a commitment given by the European Union , through its Parliament , to the cause of democracy , human rights and freedom throughout the world .
Eleven of our fellow Members , myself included , have sent a letter to the President of the Council , the High Representative , the President of the Commission and the President of Parliament , asking them to work together to invite Mr Payá to come here and for the Council to draft a recommendation to this effect to all Member States for their ambassadors in Havana to do the same and invite Mr Payá to come to Europe , to visit our capitals , our ministers , our prime ministers and the President of the Commission and , in the international limelight , tell us the tragedy of what is happening in Cuba .
This is an active way of our expressing solidarity , and of showing that the prizes we award here have real meaning .
Who sent it ?
Nothing else has come to my attention ; consequently , I have no specific answer to give you at this moment in time .
Mr President , I am surprised that the MEP who asked the question has come out in support of the people arrested and tried , because they were demonstrably cooperating , in return for payment , with the representative of the United Nations in Havana against their country , against socialist Cuba , which is a beacon , a shining example for the peoples of America and which , despite forty years of criminal embargo by the United States , manages to provide its people with the highest standard of living and education in the whole of Central and South America .
This is , in fact , what the American imperialists cannot forgive the Cuban revolution and they are striving to overturn it by every possible means , including assassinating its leaders .
I should like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council who , from what I have heard , agrees with everything the previous speakers have said : What would the government of his country do if it were discovered that Greek citizens had agreed to be recruited and paid by a foreign power hostile to Greece in order to act against their country ?
Perhaps it would have awarded them a prize ?
How does this activity stand in relation to the exercise of human rights ?
What comments does he have on the fact that the conspiratorial meetings organised by the US representative in Havana are also attended by Greece 's diplomatic representative ?
How does he justify the silence of the European Union about the Cubans being held in the United States because they uncovered plans to assassinate Fidel Castro and other Cuban leaders , and the failure to extradite to Cuba the Cuban hijackers who are now circulating freely in the United States ?
For the rest , we are fighting to combat terrorism .
Mr President , to start with , this is not a question to which I shall reply .
I shall reply to one , not as the President-in-Office , but as the minister for foreign affairs of the Greek Government .
You referred to the involvement of a diplomat in conspiratorial and other types of activity .
It is altogether both comical and misleading , when you must have been told that I replied to a similar question by a member of your party in the Greek Government , when I said that it is ridiculous , at a reception given at the embassy in Cuba , the American embassy , where receptions are held every week by various and sundry people , and everyone goes here and there , to translate ...
( interruption off the microphone by Mr Korakas )
Please do not interrupt ... you are not worthy of a reply !
Mr President , how dare Mr Yiannitsis say I am not worthy of a reply .
I have asked burning questions .
His government is also guilty and should reply with greater respect to the questions I put to him .
Mr Yiannitsis said initially that you had not asked him a question and that he was not therefore going to reply as President-in-Office of the Council .
I believe we must follow the agenda with the calm habitual during this sitting .
Question No 7 by Claude Moraes ( H-0321 / 03 ) :
Subject : Thessaloniki June Council meeting
Will the Council please give its view of the agenda of the June Council meeting in Thessaloniki ?
Will the meeting discuss the question of EU border police , policing resources for the new EU external borders post-enlargement , coordination of integration issues in relation to migrants , and the issue of coordination of managed economic migration ?
We referred extensively to the agenda for the Thessaloniki Council at this morning 's debate .
However , I should like to add that , as this concerns the first version of the annotated agenda , which was also submitted to the recent meeting of the General Affairs and External Relations Council , the Presidency intends to limit the agenda for the European Council in Thessaloniki to the following items :
results of the Convention on the Future of Europe and decisions for the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference ;
asylum , immigration and borders , which are all interrelated ;
enlargement issues ;
the question of EU policy in the Western Balkans ;
Wider Europe , New Neighbourhood ;
work following on from the spring 2003 European Council and , finally
certain issues in the fields of external relations and security and defence .
These items may be included in EU-USA relations : the Middle East and Iraq and recommendations by the High Representative , Mr Solana , on an overall strategy in the field of foreign policy and security , together with a wider strategy to deal with the spread of weapons of mass destruction .
The General Affairs and External Relations Council noted these intentions on the part of the Presidency .
As far as the issues touched on in the second part of the question are concerned , the honourable Member will know that the European Council has to examine two important reports .
The first is on the actual application of the guidelines agreed at the European Council in Seville on measures relating to illegal immigration , the more flexible introduction of coordinated and integrated external border management , the incorporation of immigration policy into the Union 's relations with third countries and the speeding up of the legislative work to formulate a common policy on asylum and immigration issues .
The second report examines the efficiency of common financing resources available for the repatriation of immigrants and asylum seekers who have been rejected , for the management of external borders , for programmes in the field of asylum and immigration in third countries and for the application of the principle of the distribution of burdens .
Our aim is for the Council to examine these two reports so that the European Council can issue guidelines for further action in these sectors .
Within this framework , it is expected that , in accordance with the conclusions of the spring 2003 Council , the European Council will re-examine the issue of immigration , the integration of legal immigrants into European society and employment .
Finally , the Presidency would remind you that the agenda for the Thessaloniki Council will be approved , in accordance with the Council 's rules of procedure , by the General Affairs and External Relations Council at its meeting on 16 and 17 June 2003 .
The question was put on a personal basis .
I can reply both personally and as the Greek Presidency .
This does not mean that my reply reflects the position of the 15 .
As you know , there are countries which consider that these issues - relating to the integration of immigrants , in other words - are internal issues .
On the other hand , however , failure to integrate immigrants living , in their millions no less , in the Member States of the European Union , often causes particularly acute social situations and these often also have serious repercussions at political level , with highly undesirable consequences .
Given that the European model - this social , political and economic model - is characterised by internal social convergence which perhaps is hard to find in many other countries of the world and , consequently , we need to keep it as a very basic element both for our countries and our continent , I personally consider that , on the issue of the integration of immigrants , there must also be coordination of policies at Community level , because any serious social and political tension in one country is something that is also of particular importance to the other countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to make a brief comment regarding my question 3 concerning Ukraine : it goes without saying that this is a matter for the European Union , because the accession of Russia and Ukraine to the WTO has consequences affecting this and this will probably also be a topic for discussion at the Council in Thessaloniki .
My question concerning the Thessaloniki Council , however , is this : the Council called for an impact study to be carried out on Basle II , the framework agreement on the creditworthiness of businesses .
The Commission has not yet done this .
At the last sitting you promised me you would takes steps to this effect .
What has happened here as regards the Council 's enquiry or as regards the Council 's cooperation with the Commission ?
Are there plans to undertake such a study ?
This issue concerns the Commission and , provided the Commission submits the study , of course we shall see how we can take it into account for Thessaloniki .
As the author is not present , Question No 8 lapses .
Question No 9 by Richard Howitt ( H-0325 / 03 ) :
Subject : Proposed EU Agency for Defence Capability Development and Acquisition
What discussions have already taken place within the Council for the establishment of a proposed EU Agency for Defence Capability Development and Acquisition , in order to implement the quantity and quality of the EU 's military capacity ?
Does the President-in-Office of the Council plan any further initiatives on this issue ?
The issue of creating an intergovernmental Agency for Defence Capability Development and Acquisition was the subject of recent discussions within the framework of the European Council , which resulted in the formulation of paragraph 35 of the Presidency conclusions .
I refer to the European Council of 20 and 21 March .
On the basis of these conclusions , the Council addressed this issue , as it did within the framework of the conclusions of the General Affairs and External Relations Council of 19 May , when it reiterated this paragraph and , especially , the need to examine the possible creation within the framework of the Union of an intergovernmental defence capabilities development and acquisition agency .
The relevant work is continuing .
I should like to remind you that , at the initiative of the Greek Presidency and in a letter which we sent at the end of last year to the President of the Commission , we supported precisely the need for initiatives such as these , which come within the line of thinking of the question formulated by the honourable Member .
Efforts have been made to bring forward this idea .
Now , whether the Greek Presidency will be able to make any progress within the remaining three weeks , is difficult to answer .
We need to bear in mind that , at the joint General Affairs Council held by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and the Ministers for Defence , there was an opportunity to examine all these issues and I believe that perhaps the next opportunity will be later rather than sooner , within a period of three , four or five weeks in other words .
Question No 10 by Olivier Dupuis ( H-0330 / 03 ) :
Subject : The Iranian regime 's nuclear weapons programme
On August 2002 the People 's Mujahedeen denounced the Iranian regime 's secret nuclear weapons programme .
Both state authorities and independent research organisations have confirmed the military purposes of this programme .
Even Commissioner Patten in his latest declarations seems to have now admitted this fact .
Can the Council explain what has been the role of the negotiations developed by EU and Iranian regime officials under the so-called ' constructive dialogue on energy ' regarding this Iranian nuclear programme ?
Can the Council explain what measures and changes in policy it intends to take to prevent the disastrous results of its present diplomacy regarding Iran ?
Weapons of mass destruction , especially nuclear weapons and their non proliferation , are indeed an issue which is provoking a great deal of concern in the Union in connection with Iran .
Mr ElBaradi , the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency , expects to submit a report to the board of governors of the Agency in question on 16 June , containing his findings on Iran 's nuclear programme .
This report will contribute to the greater clarification of the situation as regards the existence of a nuclear weapons programme in Iran .
The Council will take account of this report when it discusses issues relating to Iran at its next meeting .
The question , which concerns the opinions expressed on this issue by the Commission , should rightly be submitted directly to that institution .
Similarly , the Commission will need to explain what is happening within the framework of what is referred to as the ' constructive dialogue on energy ' with Iran , given that this dialogue is being conducted on behalf of the Union by the Commission .
The Council , especially within the framework of the broad dialogue between the Union and Iran , regularly raises the question of weapons of mass destruction and their non proliferation ; the last time was on 29 April .
The Council calls on Iran to sign , to ratify and to implement fully the relevant international agreements , especially the Additional Protocol to the ? ? ? ? guarantee agreements .
These issues were raised at the round of negotiations for a trade and cooperation agreement between the Union and Iran held in Teheran on 1 and 2 June .
The Council clearly stated to Iran that it expected that deepening of economic and commercial relations between the Union and Iran should be matched by similar progress in all other aspects of the EU 's relations with Iran .
Finally , I would add that the Union attaches great importance to achieving global compliance with the Non-Proliferation Treaty and in the establishment of a verifiable nuclear weapons free zone in the Middle East .
Mr President , I agree with the Council that it is the Commission who is conducting the constructive dialogue on energy .
Nonetheless , the Commission , like the Council and the European Parliament , is part of the European Union and moreover it is for the Council to establish the broad guidelines on foreign policy .
Consequently , if the report due to be presented soon by the International Atomic Energy Organisation contains negative conclusions , will the Council ask the Commission to break off this constructive dialogue on energy ?
This is what I would like to know .
It is indeed the Commission that implements decisions but it is primarily the Council that establishes the broad guidelines .
I have already stated in my reply - and I wonder why this is being asked a second time - that the Council will take account of the report to be submitted when it discusses issues relating to Iran at its next meeting .
Now , hypothetical questions about what this report will contain and what the Council will do if the report contains A , B or X , I cannot discuss at present .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are nearly out of time , but we will try to deal with two more questions on Iran , if the President-in-Office is willing to stay until 7.15 p.m. , since we began late .
Thank you very much .
Mr Casaca has the floor for a supplementary question .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I should like to ask you whether you do not find it strange that the positions you have adopted are not those held by judges , or by anyone independent ; instead they are the Council 's own political positions on terrorist organisations when nowhere in the press is there any mention of the matter . Where the nuclear programme in Iran is concerned , however , there is an enormous amount of detail in the scientific press and elsewhere on Iran 's use of heavy water , which is only used in the construction of nuclear weapons , and the Council is doing absolutely nothing and confines itself to waiting for any future reports that the Iranian Government might submit .
I said that there will be a report from the most authoritative international organisation .
The Council will take account of this report and will decide what it is going to do on the basis of it .
I would remind you that the Council has said that there will be no progress on economic and trade issues if there is no progress on the issues we are discussing ; consequently , there is a de facto link between the two .
Question No 11 by Gianfranco Dell 'Alba ( H-0331 / 03 ) :
Subject : Destabilisation of the Middle East promoted by Iran
After Lebanon and Palestine , the Iranian regime seems to be focusing its efforts on spreading a theocratic dictatorship in Iraq , profiting from the instability prevailing in this country .
What does the Council plan to do to prevent further destabilisation of the Middle East by the Iranian regime ?
The Council is well aware of the fact that the restoration of viable political and economic stability in Iraq will depend to a great degree on a constructive stand by neighbouring countries .
Consequently , the European Union is constantly urging neighbouring countries , including Iran , to demonstrate self-control and support efforts to stabilise Iraq .
The Council has identified the peace process in the Middle East as a basic field in which the Council wishes to achieve substantial progress through more intensive dialogue with Iran .
The Council has also made it clear to Iran that it expected that deepening of economic and commercial relations between the EU and Iran should be matched by similar progress in all other aspects of the EU 's relations with Iran .
Both Iraq and the Middle East were discussed extensively with the Iranian side during the last EU / Iran ' broad dialogue ' meeting in Athens on 29 April .
The Union will continue to raise these issues in its contacts with Iran .
President-in-Office of the Council , today , something which we hope will be extremely significant is taking place in Sharm El Sheik : a dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians , which we hope will be genuinely constructive .
Europe is absent from these talks , and yet you are still advocating the idea of critical dialogue , which means conducting trade without giving much consideration or no genuine consideration to the matter of human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
In the light of the news that Iran appears to be promoting this - as I mentioned in my statement - in the light of the protests of dozens of Members of Parliament , who are calling in a document for greater efforts , for Iran to democratise its system , failing which it will be necessary to take not necessarily military measures in its regard but measures which make it understand that critical dialogue is not the way to address issues , what is the Council 's reaction to this increasingly urgent request from the Members of the European Parliament ?
I have noted the wish for the Union to have a higher profile on this sort of issue .
It is a minor aspect of the more general problem we constantly discuss , by which I mean how the Union can have greater weight in the foreign policy area .
However , the Union was present at the meeting held in Crete a few days ago , at the Euro-Mediterranean conference , which was also attended by the Israelis and the Palestinians and numerous other Arab countries .
The climate which prevailed at the discussions which we held helped bring us to the point where we can now discuss developments which may be of particular importance .
Question No 12 by Maurizio Turco ( H-0332 / 03 ) :
Subject : The Iranian regime 's anthrax programme
The People 's Mujahedeen 's denunciation of the Iranian regime 's secret nuclear weapons programme in August 2002 has been proved completely correct , namely by independent research institutions , and therefore the public denunciation by the same organisation on 15 May of the Iranian regime 's programme of anthrax production was naturally viewed with general acceptance by the international media .
What does the Council intend to do about the existence of such programmes ?
The Council would emphasise that , as a general rule , weapons of mass destruction and their non-proliferation have indeed been one of the sectors in which the European Union has had concerns in connection with Iran for years now .
The Union is encouraging Iran to sign , ratify and fully implement the relevant international acts , especially , as I said earlier , the agreements of the International Atomic Energy Agency , because at present the Iranian nuclear programme is causing concern in the international community , to which I also referred .
The Union is also encouraging Iran to participate fully in the work which will lead to the sixth conference to review the Biological and Toxic Weapons Convention , which is scheduled for 2006 .
I should like to point out that the round of negotiations held in Teheran on 1 and 2 June on an EU / Iran trade and cooperation agreement provided an opportunity at just the right time to raise the above issues with this country .
As far as anthrax is concerned , the Council has no knowledge of any specific production programme of the Iranian regime .
However , any indication of the possible existence of such a programme will be taken into serious account and examined with all due attention .
This is the answer we are usually given every time anybody asks a question about relations between the European Union and any of the world 's dictatorships .
There is no antidemocratic dictatorship in the world that is not funded by the European Union on the pretext that that serves as an opening for dialogue .
We can see what is happening in Vietnam , in Laos , in China , in Cuba .
Your words , President-in-Office , remind me of what was said in this Chamber in December 2000 with regard to the adoption of the joint resolution on Afghanistan .
It would seem ridiculous if we were to hear it again now .
Our short-sighted attitude to the future , despite the fact that we can already see clearly what is likely to happen , and this approach to international relations are disturbing as well as wholly unconvincing and herald much greater destruction than what we ourselves are already facilitating today .
Question No 13 by Marco Cappato ( H-0333 / 03 ) :
Subject : Democracy and human rights in Iran
Seven years after the Iranian regime tried to convince the Iranians and the international community that it was open to change and to democratisation , it is now clear - to all the observers , and to the Iranian people first and foremost - that nothing has changed for the better and no improvement in the human rights situation or the democratic rights has taken place .
Does the Council support an internationally monitored referendum on the establishment of a democratic regime in Iran ?
The Council continues to have serious concerns about violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Iran .
The Council is making an effort to strengthen respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and to promote the rule of law in this country .
This is being done , among other things , through the broad EU / Iran dialogue on human rights set up last December .
The Council has repeatedly made it clear that deepening of commercial relations between the EU and Iran - which are also the aim of the negotiations being held on a trade and cooperation agreement - should be matched by similar progress in all other aspects of the EU 's relations with Iran .
This means that any reinforced cooperation and trade with Iran must go hand in hand with substantial positive developments in various sectors which are giving rise to concern in the Union , including and especially human rights .
Mr President , the issue raised in this question is actually the more general matter of the Council 's willingness to make a clear , practical proposal on a transition which it considers to be essential and indispensable in the process of democratisation .
My question referred to a referendum on the establishment of democracy .
If we do not want a referendum , then other instruments can be found .
The important thing is for the Council to lay down the parameters .
This is an explicit request .
We cannot be content with calling for dialogue and mutual understanding and saying that the situation needs to be improved .
There must be firm points of reference .
You are against a referendum ?
Then we want to know what points of reference the Council is establishing , what you consider to be the lowest common denominator , the absolute minimum .
Since you are telling us today that our trade agreements will be subject to the evaluation of progress made in democracy and human rights , our question is : If there is not to be a referendum , then what threshold , what instrument , what parameter do you consider to be the absolute minimum ?
Otherwise , we will just go round and round in circles , and then - you never know - the United States might intervene , amid general outcry , and propose other solutions or instruments .
Mr President , I would find the idea of Parliament 's passing such a resolution , proposing a change of regime in Iran and a referendum on the introduction of democracy , extremely interesting .
From a political point of view , the Council will bear it in mind before it decides what to do .
Thank you very much , Mr Yiannitsis .
President .
As the time allocated to Question Time is at an end , Questions Nos. 14 to 21 will be answered in writing .
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report ( A5-0143 / 2003 ) by Mrs Smet , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on analysis of the open coordination procedure in the field of employment and social affairs , and future prospects [ 2002 / 2223 ( INI ) ] , and
the oral question ( O-0044 / 2003 - B5-0096 / 2003 ) to the Commission , by Mr Rocard , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the application of the open coordination procedure .
Madam President , we first need to question the reason why an own-initiative report was proposed , for we have noticed that this method is spreading to many areas .
In Lisbon , it was recommended to apply this method to the information society , research and innovation , company policy , education and training , social inclusion , economic policy , migration policy , etc .
However , we have noticed that Parliament 's input and control are very restricted .
There is a great lack of transparency in the decision-making process and in the reasons why some elements of the method are , or are not , being used .
This is why the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has decided to carry out a thorough analysis of the way in which things are being done , which has resulted in a report containing the suggestion that , if the Commission wished to start an open method of coordination , this should require the permission not only of the Council but also of Parliament .
Moreover , the Commission must indicate the components of the method it wants to use .
These components are common targets , common indicators , guidelines , common indicators , a summary report , national reports and recommendations .
These are the conventional components that are used either wholly or in part .
Parliament must give an opinion on the guidelines , the summary report and the recommendations , and the social partners must be consulted on matters relating to social policy and labour .
Finally , the Commission is also asked to draw up a study on the method 's effectiveness and on the linking of money from the Structural Funds with the recommendations that have been put to the Member States .
To organise this in a structured manner and to prevent the open method of coordination from being developed in one area or another without Parliament 's knowledge , input or codecision , it is necessary to enshrine the general mechanism and Parliament 's codecision right in the constitution .
The question is , however , whether we will succeed in doing so ?
Judging from the texts drawn up to date by the Convention 's Presidency , I notice that we have met with partial success .
For example , it is stipulated that the open method of coordination is applied to economic policy and to employment policy and that - this is an improvement on the current texts - it can be applied to social policy .
It is also stipulated that Parliament must be consulted or informed of the guidelines and recommendations .
Needless to say , this is a step , albeit a small one , in the right direction .
It is in any case more than what was deemed possible at one stage on the basis of the discussions in the Convention .
However , it remains a drop in the ocean .
Parliamentary powers and possibilities for control remain restricted .
Those who are opposed to this method and labour under the illusion that if we do not mention it in the Convention , it will not be used , are , of course , mistaken .
Nobody can stop this method from going ahead .
A simple Council decision without any input from Parliament therefore leads to the method being used in one area or another .
I will illustrate this with migration policy .
If the ministers involved in migration decide to apply the method - also because , for example , they are unable to lay down legislation in this area - the open method of coordination will be applied to migration policy .
Our problem is not so much the fact that it is being applied , but the fact that Parliament has no , or very little , involvement in it .
This is why we said in the committee : fine , let us then , in the Convention , adopt an article clearly stating that it is obviously not prohibited to apply the open method of coordination but if it is , that it should be done in consultation with Parliament .
This was , in fact , the meaning of the article .
We have thus seen that some progress has been made in the Convention , that we have achieved what we wanted to some extent .
However , it is imperfect and incomplete compared to what it should be .
I would reiterate my two key comments : I fear that , on the one hand , the open method of coordination could result in no legislation being laid down and , on the other , that some of the national powers may possibly be removed if the open method of coordination is applied .
There is , in fact , only one solution in both cases , which is : to allow Parliament the right of codecision .
It is precisely the opposition to the open method of coordination that has led to this not being achieved satisfactorily .
I can only say that this is regrettable .
I think that we have drawn up a sound report and I would thank all the members of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , for they have made a marvellous contribution to this report .
Madam President , Commissioner , an ambitious objective was set in Lisbon in spring 2000 that Europe should develop into the world 's most competitive knowledge-based economy in 10 years ' time .
There were a number of concrete aims associated with the conclusions reached at the summit relating to education , especially training in information technology .
In addition to IT training , the Lisbon process emphasises the importance of lifelong learning .
We on the European Parliament 's Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport are pleased that education is now higher up on the Union agenda .
We need jointly set objectives and indicators and joint action .
The new jobs that are being created mainly demand special skills .
Mastery of IT is nowadays required in most professions .
It is also one of today 's areas of civic education , which , if neglected , makes life difficult for people and exposes them to exclusion .
Education is not only a key to inclusion on the part of our citizens , but also a basic prerequisite for our societies to succeed .
It is good that the EU Education Ministers have been able to agree together on concrete aims for education and training and that the Bologna and Bruges processes , aimed at the recognition of qualifications , are under way .
In the opinion of the Committee on Culture , in addition to education and lifelong learning , open coordination is also needed in other areas that come under the job description of the Committee , that is , in policy on youth , the media , culture and sport .
Increased cooperation will boost the functionality of the Internal Market as well as our citizens ' prosperity and degree of inclusion .
That way we will create the right conditions for social unity , steady development and belief in the future .
The introduction of open coordination in the field of education has , despite its worthwhile objectives , nevertheless meant problems .
It has increased the power of civil servants and pushed aside both the European Parliament and national parliaments in the way it acquires information and exerts influence .
This cannot continue .
In the resolution it is drafting , the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport is calling for a clearer and greater role for the European Parliament .
That is necessary for the process to have democratic authority .
The committee is also stressing that the open coordination method must not be allowed to become like other legislative procedures but at the same time a closed procedure which will undermine the legislative aims laid down in the Treaty establishing the European Community .
In its resolution the committee invites the Council and the Commission to hold talks with the European Parliament in order to establish an interinstitutional agreement on the open coordination method .
The agreement should contain rules on the choice of policy areas to be included in the open coordination method and a process for applying them in a way that is consistent .
The European Parliament must be able to participate in decision-making fully and on equal terms .
In the view of the committee thinks the interinstitutional agreement should contain rules concerning the European Parliament 's participation in drawing up aims and indicators .
At the same time we must agree on access to documents , participation in meetings , monitoring progress and the dissemination of information .
What is most important , however , is that open coordination should become a Community process .
It should be decided on by the European Convention , now on the home straight , and at a future Intergovernmental Conference .
Running parallel with the aims of the Committee on Culture is the report by Mrs Smet on open coordination in the field of employment and social affairs , which is being discussed today .
It is good that two of Parliament 's committees are playing an active role in the creation of a parliamentary dimension for open coordination , something we obviously need in Europe .
Madam President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Smet on the exceptional analysis in her report of the open coordination procedure and on the topicality of the debate , given that , as we know , this issue is also being discussed in the Convention .
There are two essential categories of issues .
Those which concern the democratic legalisation of the procedure and those which concern its efficiency .
As far as democratic legalisation of the procedure is concerned , our experience to date is that only in the field of employment is there a legal basis in the Treaty .
It is therefore an open procedure , which is applied with very specific rules defined in the Treaty and Parliament plays a role in this procedure .
It could be much stronger , but it has a role and its opinion is necessary and respected .
However , as Mrs Smet quite rightly said , no legal basis has been used for the other applications of the open coordination procedure .
They have been based on agreements by the Council of Ministers .
Consequently , the role of Parliament is still reduced , even though I must say that both on the issue of combating poverty - where we have an application of the procedure - and on the application of the procedure to pensions , an important effort has been made for us to cooperate with , consult and inform Parliament .
In future , this procedure will certainly play an important role .
We see that it is beginning to appear in numerous individual policies .
The problems of the participation of Parliament , and hence its democratic legalisation , have not only their European but also their national dimension .
In the evaluation we carried out , we saw that , in numerous countries , the national parliaments not only do not participate but also are hardly even told of the targets , commitments and method of implementation of the joint action plans .
I believe , therefore , that with the discussion taking place in the Convention , it is very important for there to be an article covering the open cooperation procedure , determining the role of Parliament and , as the Commission has proposed , for there to be a special reference to the application of this procedure to social protection , where there are various problems , given that many of these competences in the social sector are national .
Now as far as the area of efficiency is concerned , I would agree with the report that a national and European evaluation of the results plays a very important role in year-on-year improvements .
Our first experience is the evaluation of the European strategy , of the application of the procedure in the area of employment carried out in 2002 , while we shall have the evaluation of the application in the field of pensions in 2006 .
A second element relating to efficiency is if there will be financing of the application of the procedure .
We must say here that , so far , there is experience concerning financing of the strategy for employment by the social fund and financing of specific guidelines , mainly those directed at human resources , and we believe that , for the area of enlargement in particular , for the new countries which will be called on to participate in the implementation of the procedure , but with reduced resources , the social fund can play a very important part .
Finally , I should like to refer to the observation in the report that mainstreaming the gender dimension in all Community policies can also play a very important role in the application of the open coordination procedure , given that this is where individual targets which might concern equality of the two sexes are always identified .
Madam President , I would just like to speak about the part for which Mrs Diamantopoulou is not responsible , namely culture , youth , education , media and sport .
But I think you are also representing Mrs Reding here .
Before the report was even planned by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , we had already made an enquiry to this effect , but then - for whatever reason - it was delayed for months .
So at last we are getting together to debate this issue , and together we should try to make the best of it .
We realise that these coordination procedures exist , and as a European politician I would actually be pleased if some people - people in positions of responsibility , politicians - would coordinate their activities .
These people , however , are precisely the people who are usually trying to deny us our authority .
They coordinate their activities in areas where they do not want to grant us any responsibility at all : in the field of culture and education .
They are suddenly coordinating in these areas without being accountable to us .
This strikes us as rather suspect .
The problem is that we are being treated like NGOs in this area .
We are not NGOs , however , but elected representatives , and we ought to know what exactly is being negotiated in our name behind the scenes .
Moreover , it is not only the Council that is content with this ; the Commission too , unfortunately , is very pleased about it .
You see , in this way it has managed to oust an awkward player from the field .
The Council and the Commission have joined forces here - which could even be a good thing , but I would like to use Machiavelli 's words here and say , ' Not every end justifies the means ' .
For this reason , I believe that we have to be very cautious in this case , and that we should expect to be included .
It has now transpired that what has developed is an intergovernmental method .
And once something like this has got under way , is it very difficult to stop it again .
Although we now know that the Convention , which has little to say about coordination , declared its opposition to the open variety of it , we also know that all national presidents should coordinate with each other , where the need arises , even in instances not necessarily covered by the Treaty .
We really need to be careful , however , not to let ourselves be excluded .
From the point of view of culture and education , I can actually say that it is really hypocritical that we are not allowed to be active in precisely those areas where we would be happy to be involved .
Then , in a roundabout fashion , in the context of this open method of coordination , we have the same things that we would be happy to do , but we are not included .
This is simply unacceptable , and we must fight against it .
We should recall that an intergovernmental method may not be introduced indirectly .
We should see to it - including by means of today 's debate - that this existing intergovernmental method , in other words open coordination , is converted into a Community method .
If heads of governments or individual ministers recognise something to be right and necessary and important , then this too should be converted to the Community method , so that we , as elected representatives of our peoples , can participate .
I ask that this be taken into account and thank all those who were involved .
Madam President , I do not think I need to go over the ground already covered by Mrs Pack .
I am here to illustrate an oral question tabled by Mr Rocard on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , who is unable to be here this evening to illustrate it himself .
The oral question refers to points which have already been illustrated by both Mrs Iivari and Mrs Pack , in other words the fact that we in the Committee on Culture have often realised that many of the measures debated subsequently by the Council are developed according to a coordination method from which we are excluded .
We have been faced with measures which have already been adopted , on which we were only able to express an opinion after the event , despite the coordination method , which it would be extremely useful actually to apply to Parliament too .
With this question , we are asking the Commission , firstly , whether it can provide any guarantee that the measures the Council adopts in future using the coordination method will be notified to Parliament and the Parliamentary committees in good time for them to be able to examine them and express opinions , and secondly , to specify - despite the fact that , in this situation , everything seems to depend on the Convention now - whether it has any proposals to make regarding the wider application of the open coordination method with a view to avoiding Parliament being excluded .
The Members who have spoken before me have already covered all these points fully .
We would now like to raise them once again in this oral question as specific questions to which we await a response from the Commission .
Madam President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Smet on this report , although our group is also left with quite a few questions on this topic .
I recently attended a large pensions conference where open coordination was warmly welcomed in the area of pensions .
There are a number of issues , for example in the areas of pensions , employment , asylum , immigration - to which some reference has already been made - which require a solution at European level , and where , in most cases , a legal basis is lacking .
The open method of coordination was a godsend .
Despite this , there are also people - including some in my group - who are opposed to the open method of coordination .
They are mainly against it on account of the problem cited by Mrs Smet , namely the lack of democratic legitimacy .
A number of speakers have echoed this .
If we pursue the open method of coordination - of which I am in favour , as also , in fact , is my group - a number of points should be addressed .
These have to do with democratic legitimacy .
Both the national parliaments and the European Parliament will need to be involved .
It is unacceptable for Parliament to be consulted only if it is considered opportune to do so .
Parliament will need to be consulted systematically .
Mrs Smet 's report also dealt with another aspect that I should like to bring to your attention .
The big players in this field are , in fact , people in closed , high-level committees who work out virtually every detail and who then submit their ideas to the Council .
I think that this does not benefit public involvement .
Citizens feel represented by their Members of Parliament .
They want to be able to talk to Members of Parliament about things that are happening or arrangements that are being made and over which , at a given time , they lose any sense of control .
So , no matter how sound the system could be in itself , this democratic control will need to be in place .
Another point that has already been mentioned is the issue of indicators .
If we want to compare the facts in a number of areas of policy , the facts will need to be comparable .
Very clear indicators will therefore need to be put in place which can be measured exactly if a comparison is to be drawn between the Member States .
To cut a long story short , I welcome Mrs Smet 's report being discussed at this time .
In my opinion , we should ask the Commission to come to an agreement with the Member States to the effect that , if this open method of coordination is maintained in future , at least a number of basic conditions will have to be met .
Madam President , I should like to thank the rapporteur warmly for the report .
I believe it to be important for two reasons .
First of all , based on the experience that we in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs have gathered , the rapporteur has drawn up a very practical assessment of what has happened in the different open methods of coordination .
Secondly , it is also important because she offers solutions .
In her intervention a moment ago , she herself indicated the dangers which the method entails .
Mrs Jensen and Mr Schmid have tabled amendments which put these dangers into extra sharp focus .
If we were to follow their solutions , particularly those of Mr Schmid , it would mean we would be maintaining bureaucratic mills full of civil servants talking among themselves and organising cosy conferences , where something may occasionally get done , but where no real results will ever be achieved - and if they were , they would remain behind closed doors .
The good thing about the open coordination process as we know it now is that the facts and figures will now at least be on the table .
As you know , the process started with a decision taken by Heads of State and Government , who decided at a given time to produce honest figures on employment .
This was an extremely important achievement at the time .
Nobody produced honest figures with regard to employment .
Those figures are important .
The question is then , of course , to what extent the common targets can be further pursued .
There are risks .
The risks are two-pronged , as Mrs Smet mentioned earlier .
There are thus the bureaucratic mills , on the one hand , where nothing happens and which are , from the citizens ' point of view , a waste of time .
On the other hand , there is the risk that coordination will be taken to extremes .
This is mainly a fear in Germany , which is understandable , if you know the situation in Germany , where certain powers are delegated to the federal states .
Culture and education fall within the remit of the federal states in Germany .
Member States will then start pooling this power .
Then what ?
Numerus clausi will then be agreed upon as if Germany were one country .
This is , of course , not federalism , but exactly the opposite .
It is , therefore , understandable that German MEPs , in particular , have problems and are concerned that this method , via the backdoor , would lead to a horrible kind of harmonisation which involves neither this Parliament nor the citizens .
This is very understandable .
So it is particularly pleasing , in my view , that this report offers a solution .
The solution is that this Parliament is to give its authorisation not for applying the method but whether a method is put in place in a certain area .
I am certain that , if we take the area of culture as an example , something like this can only achieved if Parliament plays its part in such coordination .
This is of key importance and this is why this authorisation is so important .
This is why I am , at present , strongly opposed to Mrs Jensen 's proposal , which would prevent us from making any progress .
For four years now , we have been trying to conclude an interinstitutional agreement , without success , as the Council says that it is not provided for in the Treaty .
A change is therefore to be made to the Treaty .
Mrs Smet has submitted a request to this effect and this is why I believe that we should all give our unqualified support to the solution presented in this report .
Madam President , I would like to begin by warmly congratulating Mrs Smet on her truly remarkable report , the principal virtue of which is its timeliness .
The open coordination method has become the general rule on the basis of our experience of the Luxembourg process and of the possibilities opened up by Articles 126 and 128 of the Treaty ; it is a timely process , because this generalisation has also allowed many issues to be raised in Parliament - in relation to insufficiencies and gaps which have repeatedly been condemned and which should be resolved - and because the Convention is about to produce a constitutional Treaty , offering Parliament a great opportunity to make its voice heard .
It is therefore a timely project and a highly topical initiative , because the Convention and the Intergovernmental Conference are going to offer us the opportunity to overcome these difficulties , which , as other Members have pointed out , relate to certain fundamental visible deficiencies , the lack of openness - despite being called an open method - and also the inefficient coordination .
We therefore have an excellent opportunity and Mrs Smet 's initiative offers us an excellent reason to continue working .
Secondly , Mrs Smet has done great work , a great report , into which she has incorporated the best ideas emerging from the debates we have held in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
We socialist Members of course feel very comfortable with this report ; although you and I , Mrs Smet , are very far apart physically and ideologically , we are in fact very close on this issue since you are truly dealing with and resolving our group 's main concerns .
You establish a balance between all the institutions , you spell out the role of the Commission and give Parliament a central role , thereby overcoming the significant democratic deficit we have observed .
You open up channels for transparency , in order to incorporate all the players - national and regional parliaments , NGOs , social actors - which we value highly .
You call for an institutionalisation of the Treaty - which we believe to be essential - you define the scope in order to prevent this method from replacing or encroaching on areas in which there are Community instruments of a legislative nature - I believe you do this very well - and , finally , you guarantee that assessment work is carried out so that the method may be effective .
We socialist Members , Madam President , are therefore going to give this report our fullest support and we hope that it will assist in European integration and help to provide European problems with a European solution , even going somewhat further than mere intergovernmentalism .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to congratulate the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport on their successful and fruitful open coordination !
Open coordination - it sounds like a really modern logo .
Coordinating political activities and political strategies requires a great deal of logic , and we are not always used to this in the work of politics .
It is really very welcome !
I had a few problems at home , trying to explain this open coordination to the Austrian public .
We do not yet have a tradition of this in the way the Scandinavian countries do , for example .
The first question people asked me at home was ' And what role does Parliament play in it ? '
I had to explain to them everything I have heard here this evening , and everything we hear over and over again in the committees .
' Of course ' , the citizens said , ' not just out of respect for you as a Member of Parliament , and not only as a right that a Member of Parliament must assert for herself and on behalf of the population : we demand democratic legitimisation of this wonderful opportunity ! '
Now , as to whether open coordination is indeed such a wonderful opportunity , as I have said , I have no experience to date ; I am not yet a fan .
Neither am I sure that conversion to the Community method is really the recipe for solving matters .
I believe that we must look more closely at the details , which means that the three institutions must sit down at the table .
This does not mean an act of mercy towards the European Parliament , but open , fair negotiations among the three institutions .
It is all about the details : how is Parliament to be involved ?
How are we to have access to documents ?
What rules should we put in place ?
If we really do make good progress in this regard , I may yet become a fan of open coordination .
In the field of culture , media , sport , education and youth , it would also be a possible step towards a kind of European cultural policy , but please do not misunderstand : I am in no way referring to harmonisation of national cultural policy , but rather to effective coordination of common policies in order to achieve common goals together .
Because , as we all know , we are simply not strong enough on our own - particularly in these sensitive areas .
This is the reason for my request , and I cannot repeat it often enough .
I believe that Parliament came close to speaking with one voice here . This is what is expected of Europe in many areas .
Let the Commission consider us a partner and coordinate with us - openly !
Madam President , the specific fundamental assumption of the oral question tabled by Mr Rocard is whether the open method of coordination should be applied to all fields of activity covered by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport and not only to those fields that are directly linked to the Lisbon strategy , that is , education and lifelong learning .
In fact , the reason for deciding on these areas is absolutely identical to that which applies to the two that I have just mentioned .
This was also covered by the willingness expressed by the Lisbon Council to extend open coordination to other areas .
Since this is the case , it would be desirable also to apply the policy of open coordination , to which the European Parliament is fully committed , to the areas of culture , youth , the media and sport .
There are de facto practices that , incidentally , could legitimise this course of action .
This is the only way in which Parliament will be able to deliver an opinion , on a solid basis and on time , thereby usefully contributing to finding better solutions , with greater democratic legitimacy , before the Council considers any relevant initiative , to ensure that national and regional policies can also implement European policy guidelines .
Nor can we understand how Parliament can merely be a passive spectator in this and in other matters .
If this procedure has already proved to be relevant and necessary in a Union of 15 Member States , it will be all the more relevant and necessary in a Union of 25 .
European policies that create European added value must also be discussed by the direct representatives of the European peoples .
We therefore need an interinstitutional agreement that provides for Parliamentary intervention in order to ensure that not only rules but also policies are established coherently , based on objectives and having indicators , entailing access to documentation and participation in steering meetings and in meetings for studying the progress made , providing information on the reports and best practices , in a process that develops the open method of coordination as the Community method .
Parliament should , therefore , be able to act in a timely and relevant manner before the Council takes its decisions .
The Commission should formulate proposals to ensure that Parliament is fully involved in the method adopted in Lisbon .
It is in this context that the oral question tabled by Mr Rocard , Chairman of the Committee on Culture , becomes most relevant .
Madam President , Commissioner , I welcome this discussion enormously .
I also thank the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , because had it not been for this initiative on the part of Mrs Smet , the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport would probably not be in the situation at all where our enquiry is being debated at least in this Parliament .
Mrs Pack pointed out that the Committee on Culture has been waiting for months for our questions - just the questions - relating to applying coordination in the field of culture , education , youth , the media and sport to be dealt with here at all .
This makes it abundantly clear that something is not right with the system .
The debate this evening is an opportunity to lay the issues on the table , and I hope that we will also come to some conclusions .
The method of open coordination can certainly make an important contribution to helping us meet the public 's expectations , and to improve coordination in important areas of policy where we do not want harmonisation .
In my experience , however , this process will not gain public approval if it is not a democratic process .
And to date it has not been democratic ; it has been intergovernmental .
This is why it is up to us to do something about it .
If we believe efficiency to be contradictory to democracy , or flexibility or transparency contradictory to the responsible involvement of Parliament , then this - in my opinion - is indeed a sad reflection on our own shortcomings .
This is why I hope that this debate and report can help to ensure that we finish our homework within a few weeks after the conclusion of the Convention , and that this House - and especially the two committees concerned - can respond to these questions .
Thank you , Mrs Stauner .
At the close of this debate I have received a draft resolution on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport pursuant to Rule 42 of the Rules of Procedure .
The next item is the report ( A5-0150 / 2003 ) by Mr Menrad , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission communication to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on a framework for the promotion of employee financial participation [ COM ( 2002 ) 364 - C5-0527 / 2002 - 2002 / 2243 ( INI ) ] .
Madam President , Commissioner , the own-initiative report before us by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs relates to the Commission communication on a framework for promoting employee financial participation , in other words , employee participation in profits and productive capital .
The communication is intended to kick-start studies and research projects on the opportunities and risks involved in a policy of a broad distribution of assets .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs welcomes the setting up of a working group of independent experts to present proposals to overcome the various problems relating to employee participation .
The focus in this context is on transnational obstacles in enterprises operating across national borders concerning different levels of taxation for participants .
A detail : my report proposes that , in the case of share options , tax should only be payable when the shares acquired by way of option conversion are successfully sold .
This would make sense especially if employees , and not only top-level management , are to be given stock purchase rights .
The primary concern of the Commission communication is to strengthen the competitiveness of the European economy in accordance with the Lisbon strategy decisions .
The Commission proposed a productivity-related wage policy as far back as the Delors White Paper on Employment .
Restraint in terms of cash wage increases , it suggested , would lead to higher profits and thus to investment , in other words to the creation of jobs .
The opinion of our committee is that it is not enough to say thank you to employees for their modesty and understanding ; instead , on the basis of voluntary schemes , they should have a share in the profits and investments that would not have been possible without their restraint .
We support and complement the general principles developed by the Commission : first of all , schemes must be voluntary , in other words , both employers and employees must agree to them .
Second , all employees must be included in the participation scheme .
This means that part-time employees - often women - must not be excluded , in other words , there must be no discrimination against women .
Wherever possible , unreasonable risks should be avoided , especially in the case of employees of small and medium-sized enterprises .
They face a double risk in the event of insolvency , namely that they could lose both their job and the value of their shares .
The Commission has clearly set out its proposals for profit and equity participation in larger enterprises in particular , especially in public limited companies .
Here , we could learn from the experience of other countries , especially countries that are models of participatory schemes , such as Britain and France .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs recommends that more consideration should be given to the problems of small and medium-sized enterprises , and that participatory schemes which are also feasible for small and medium enterprises should be promoted at national level .
The Committees on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , on Economic and Monetary Affairs and on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy have given important answers to the many questions relating to profit and equity participation .
They have presented their opinions very well , and I thank them for this .
Special thanks also goes to the Commission for its valuable suggestions .
The consultations in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs were very constructive , for which , thanks once again to all the parliamentary groups and to all the shadow rapporteurs .
Here , to conclude , is the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on one or two burning issues : first , because employees with equity participation are more motivated , an increase in productivity is likely .
This leads to lower unit costs , which increases the volume of sales , with the resulting possibility of creating more jobs .
The broad spread of ownership also increases willingness to invest , because fairer distribution of wealth stabilises the structure of society .
Second : we need an enterprise law that coordinates co-ownership and cooperation .
The new enterprise law must ensure that employees are no longer outsiders , but members of the enterprise .
In ' Quadragesimos Annos ' this is formulated as follows : the work-contract should be developed to become a partnership-contract .
Through ownership and participation , employees become co-workers and co-workers become sharers in ownership and management .
The goal is to make employees economic citizens with equal rights .
Let us embark on the path towards this goal .
It is in this spirit that I call upon you to approve the present report .
Madam President , I should like to thank Mr Menrad and all the Members who helped draft this report and highlighted the need for this debate on employee financial participation at European level to be restarted .
I shall start by saying that I think it is very important that both the Commission and Parliament agree that there are huge differences between the institutional frameworks in the Member States and thus it is not possible for us to talk about the need to harmonise legislation and practices between the states in the field we are examining today .
It is important that we evaluate the experience of countries in which this model has been used and where it has been proven , in accordance with the studies which we have at our disposal , that it increases the productivity and competitiveness of companies , and use this experience in order to give this practice added European value .
I agree with the opinion expressed in the report that the Commission can encourage the older as well as the new Member States which do not have this legislative framework , so that they proceed to a fiscal framework and to an employee financial participation framework , based mainly , as I said , on the results which we have from countries in which it is applied .
Within this framework , I am delighted to say that the Commission welcomes the setting up of the group of independent experts , which has already started work and will report to us in October and which is currently examining the obstacles faced by companies that wish to apply the employee participation system but have companies in more than one country , which is basically a serious obstacle to large companies operating at European level .
I would highlight the need , to which Mr Menrad also refers , for national practices and national legislation to follow a series of principles , the most important of which is the need to minimise the financial risks to employees .
The report concludes with specific proposals calling on the Commission to conduct a comparative performance analysis between countries and models , to undertake studies on the forms of participation which are most suitable for small and medium-sized enterprises , where the problems are different , and to proceed to draft a paper on trade union and management aspects , attaching , of course , special importance to the issue of gender equality .
I should like to assure you with regard to all the foregoing that the Commission will promote all these proposals to the greatest possible extent and to say that , as we speak , the Commission is already drafting a study on precisely this subject , in cooperation with the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions , relating to small and medium-sized enterprises , together with a framework of comparative evaluation indicators .
Once this study is completed , the Commission will come back and submit a new report and this report will be within the framework of the actions to which we committed in the Commission communication for 2000-2004 .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the issue of the financial participation of employees in companies is a matter of intense debate .
Recent events relating to the collapse of various companies that had systems of employee participation in capital demonstrate the potential risks linked to this system .
The case of Enron and others like it show how crucial it is to study the consequences of applying existing systems , to look more closely at the various alternatives for participation , whether they are associated with pension plans or linked to participation in capital , profits or share options .
Previous experiences not only warn us of the risks but also raise many doubts about the incentive that employee participation schemes might provide for job creation and about the dangers of these being used in order to get around labour legislation and to call into question workers ' rights , specifically in the field of pay , work organisation and hours , equal opportunities for men and women and maternity and paternity rights .
We must all bear in mind the increasing volatility of the financial markets .
Applying the private profit approach to the financial resources of national pension systems and , to some extent , the salaries and savings of employees , which is what the financial participation of employees entails , means increasing the risk of financial crises and the socio-economic consequences of these , as the rapporteur in fact states : it means putting employees at a dual risk because in the event of the company 's bankruptcy they will lose both their job and the value of their shares .
There are obviously various types of financial participation that could generate management schemes .
The discussion is not , however , about the ' how ' but more about the basic ' aim ' of the proposal .
We cannot allow it to be used to interfere in the process of setting salaries and to exert pressure for making the labour market more flexible .
Our fellow Member Mr Menrad has sought to establish some rules , specifically on collective bargaining , arguing that pay increases should not be conducted at the same time as negotiations on financial participation or even that employee participation must be an additional element and must not replace the normal salary or other pay components such as pension schemes .
The option of signing up to participation schemes must clearly always be voluntary and never lead to discrimination between employees or call into question other forms of participation in company life , particularly in the field of union activity .
Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Menrad for what is essentially a sound and conclusive report .
Once again , you have shown yourself to be a worthy champion of employees ' interests .
Is this a theme for the European Union ?
It certainly is !
The reason is that employee participation has an absolutely innovative character , both on the company and the employee side .
That is the approach , and that is the new philosophy , which we must adopt if we want to pursue the Lisbon objectives .
That is what I would say to the previous speaker .
Of course it is important to distinguish between specific things as Mr Menrad himself has done .
We are assuming that these are clear capital shareholdings which cannot supplement the existing wage and salaries systems .
They must be dealt with separately , and that is a factor .
We are assuming , and this has already been expounded upon , that the participation sector or participation in the industrial sector will therefore become far stronger .
It has a psychological effect .
It has an effect on the company .
It is innovative , and holds promise for the future .
That is how it has been presented .
Yet what age are we living in ?
That now applies to the Commission as well .
The task is to integrate these specific models of employee participation into a specific network for the present day , in other words , to encourage employees to take an interest in obtaining shareholdings in companies .
What is the reality in Europe ?
We have recessional and deflationary trends , characterised by the Commission 's growing pressure to make savings .
As a result , pensions and social systems are being cut , and this does not make employees more willing to acquire shares in the corporate sector .
That is the problem .
In other words , if we want to make policies for the European Union , we should get down to brass tacks : we should create systems which are equipped with appropriate flanking measures so that everything can come together to form a creative whole .
That is actually what we want .
This cannot be the case as long there are quite different economic tendencies on the one side from our own , with our ideas , on the other .
Employee participation must not be just a theory .
Employee participation in the Lisbon sense means more than that !
Thank you , Mr Ettl .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0167 / 2003 ) by Mrs Fraisse , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , on women and sport [ 2002 / 2280 ( INI ) ] .
Madam President , Commissioner , I am happy to be able to present my report to you this evening , although , as you can testify , the House is now looking a little empty .
The issue of women and sport pertains to both my Parliamentary responsibilities .
It relates to both the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities and the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport .
It is an own-initiative report , which in essence deals with a fundamental element of our democracy .
Sport has formed part of the basis of the development of democracy since ancient times .
I am also happy that this report has been completed under the Greek Presidency .
I would like to give you a brief outline of the different contextual elements of this own-initiative report , as I set out to do .
Firstly , we need to acknowledge that there is a huge disparity between the situation of men and women and between boys and girls on the issue of sport and access to sport , whether pursued at a high level or as a leisure activity .
It is essential to recognise this disparity .
Secondly , sport is and remains a means of self-fulfilment at all stages of life .
The issue of equality of opportunity comes into play here .
Thirdly , as there is the disparity I mentioned , we need to take account of an issue that poses some difficulties .
If we want to ensure equality between young girls and young boys , between men and women and amongst teenagers and young adults , we need to take account of the disparities and differences between men and women when it comes to sporting performance .
Some people have told me that they think this has been taken on board already .
I note that both the army and the police have had to arrange for different competitive and performance-related tests for men and women .
This is an attempt to establish equality between different body types to ensure men and women have equal opportunities .
I have tried to explain this idea in recital M of my report in particular .
It is difficult to achieve a situation of equality or equilibrium , however you want to put it , when we have two different starting points .
In my opinion , these are the three contextual elements which form the basis of the report .
I would remind you that a report on women and sport was presented to Parliament thirteen years ago .
I had hoped to be a pioneer , but I am not .
I must recognise that others have highlighted this problem before me , and I am delighted about this .
There are three main contexts in which equality of opportunity and self-fulfilment are an issue , namely sport in schools , sport as a leisure activity and top-level sport .
It is perhaps in this regard that I set out to be innovative in relation to the previous report .
All three areas must be taken into account in the development of sport .
School is a place for setting standards and for teaching girls and boys together .
It is a place for opening horizons rather than slamming the door on future opportunities .
All the professionals have told me that school plays a key role in women 's access to sport .
Sport as a leisure activity is a luxury for some people , for some women I should say .
You need to have the time , the means and the opportunity to access sport in order to pursue it as a leisure activity .
There are far fewer sports facilities for young girls , teenagers , young women and women than there are for young boys and men .
There is a great disparity in that pursuing a sport as a leisure activity is a luxury for women who have to deal with the demands of both work and a family .
I wanted to stress this point .
As for top-level sport , we first need to understand the issues involved .
It is sometimes difficult to get up-to-date with what is happening in women 's sport at the highest level .
The media do not always cover the issues as they could or as they should or as we would wish them to .
Furthermore , we must not overlook the specific health problems encountered by some top sportswomen .
There are disorders and hormone problems which can later lead to reproductive problems or premature ageing .
All the professionals have stressed these health problems to me .
As one sociologist put it , sport does not equate to health , contrary to the received wisdom .
Lastly , everyone is agreed on the need to ensure that women have a greater role in decision-making .
This is also a key element .
Lastly , I would like to explain that I have recently undertaken a good deal of work with the different political groups .
I would like to thank them for being so willing to contribute .
I would also like to thank the Greek Presidency for organising a meeting on women and sport , held in Thessaloniki on 8 March , which I attended .
Thanks are also due to the Presidency for including my proposal to create a ' Women and Sport ' unit in its declaration at the end of this meeting .
Further , I would like to thank the International Olympic Committee and the European Women and Sport network , which have been very cooperative .
The last idea that I would like to put forward stems from what I heard from all the parties involved , professionals included .
They asked me to stand up for mixed participation in sport .
This is the way forward .
This report is entitled ' Women and Sport ' but its objective is mixed participation .
We want men and women , girls and boys to be involved in what is and should remain a pleasurable activity for both genders .
Madam President , I should like to thank and congratulate Mrs Fraisse because her report is interesting but also has huge difficulties , if you think that , on the one hand , it directly concerns million of citizens in the European Union and , on the other hand , it is an issue for which there are very few competences and very little experience at European level .
As far as the report is concerned , I should like to start with the analysis relating to the Community value of sport .
I believe that Mrs Fraisse quite rightly demonstrates the importance of sport as an important weapon against discrimination .
That is why both in the European Commission and in the plan for 2003 , which is the year against discrimination , the dimension of sport as a means of combating discrimination is very intensely promoted , and in 2004 , which is the year of sport , the plan being drawn up takes account of the issue of discrimination .
I should like to refer more specifically , because of course I must say that I absolutely agree with the spirit of the analysis to which she herself referred just now , and comment on certain calls which directly concern the institutions .
The first is that , as you know , the Convention has already answered the question of sport and the Treaty ; it is clear - and no one disputes - that sport , with its social and educational dimension , like culture and education , are seen as support activities at European Union level , something which no Member State has contested .
Thus we know the limits within which we can move institutionally .
There is your proposal to create a ' women and sport ' unit .
I think that , at the present stage , it is difficult to determine the specific remit of such a unit , when there is this practical difficulty of determining competences at European level .
As far as available studies and material are concerned , there is an important bibliography from the Council of Europe which , we believe , has been used from time to time and suffices for us to base positive action on it , and I believe that , in 2004 in particular , we shall have the possibility of progressing further and promoting the dimension of women 's sport .
Of course , we cannot sit by and do nothing while we wait for a new article in the Treaty .
There is a margin and I think that we can progress further by improving information for sports associations and increasing awareness of the possibilities within the framework of existing Community programmes , for which there is minimal to no demand from sports-related associations and programmes .
We might refer to the ? QUAL programme or we might refer to the research programmes , for which no such proposals have yet been formulated , or even to the DAPHNE programme , if we think about the dimension of sexual harassment in sport , which is not at all negligible .
Consequently , I would say that I agree and we shall proceed to fully support actions to encourage sports associations to use Community programmes , but I would be more cautious on issues relating to new studies or new administrative structures , at least until we have a clearer definition of activities .
It is clear that the European Commission is obliged in any proposals it makes to respect the legislative action of the Member States , on the one hand , and to take account of the autonomy of sports associations , on the other .
However , one sure way of increasing the interest of the Member States and the sports associations is to promote sport for women as a means against discrimination .
I have taken note of this in your position and would stress that sport and sports policies can clearly be used as a means of combating it .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is clear that we have a long way to go towards reaching a situation in which women regularly undertake a physical activity .
Sport is of fundamental importance to our society .
It is an all-embracing means of increasing understanding that transcends barriers of language , nationality , religion and colour .
As the Olympic Games of 2004 draw nearer , sport is a wonderful means of promoting peace in the world .
Participating in sport is like being a member of a big family .
Consequently , women should never be excluded and their interests should never be sidelined .
We must take both horizontal and vertical action to promote equality of access to sport for women .
In other words , we must develop sport for women and girls at all levels .
We must develop sport in schools , sport as a leisure activity and sport at a competitive level .
We also think it is important to target all groups of women and especially those who are less able to access sport because of their lifestyle or their status .
Sport in schools involves more than just learning sports .
It involves developing the role young people will play in society in future .
Given the reticence of those young girls who drop out of sport , it is also essential to ensure young girls are more enthusiastic about doing sport .
Sport is therefore about achieving emancipation and autonomy .
As for sport as a leisure activity , it is clear that for many women , sport is an optional extra , that can only be considered after work , children , housework and family leisure activities .
We are only too aware of the consequences this has on women 's health .
In addition , our sports facilities do not always allow young women and women to participate in sport at a convenient time .
Services such as childcare are not always available .
Lastly , sport is also a profession and a means of earning a living .
Sports authorities and top sportspeople must therefore respect the current rules on the free movement of people and the provision of services .
Women are in a minority in top-level sport and they are role models for young people .
In order to encourage young girls to participate in sport , these sportswomen need to be in the public eye .
In television programmes for example , they should not be relegated to second place , only appearing after other items .
Being involved in sport at the highest level entails many significant physical changes that have an impact on the health and future life of participants .
It is important to undertake specific studies on the effects of top-level sport on the health of women .
Specific physical training should also be provided for women .
Lastly , it is important that women are represented in all sports regardless of the level or reason for pursuing a particular sport .
It is also essential to allow women to act as referees and umpires and to ensure both genders are represented on medical and selection committees .
Our initiative should allow women to participate in a sporting activity on a regular basis , and gives special consideration to the case of disabled women , and also to the case of older women .
Sport is of course an excellent means of self-development and rehabilitation .
It also promotes the social integration of people of all ages , solidarity and allows people to exceed their expectations .
Sport must be promoted .
It will enhance our society and ensure the well-being of all .
I would therefore like to conclude by thanking Mrs Fraisse and the Commission for the interest they have shown in this issue .
Madam President , it was the struggle pursued by some women and the pressure they exerted that forced the International Olympic Committee in 1928 finally to allow women to take part in the Olympic Games as athletes but still only in a few events .
It was only in 1964 , for example , that the women 's 800 metres was introduced .
It was the pressure exerted by female athletes and trainers , their irreverence and their fighting that wrung the odd concession from highly misogynistic sports organisations .
They started off developments to which we are now paying tribute in the debate on this report , which I support , produced at the initiative of the rapporteur , Mrs Fraisse , whom I congratulate on her excellent work and whom I thank for having included the proposals that I tabled .
We know that there are enormous differences in the situation of women in sport in the European Union , specifically between the countries of northern and southern Europe , although the average for women ( only 16 % ) and girls ( only 37 % ) claiming regularly to practice a physical and sporting activity is extremely low .
An aspect I would therefore emphasise as being particularly important is the report 's call for women 's sport to be recognised as an expression of the right to equality and the freedom of all women to take control of their bodies and participate in sports publicly , regardless of nationality , age , disability , sexual orientation or religion . This means that the Member States and the European Union must adopt the measures necessary to guarantee women and men equal access to sporting activities at all levels and at all stages of life , regardless of social background , particularly in the case of the mentally or physically disabled , who should be encouraged to take part in sport and physical activity , as the report states .
I also welcome the fact that the Commissioner has also referred to this European Year of the Disabled . I hope that it extends beyond this year .
Hence also the importance of using the various legal and financial instruments to promote and support women 's sport .
Greater emphasis must also be placed on physical and sports education , on creating better conditions for female athletes and on ensuring equal rights in all areas of high-level sports , including decision-making and establishing conditions for active social reintegration at the end of the sports careers of female athletes .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , including those of you with observer status , if you are awake .
As I did not start working in Parliament until April , the same time as the observer Members , I would like to mention them .
I feel I am still a little like an observer .
I now have the honour to speak in plenary for the first time , and I am happy that a subject has come my way that I feel is very personal to me , having acquired the kind of energy and invigoration that comes from a lifetime of sport .
Perhaps that is the reason why we are still all in good shape here .
I am pleased to be able to say that the rapporteur , Mrs Fraisse , has incorporated , if not quite all , then very many of the amendments proposed by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance in our committee debate .
With these amendments our group has attempted to highlight the same matter that the rapporteur , Mrs Fraisse , has included to some degree in her report .
Women 's sport is associated with a problem that is also familiar in the political and economic sphere : participation in decision-making .
Real action on equality is needed to solve it .
We should remember that sport does not just mean competitive sport , peak performance or world records .
Sport and exercise for most people are ways of achieving a healthy , balanced life in a society that is ever more demanding and hectic .
This is an aspect that we wish to highlight more emphatically in the report .
Exercise and sport promote vitality , in both individual and team events .
There are also a number of other matters whose importance I now wish to stress , having been given the floor .
It would be very important were opportunities to participate in sport to be were stepped up for people other than those who enjoy perfect health .
Sport is also a very effective , mentally therapeutic and socially beneficial way of improving the quality of life of sick and disabled people and helping them to cope in everyday life .
Those who cannot walk using their own legs can ride , borrowing the legs of the horse , as it were .
That is sport .
Another important point to take into consideration , I think , is that ageing women and men should also be given the very same opportunities to take exercise and practise sport as the young and agile .
Similarly , the beneficial effect of sport and its ability to rehabilitate cannot be stressed too much at this point .
These two very important issues have now been added to the report .
I would have nevertheless liked to have it emphasised rather more strongly how sport is the most wonderful way of integrating migrants , women and children , into a new society .
Despite everything , we are very pleased with the report and we are only asking for a few separate votes on some points .
I hope special attention will be given to the fact that sport as a subject for study in school should not be judged using the same indicators as for intellectual disciplines such as foreign languages and mathematics .
I would also hope the reference to sport as an individual 's fundamental right will be omitted from the report .
I am of the opinion that sport is the right of all people , but I believe the concept ' fundamental right ' would suffer inflation in this context .
The report should also leave out the list naming those countries that did not send mixed teams to the last Olympic Games , although it is important to appeal to all countries to send mixed teams .
If this report gets through the parliamentary debate in tomorrow 's vote , as I hope it does , I will nevertheless be a little sceptical about what the Commission and the Member States will do about this matter .
For that reason it would also be very important if we could have a follow-up to the report , and I now appeal to the Commissioner responsible and ask if we could have a follow-up report on the recommendations contained in this report before the current parliamentary terms ends in 2004 .
I would like to thank Mrs Fraisse for this report and for her passionate defence of this issue as a whole .
Madam President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur for this report , Mrs Fraisse , for all her efforts .
Ladies and gentlemen , times have changed a lot .
Just imagine , in 1912 , when the legendary Pierre de Coubertin was asked about the possibility of organising Olympic games for women he replied as follows : ' This is impracticable , lacking in interest , anti-aesthetic and incorrect .
The conception of the Olympic games must be based on the following formula : the solemn periodic manifestation of male sport based on internationalism , on loyalty as a means , on arts as a background and the applause of women as a recompense ' .
One hundred years is not so long ago .
We women did not then participate in the Olympic games , but now we make up more than 40 % of participants .
And if we bear in mind that there are continents for which participation is extremely low , I believe that we have truly made great progress .
However , as a person who has dedicated 20 years of their life to sport , first as an amateur and then as a professional , I believe there are two fronts on which we still have an awful lot to do and a very long way to travel .
The first is the media .
In Spain we have sports newspapers , which only cover sports , and they are some of the most widely read newspapers in our country - even more than the national newspapers - and they hardly dedicate 4 % of their content to women 's sport , and what is more , the content relating to women 's sport often consists of news of a sentimental nature or on the postures or clothing of our sportswomen .
This is not just a Spanish problem .
In France , the daily L 'Équipe dedicates a maximum of 5 % of its news to women 's sport .
It is therefore a problem which affects the whole of the European Union .
The second front consists of sporting bodies .
In the world of politics , we often complain that women 's participation is too low ; nevertheless , I must point out that women 's participation in politics is light years ahead of their participation in sporting bodies .
In view of such a dramatic situation , in 1996 the International Olympic Committee decided that , by the end of 2000 , 10 % of all posts in all decision-making structures should be reserved for women , including in the international federations and bodies belonging to the Olympic movement , with a view to raising this quota to 20 % by 2005 .
These are ridiculously low quotas , but what makes the situation even more serious is that these quotas are not being achieved .
Ladies and gentlemen , at the closing of the First Conference on Women and Sport , in October 1996 in Lausanne , Juan Antonio Samaranch stated that the twenty-first century should be the new era for women 's participation in the world of sport .
Amongst all of us , men and women , we must do everything we can to make this statement by Juan Antonio Samaranch a reality .
Madam President , I should like to start by thanking and warmly congratulating Mrs Fraisse on her initiative to mobilise and increase the awareness of the European Parliament and all the competent agencies on the very serious issue of the relationship between sport and women .
This report is particularly important and valuable in the run up to the 2004 Olympic Games and we hope that the proposals which it contains will be taken into serious account by the Athens 2004 organising committee .
However , I should also like to warmly congratulate the Commissioner , who has responded directly and positively to the report 's proposals .
Indeed , Commissioner , sport can be a very pro-active way of combating discrimination against women and , more importantly , of combating the under-representation of women , and I think that measures should be taken in this direction in order to increase the number of women in leading positions at all levels of sports activities , to support the personal and professional development of women in the field of sport , the organisation and administration of sport and training and the organisation of sporting events at all levels .
Mechanisms need to be created which ensure that young women will have a say in the development of policies and programmes which concern them .
The media need to be encouraged to positively reflect and adequately cover the breadth , depth , quality and benefits of women and girls working in sport ; and , finally , support is needed to achieve the standards of equality between the sexes laid down by the International Olympic Committee in 1998 and the practical application of everything included in the Thessaloniki declaration , which closed the work of a large international conference held within the framework of the Greek Presidency .
As we approach the 2004 Olympic Games , let us make the idea of women 's participation an important message from these games .
Let the Olympic Games become a real celebration of humanity which will promote the values to which women attach particular importance , the values of peace , democracy , equality , respect for differences , dialogue between cultures , the creative coexistence of people and the resolution of differences by peaceful means .
Thank you , Mr Karlsson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.15 p.m. )
Breast cancer
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it gives me great pleasure to tell you that 15 national presidents from the European Breast Cancer Coalition , Europa Donna , are following this debate in the public gallery .
Breast cancer affects all of us .
In the European Union , someone is diagnosed with it every two and a half minutes .
Every year , 216 000 women suffer from this disease and 79 000 women still die from it even though 90 % of all cases can be cured if they are diagnosed and properly treated at an early stage .
For the most part , these women die when they have their most important responsibilities in society .
Breast cancer is still the most frequent cause of death in women between the ages of 35 and 55 .
Every year , though , 25 000 women could be saved if all Member States were to offer proper preventive care , that is to say , screening in accordance with the European Guidelines for Mammography Screening .
They would provide women with a guarantee that their radiologist carries out only breast X-ray examinations and that he reads about 5 000 mammograph screenings a year , which enables him to evaluate them with an experienced eye .
It is completely unacceptable that , eleven years after the EU guidelines were submitted , only eight Member States offer national mammography screening programmes .
In countries like Sweden , Finland , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom , 90 % of all women aged between 50 and 69 already participate in screening programmes , but in my own country of Germany , barely 2 % of women in this age group are offered screening .
This despite the fact that , according to the World Health Organisation , it can be proved that mammography screening reduces mortality by an unbelievable 35 % .
Even the best early detection is of no use however if subsequent treatment is inadequate , or downright wrong .
The report therefore calls on Member States to establish a network of multidisciplinary breast centres to cover the entire population of the EU , with one centre for every 330 000 inhabitants . These centres should be certified by an independent body and subject to regular review .
The entire medical team of doctors and nurses should specialise in both benign and malignant breast disease and there should be multidisciplinary case conferences to discuss each case .
It is particularly important that the surgeons should perform only breast operations , and that the centre should perform a minimum of 150 primary breast cancer operations per year , because expert knowledge comes only through experience .
These breast centres are extremely important because it has been shown that women who are treated in them have a higher chance of being cured .
Rates of survival in Sweden , for example , which has both nation-wide screening and breast centres , are 16 % higher than in Austria , where neither of these exist .
In fact , only Sweden , Denmark , Portugal and the United Kingdom have breast centres that cover the entire country .
It is precisely because of these disparities in the mortality and survival rates that we must develop a common European strategy in the fight against breast cancer .
We have to get the right information quicker and get better at exchanging experience . We have to introduce a system of benchmarking and be guided by best practice .
This is the only way to save the lives of more women and , at the same time , help to reduce the cost of health care .
And I am convinced that it is the only way to exert positive pressure on countries that lag behind .
The same is also true of national cancer registers , which are a fundamental prerequisite for reliable data , and which exist only in half of the Member States .
Our request to governments to create , by 2008 , the conditions required for a 25 % reduction in the breast-cancer mortality rate in the EU is not unrealistic .
It can be achieved if the political will exists and if the medical profession supports us .
The United Kingdom has been exemplary in showing us how .
In this regard , I would ask the Commission to join us in taking stock of the situation in 2006 .
We know that the Commission is on our side . This was made clear once more with the proposal for a Council recommendation on cancer prevention .
It is only if the proposals made in this report are rapidly implemented that every woman in Europe - irrespective of place of residence , social status and education - will soon have the same optimum screening for , and treatment of , cancer .
Mr President , this is not the first time Mrs Jöns has brought as serious a matter as combating breast cancer into the limelight in a very specific and efficient manner and it is important and proves yet again that the commitment and systematic work of one person can set policies in motion .
Thus , I should like personally to congratulate Mrs Jöns both on the quality of her report and on her continuous commitment to this very important issue .
The fight against breast cancer is a public health priority .
A number of figures were quoted . I think it is important to repeat them so that we understand the size of the problem .
220,000 new cases a year , 75,000 women who die from this disease .
However , according to estimates and studies , the lives of 25,000 women a year could have been saved if proper screening practices were applied to all women in the European Union .
Prevention , therefore , proper screening , saves lives and that is also the report 's message .
In her report , Mrs Jöns examines both best practices in connection with cancer screening and best practices and effective experience in connection with treatment for and care of breast cancer .
It is important to say that many of the elements and proposals formulated emanate from the various actions undertaken by the Commission between the years 1987 and 2002 within the framework of three successive ' Europe Against Cancer ' programmes .
These programmes , together with the new programme in the field of public health illustrate the Commission 's commitment to combating this major illness .
One important element of policies at European level , therefore , is the inventory we have today and the knowledge we have about what is happening in the Member States , so that we can choose the best and most efficient practices and so that the Member States themselves can identify their own weaknesses .
The second important element of policies and choices is the proposal for a recommendation , which essentially also illustrates the Commission 's commitment .
The proposal for a recommendation on cancer screening issued on 5 May .
The objective of this proposal is to formulate recommendations for the implementation of mass screening programmes on a proper scientific basis .
This recommendation has already been submitted to the Council of Ministers for Health , which was held on Monday this week .
What does it contain ?
Essentially it contains a proposal for measures which aim to correlate screening practices with the results obtained in the various Member States .
This means that there must now be quantitative targets from the Member States concerning the rate of reduction in the death rate from cancer .
The Commission 's proposal for a recommendation is a general framework which , of course , cannot have the binding force of legislation , given that we all know that these are issues that come under the jurisdiction of the Member States .
However , this proposal for a recommendation makes provision for the submission of a report on the implementation of cancer screening programmes on the basis of the statistics provided by the Member States by the end of the third year after the date of their approval , and this report will constitute the basis for evaluating and analysing any further action .
In addition to the proposal for a recommendation which , as I said , was the second basic element of the European Union 's policy after the inventory of the existing situation , the third important element is the action programmes .
The Commission has undertaken a major action which relates to the public health programme for the years 2000-2008 .
These programmes make use of the results and achievements of previous programmes , including the programme against cancer , and the relevant networks .
And here I should like to welcome to the gallery the representatives of the networks , the chairmen of the organisations fighting breast cancer , and say that , in our experience also , it is clear that the role of these organisations , the commitment of volunteers , the commitment of civil society , plays a very important role and we see that , in numerous countries , there have been essential improvements and changes to the situation in the field of breast cancer due to the operation of these networks .
Of course , some of them are also pan-European in range .
In 2004 , the Commission is due to submit a final report to the European Parliament and the Council on the success of this ' Europe Against Cancer ' programme .
This programme , the public health programme , includes exchanges of information and best practices between the Member States .
Essentially , it is about reinforcing cooperation between states so that each can learn from the other .
This is in keeping with paragraph 13 of Mrs Jöns ' report and , of course , it recognises and supports the need for common strategies and actions in sectors such as research and technical equipment and technological development , which is also in keeping with paragraph 6 of the report .
The Commission is currently evaluating the numerous proposals for plans submitted for funding in 2003 .
In conjunction with the priorities of the programme of work for 2003 , the services will take account in the final choice of the priorities set out in the report and , of course , we shall take serious account of all the recommendations formulated .
As far as the proposal for a conference on the outcome of the ' Europe Against Cancer ' programme is concerned , I think that it should be discussed with the next presidencies .
I should like to express a slight hesitation as to the possibility of its being organised within the framework of the Italian Presidency , given that there is not much time , but of course we can try and find the best possible time .
Finally , allow me to inform you that the Commission intends to create a health information portal on the Internet .
This portal will be a source of information on public health in the European Union ; its content will cover a wealth of topics and it will be a single point of access for citizens , patients , doctors , experts , the competent authorities and the networks .
We believe that this portal will be an important tool in everyone 's hands for exchanging experiences and promoting policies .
Mr President , I should like to close by thanking Mrs Jöns on behalf of Mr Byrne , who was prevented from coming by very important commitments , for her particular contribution to the implementation of our common objective and to congratulate her warmly .
Mr President , every family , every household in the European Union has at some time or other come into contact with cancer , a terrible disease that you can never get rid of , even though you may recover from it .
That the European Union is not only active in the field of cancer prevention and the detection of this terrible disease , but also creates the opportunities to cure cancer through the research programme there are EUR 400 million available for this research programme must be heartening for the European citizen .
That is also the reason why Mrs Jöns and I , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and together with all its members , have worked together consummately to ensure that the report of our rapporteur , Mrs Jöns , now before you can really be seamlessly supported by our group .
Together we have followed a path that we think is the best for everyone who has to face , will have to face or has had to face the problem .
There are great differences in Europe .
I am proud of my own country : our screening programme is perfect , but that does not mean that there is nothing now to be done there .
There are differences in the sense that the breast cancer problem is greater for women in the Northern European countries , at least it occurs more , and that in other countries - and I am looking at the accession countries here too - it occurs less but the chance of a cure also differs very widely across the European Union .
That means that what was started in the 1990s with the breast screening programmes now requires further completion , and that is why we stand together .
I shall be making a further remark about this directly .
I am asking the Commission for attention to be given to other programmes , other forms of cancer that are also very curable and to which I feel we have really devoted too little attention to date .
One example is cervical cancer , which you can detect very early using the HPV test and for which we as the European Union should be exerting rather more pressure on the Member States to be rather more active in this regard too , because if it is detected then in most cases it can be cured .
The same goes for prostate cancer .
Same problem .
Let there be rather more attention given to them too in the new programmes .
What we have done is look to see whether the Commission 's guidelines and programmes are adequate , where , in order to arrive at solutions , we can really only advise the Member States .
A number of points have , I think , been highlighted .
First of all I would mention screening , apart from which , however , it is also of the utmost importance that women , when the existence of breast cancer is suspected , should be taken care of very quickly .
I have to say that in my country we make the occasional gaffe in this regard .
Prompt detection therefore , but prompt treatment also .
That is of the utmost importance and I ask you too , Commissioner , to devote attention to it .
Another situation we must avoid is one in which , whenever cancer is detected , any small hospital can then take action .
Interdisciplinary , multidisciplinary tackling of the problem leads to the best chances of cure and I think that every woman in the European Union has a right to this .
Mr President , we have waited a long time for this debate , and I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Jöns , for all her work on this issue .
It often takes one person to drive an issue forward and to obtain a result and if it were not for Mrs Jöns and all her hard work , we would probably not be sitting here today debating this issue .
Breast cancer is one of the greatest health problems facing Scotland and the EU as a whole .
It is the most common form of cancer amongst women in Scotland and the second leading cause of death in all women .
The disease affects one in nine women and claims 13 000 lives in the UK every year .
Despite advances in diagnosis and treatment , breast cancer is the leading cause of death in women aged 35 to 55 .
These are quite chilling statistics , so what can we do to help prevent breast cancer in the first place ?
And if diagnosed , how can we ensure that women get the best possible treatment ?
Firstly , as the rapporteur recognises , screening has to be a priority .
Although treatment in Scotland and the UK is better than in most Member States , with specialist nurses and the promotion of breast care centres , it is still the case that , unlike with smear testing , women only start being screened automatically at the age of 50 .
The Scottish breast-screening programme currently invites eligible women aged 50-64 every three years .
This is a good start , but we know there is always more that can be done .
I would like to see more women screened at an early age across the EU and in the applicant states , and although women who have a history of breast cancer in their family are more aware of the risks , and start screening earlier , there is more we can do to push Member States to promote earlier and better diagnosis .
Recent studies show that , with improved screening of young and middle-aged women , mortality rates could be reduced by about one quarter .
Secondly , on prevention : interestingly the report mentions that the increase in breast cancer has been worldwide since the end of the Second World War .
Part of the reason is better diagnosis and also people understanding about genetics and family history , but our environment , lifestyle , habits and general quality of life may be related .
That is why research is so important , as are other directives promoted by the EU : for example , the new chemicals directive which is about to work its way through the parliamentary process and may be another way to try and minimise the risks that we as EU citizens face in our daily lives ; the same applies to our work in dioxins and the eHealth communication .
Thirdly , we need to make sure that organisations like Europa Donna which have done so much work across Europe on the issue of breast cancer awareness are given the support they deserve .
Women in the EU diagnosed with breast cancer need to understand the treatment options available to them .
It is important that patients have access to useful information about breast cancer and support systems .
Finally , the importance of information and awareness runs through this report ; this is our goal and we should all be aiming for this .
Mr President , I should also like to warmly congratulate Mrs Jöns on this report .
My group spoke very appreciatively of it , despite the fact that a number of Members feel that some parts go too far in the direction of subsidiarity and for this reason abstained from the vote in committee .
All the members of my group regard the report , as such , as being of high quality .
I think that that is very important .
I also have appreciation for the Commissioner and her vision of how things should proceed with this report .
She has said that it is important to gather and to record knowledge .
This view I share entirely .
Member States will themselves certainly become better acquainted with their own weaknesses if they look across the border at others .
That is by no means a luxury .
If we look at the report closely , we see that there is a 60 % greater chance of developing breast cancer in Western Europe than in Eastern Europe .
We really must learn from that .
Why is this so ?
If we look at the growth in the number of women with breast cancer , again there are significant differences .
In the European Union , for example , the number of women with breast cancer is showing the greatest growth in my own country .
There must be reasons for this that we can find .
In the report we read for example that women from urban areas are more prone to breast cancer than women from rural areas .
A lot of research is therefore needed to see what factors really do have an impact on breast cancer .
Is it actually true that the effect of using oestrogens is to increase the risk of breast cancer rather than to reduce it ?
The answers to many of these questions remain unsatisfactory and I think that it is excellent that where we can all learn from research we do it collectively at a European level .
This is after all the most useful way of spending the money .
I also greatly appreciate the volunteers and the voluntary organisations that have done much to improve the quality of the treatment .
Personally I am a great advocate of treatment in breast centres .
Not only because of the greater chance of survival there , but also because of the total approach to the problem that women face .
For women it is after all in some cases a violation of their body .
A violation of the way in which they feel they lead their life as a woman .
For a long time little attention was paid to this and we looked too much at the technical side of the disease .
Mr President , I think it extremely important that we should continue with what the Commissioner has proposed .
I also appreciate that she will be bringing forward a plan to provide information about cancer in general on the Internet .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has also made a number of important points .
I therefore hope that we shall soon see all this in place and that the conference that has been requested will also be organised quickly .
Mr President , Commissioner , on my last visit to the gynaecologist she told me that the risk in Belgium has risen from one woman in 10 to one woman in eight .
These are frightening statistics and I think that the drama of discovering breast cancer in a woman is still a major trauma for herself and her family , even though this cancer can often be cured if discovered early on .
One in eight , though , is too high a risk and in Belgium we are in fourth place behind the Netherlands , Denmark and France .
We must also take into account that there are unacceptably large differences in the chances of survival , depending on whether you live in one country or another .
Early detection , diagnosis and treatment and aftercare help thousands of women to survive , but these chances of survival vary from 81 % in France to 58 % in Poland and Slovakia .
That must make us think .
The quality of the research must therefore be reliable and in this regard it concerns me that only eight countries are considering doing a general screening test .
There are discussions about this .
In Belgium they are baulking at the idea , on the one hand , because of the cost , but on the other I am sure that there is great pressure from the medical world to keep it to individual medical investigations by your own doctor .
It would be good to examine the results of these different approaches critically in the light of what you , Commissioner , called cooperation in connection with knowledge gathering .
There is a common European strategy , but there is a need to do more than prevention alone .
I think that we need to do more research into the causes .
Various fellow Members , Mrs Boogerd among them , have pointed out that there are still many unresearched areas .
In particular I should like to bring Mrs Jöns 's recommendation in paragraph 11 to your attention and ask you to discuss it with your fellow Commissioner Mr Busquin , because the consequence of the patenting of genes could be that this monopoly unnecessarily stands in the way of breast cancer research .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Jöns , on her report , which is rich in content and promises very good results , and I know what I am saying because I am head of a breast centre in Italy .
I fully endorse all the calls to the Member States to achieve a rate of voluntary participation in breast screening programmes by women of over 70 % , a level which no country has yet reached .
I consider to be important the call to promote and disseminate in the Member States technical and care training initiatives and initiatives to provide patients suffering from breast cancer with psychological support , and to promote at Community level training and specialisation courses which - and this is my addition - are underwritten by university institutions , second level Masters degrees .
These courses could even be financed out of the training funds .
I can support the call to create European registers on tumours as soon as possible so that reliable , comparable data is , at last , available throughout the European Union on tumour growth in general .
It is right to call upon the Member States to use resources from the Structural Funds to fund the creation of infrastructure in the health sector .
I fully endorse the rapporteur 's call for health insurance for , inter alia , aesthetic aids such as bra prostheses , wigs and whatever else a patient needs to restore their appearance as closely as possible to how is was before the illness .
In many states , reimbursement is not provided for these aids .
There are , however , a number of points which give cause for concern .
I would like to point out first of all that a point is missing from the report produced by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities which is essential if that committee is to be able to claim the title ' Equal Opportunities ' .
The rapporteur has made no reference to cancer in men .
I regret to say that this type of cancer affects men too : basically , one man per 100 000 people between the ages of 58 and 63 develops breast cancer .
I would add that the prognosis for men is more unfavourable than for women precisely because men are not subject to screening and the cancer is diagnosed late .
I wonder whether it would not be appropriate for the committee to grant men at least the same right to information as is accorded to women .
Male cancer accounts for 1 % of all breast tumours and I realise that its incidence is not economically significant enough to think about providing specific screening .
I do , however , believe that an awareness campaign directed at the male population would be appropriate so that men can have the same chance as women of having their lives prolonged and their quality of life increased by early diagnosis .
Young men are the most likely to develop breast cancer because of the wide use of female hormones and metabolisers , which spark off gynaecomastia which often goes untreated .
The second point on which I would like to focus concerns item 7 ( g ) of the report in question .
I feel that informing patients that they can exercise the right to lodge complaints against doctors for malpractice is unnecessary , in that this right is already laid down in the European Charter of Patients ' Rights , and that it is dangerous , for it could jeopardise the relationship of trust between doctors and patients on which studies and research have shown that half the success of treatment depends .
I feel it would make more sense for these kinds of controls on the appropriateness of the quality of treatment to be carried out by dedicated institutions such as , for example , the European board for monitoring centres of excellence - specialist breast units .
Mr President , Commissioner , in 2000 , more than 216 000 women contracted breast cancer in the European Union and more than 79 000 women died because of it .
Breast cancer is the most common cause of death among women between the ages of 35 and 55 .
Cancer rates differ substantially from one country to another in the European Union : they are higher in the northern European countries and lower in the southern countries , such as Greece and Spain .
Lithuania and Latvia also have low rates .
In all countries , the rate is rising every year .
Economic , environmental and even cultural factors have a large impact on these figures and breast cancer primarily affects women in higher social classes .
The European guidelines for the early detection of breast cancer , which is the most effective means of achieving good results and a high chance of survival , are only recommendations and are not binding from a legal point of view .
States draw up their own prevention and treatment plans , and these differ significantly from one State to another .
In some countries , the programmes are regional , and there are still some Member States where early detection programmes do not even reach all women within the high-risk age bracket .
This report , which is timely and very well written , aims to raise awareness throughout the European Union of this problem , which mainly affects women .
Its publication has been a wise move on the part of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities .
Every woman should have access to high-quality screening for , treatment of and aftercare in the event of breast cancer .
As a result , we must do away with the disparities that currently exist among the Member States , whose survival rates vary by up to 16 % .
The most effective means , at this stage , of treating the cancer is still early diagnosis .
The Community programme ' Europe Against Cancer ' has been very effective and an excellent example , and we should therefore follow the same path in the future .
Early detection , with programmes to ensure regular screening of women aged over 50 , must be established in all of the Member States and the accession countries .
The collaboration and increased awareness of women are of enormous importance : self-examination is an extremely useful tool , although mammography screening is the most effective technique for the early detection of the cancer .
The fight against breast cancer must be a health policy priority and the Member States must draw up effective health policies and strategies to ensure better early detection , diagnosis and treatment .
The report is very comprehensive , detailed and precise , and I congratulate Mrs Jöns on her willingness to accept suggestions and amendments that have improved the text .
Mr President , before my speaking time starts , I would just like to clarify that Mrs Stihler spoke as the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
I am speaking on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , and would like to thank the House for the support given to Mrs Jöns 's report .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities calls in the report for the fight against breast cancer to become a health policy priority for the EU .
High-quality screening , diagnosis , treatment and aftercare for breast cancer must form an integrated whole and be provided in Member States .
With the Commission 's support , this can be done by 2008 in accordance with our proposal .
In Europe , a woman dies of breast cancer every 20 minutes .
In Germany , every year 46 000 women suffer from this disease and 19 000 die from it .
Breast cancer affects women at the height of their professional and family responsibilities . In women between the ages of 35 and 55 , breast cancer is still the most common cause of death .
On behalf of my group , I should very much like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Jöns .
Her work has a very positive influence , not only because of her own victory over breast cancer , but also because she is fighting for all women in the European Union to receive the best possible treatment .
Our aims are high-quality national screening and the establishment of breast centres .
The relevant guidelines have already been developed by the European Society for Mastology , the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer and Europa Donna .
Now it is a question of transposing them quickly .
The multidisciplinary breast centres shall bring together radiologists , oncologists , pathologists , psychologists and surgeons , who will consult with the patient on the best method of treatment for her .
In Sweden , the United Kingdom and the Netherlands a nation-wide screening programme has led to a 30 % reduction in the mortality rate .
We have now been allocated EUR 400 million in the sixth framework programme of research .
At the earliest possible opportunity , national cancer registers should be set up so that we may finally have informative data about the possible influence of risk factors like tobacco , diet , life-style and environment on the development of cancer .
This is particularly important with regard to breast cancer .
We do of course clash with other interest groups . In my native state of Bavaria , for example , we are taking a different path because X-raying is going to be left to general practitioners .
It is only in accordance with the EU guidelines , however , that optimal treatment can be attained .
Only when the attending physician reads at least 5 000 mammograph screenings per year does he acquire enough training and experience to recognise breast cancer when it is between five and seven millimetres .
Those who do not support this are concerned only with the interests of their professional groups and not with our goal of saving thousands of women 's lives .
Every seventh or eighth woman will be affected . We can count through each row here and see how many of us that will be .
Mr President , I too should like to warmly congratulate Mrs Jöns on her very important contribution towards raising the awareness of the institutions of the European Union about the burning issue of breast cancer , not only by drafting this excellent report , but also by organising the relevant exhibition at the European Parliament and by organising a public debate at which leading scientists from all over Europe participated , in the presence also of the competent Commissioner , Mr Byrne .
We realised at the public hearing , with sadness , disappointment and surprise , that very little money is available for research into diseases which afflict women particularly frequently , such as osteoporosis , the consequences of the menopause and breast cancer , the subject of today 's debate .
In other words , we found that more funds are available for diseases which mainly afflict men , and I say this for the benefit of my male colleagues , rather than for the benefit of the diseases which hit women ; in other words , when it comes to combating diseases and health problems , there is also gender discrimination .
And I should also like to ask the European Commission to look as this , because , as the data which the Commissioner and other honourable Members referred to show , one in eight women is afflicted by this serious disease , which mainly afflicts women between the ages of 35 and 55 .
We , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , are asking and calling for more research into the causes , for early diagnosis , for preventive measures and for treatment , once the disease has manifested itself .
Of course , we recognise the efforts being made by the European Commission and I should like to thank you , Commissioner , for all the positive messages you have given us today about the promotion of measures and programmes with specific targets and , most importantly , for the fact that there will be an evaluation of the results and you will take account of the proposals formulated in Mrs Jöns ' report in the recommendation which you are planning for the Member States and , finally , for the fact that you will take advantage of the opportunities afforded us by new technologies , especially the Internet .
Thank you very much for these positive measures you have announced .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to start by thanking the Commissioner for her words , which demonstrate the Commission 's commitment to addressing this serious public health problem together with the Member States , which have competence in the field of health .
The number of breast cancer cases has increased at a terrifying rate in the European Union .
By way of example , I wish to draw attention to the fact that in Portugal , breast cancer is the main cause of death amongst women over 45 years of age .
3 500 new cases are diagnosed every year in my country , and every day five women die from this disease .
Both a real political will and practical measures to improve this situation do exist , however .
I therefore thank the rapporteur and congratulate her on her excellent report , which alerts us to the many worrying aspects of this specific type of cancer , both in Europe and throughout the world and urges us all to act urgently and make the fight against cancer one of the fundamental priorities of health policy in the European Union .
The challenge we face is drastically to reduce breast cancer mortality rates in Europe , but also to eliminate disparities between Member States where the quality of health care is concerned and , consequently , women 's chances of survival .
We must therefore act at different levels :
firstly , prevention and screening . Awareness-raising campaigns must be promoted , to show that early diagnosis of the disease increases the probability that it can be cured .
Member States must offer screenings at two-year intervals for women between the ages of 50 and 69 years , as recommended , in fact , in the European Guidelines for Mammography Screening ;
secondly : diagnosis . All Member States must ensure that women are informed of the results of a mammography within five working days and wait no more than four weeks following diagnosis before treatment begins ;
thirdly : treatment and follow-up . Women suffering from breast cancer must be treated by multidisciplinary teams that have received and continue to receive appropriate professional training .
To help patients to get through the treatment phase as painlessly as possible , they must be given access to psychological support , physiotherapy and social services .
After treatment , the stage of medical and emotional aftercare is crucial .
Lastly , I wish to end on a hopeful note and say that we will one day be able to defeat and eradicate this disease .
Let us therefore make the best use not only of the EUR 400 million provided for cancer research by the sixth framework programme of research , but also of the new action programme in the field of public health ( 2003-2008 ) , to develop innovative initiatives and projects .
Mr President , Commissioner , the own-initiative report on breast cancer by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities is a balanced , well-considered one .
For that my special thanks go to the rapporteur , Mrs Karin Jöns .
The report gives key importance to quality standards and best practice , which Community health policy can help evaluate and which can be extended throughout all the Member States .
At present there are enormous disparities in the quality of treatment for breast cancer patients between Member States and regions .
Regrettably , this is directly reflected in the chances of survival of women with breast cancer , which is directly affected by the disparity in access to screening , diagnosis and treatment .
According to recent statistics from the World Health Organisation , approximately 80 000 women die from breast cancer in the Union every year .
It is the most frequent cancer in women and the most frequent cause of death in middle-aged women in the EU .
We could predict that the rise in the standard of living for women in the new Member States and the candidate countries and changes in lifestyle there will make the figures look even worse .
There is an urgent need to create a network of national cancer registers to cover the entire enlarged Europe so as to obtain conclusive and comparable data as a basis for research .
At present such a register only exists in seven Member States of the Union , in addition to my own country , and so not even half the citizens of the Union are covered .
It is to be hoped that the Commission will target Community resources in particular at more effective research into the causes of breast cancer and forms of treatment as well as methods for assessing the effectiveness of treatment .
In addition to the socio-economic and lifestyle factors the genotype is an important risk factor in breast cancer .
To date , two defective genes have been identified as causing breast cancer .
The European Patent Office is at present deliberating over an application to patent these breast cancer genes .
Granting such a patent would be very harmful as far as research and improvements in treatment are concerned .
The decision by the European Patent Office will be tremendously important .
It is in the interests of all the European actors , and their duty too , to ensure that the human genetic code is not patented but is freely available for research and the development of medical treatments .
Finally I would like to take this opportunity to thank Commissioner Diamantopoulou for the kind way in which you received the group of Finnish schoolchildren in April and took the trouble to come and meet them personally in Parliament .
Your friendly and very warm attitude overwhelmed us all and gave these young people the inspiration and encouragement to face their problems .
Mr President , Mrs Jöns has written an excellent report .
The point has frequently been made in this debate that breast cancer is the most common cause of death in the European Union in women between 35 and 55 .
For this reason alone it is a subject deserving all our attention .
It might also be worth mentioning , though , that the age group above this one is badly affected as well .
One of the key points is that in the Member States there are currently still too many differences in the diagnosis , the quality of the treatment and the care of breast cancer and therefore in the chances of survival .
But should it make any difference which country or which area or which hospital you are treated in ?
The same is true of diseases affecting men and I refer here in particular to prostate cancer .
It is therefore time for the European Union to adopt a more active approach in the combating of breast cancer in all countries , including the candidate Member States , in order to lift care to a higher level .
The recommendations in the present report give all the relevant starting points .
I am also very pleased with what the Commissioner has said , which demonstrates her positive commitment .
There are already universal screening programmes in operation in a number of Member States .
In the Netherlands there is one such programme for women between 50 and 75 .
I recently took part in it myself and I have to say that I find it very reassuring to know that early detection increases the chance of cure .
Another positive element in the combating of breast cancer is that treatment by multidisciplinary teams leads to substantially better results and it seems to me that more attention here to the psychosocial side of the matter is by no means an excessive luxury .
Breast cancer in women is not just a technico-medical matter .
Thirdly , the recording of comparable European data concerning the development of breast cancer is needed .
Such data may be an extra stimulus for more European research , especially into the causes of breast cancer .
Let us be honest : we still know little about the causal factors .
In short , a splendid and very specific report deserving of implementation and the sort of report that merits further discussion in this House .
Mr President , the fact that the European Parliament is addressing today this major , sensitive issue concerning the health of millions of people , millions of women in our continent and throughout the world is due , as we all acknowledge , to the determination and sensitivity of Mrs Jöns , whom I too would like to thank from the bottom of my heart .
Considering that breast cancer can be cured in 90 % of cases if diagnosed early on and properly treated , as is shown , not least , by the figures provided by Mrs Jöns and by current research ; considering that high quality breast screening within the framework of a regional or national programme can reduce the breast cancer mortality rate by as much as 35 % for women between the ages of 50 and 69 , and that , according to scientific studies recorded , the mortality rate can be reduced by 20 % for women between 40 and 49 too , every woman should have access to screening , to treatment and to high quality aftercare , irrespective of where they live , their social position , profession or level of education .
The main important points of Mrs Jöns ' report are precisely an excellent prevention strategy , rapid treatment and appropriate post-operative care .
Thus , the call to the Member States and the Commission - I would like to thank the Commissioner for her words this morning , which were reassuring - to make combating breast cancer a priority in health policy and to develop and implement effective strategies for increasing prevention , with the goal of reducing the average breast cancer mortality rate in the Union by 25 % by 2008 , is a key point of this report , as is the right for women suffering from breast cancer to be treated by a multidisciplinary team .
It is therefore important for the Member States to develop a wide network of certified multidisciplinary breast units which meet specific quality criteria .
One last point which I want to stress is the importance of research .
The Sixth Framework Programme allocates funds to research : that is all well and good , but we need to insist that these funds for research increase , thanks , not least , to increased commitment from the Member States .
Mr President , first of all , like all of the other speakers , I want to congratulate Mrs Jöns on her undertaking , on her work and on her excellent report .
Breast cancer , Mr President , is the most common cancer in the European Union .
The report by Mrs Jöns highlights some very important information and several approaches the Member States would do well to consider .
Both the Public Health Programme 2000-2008 and the Sixth Framework Programme for Research are very appropriate arenas for proceeding with this task of reducing the effects of breast cancer .
Research and gene therapy will also help us .
We must also congratulate and thank the national and international cancer networks for their work , without which it would probably be impossible to make any headway .
However , we must agree on certain things , such as the age at which early detection programmes should begin .
Perhaps we are starting quite late in the day and we need to harmonise this therapy .
It is also important to harmonise the collection of data and to align the situation on the ground and the treatments used .
The disparities as regards the effect of breast cancer among the countries of the European Union and between these countries and the candidate countries are enormous .
It is vital that we work together to harmonise this situation .
Probably the most important aspects are health education , prevention , early detection , self-examination and , of course , mammography screening .
Rapid treatment is essential ; there are many women who have few resources at hand in this respect , to teach them how to examine themselves and at what stage in their lives they need to seek treatment .
I therefore believe that it is vital for Mrs Jöns ' work to follow this same path , because each and every one of us will benefit from it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0156 / 2003 ) by Mr Schnellhardt , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation laying down specific rules for the organisation of official controls on products of animal origin intended for human consumption ( COM ( 2002 ) 377 - C5-0340 / 2002 - 2002 / 0141 ( COD ) ) .
As there are problems with the airlines today , ladies and gentlemen , I am afraid that I will have to be very strict with time .
In order to facilitate the presidency 's work , I would therefore ask you to discipline yourselves and to stick strictly to the speaking time you have been allocated .
Mr President , I should like to apologise on behalf of Mr Byrne , who is unable to attend this important debate on healthy food due to previous commitments .
The question of healthy food has given rise to a great deal of interest and that is not unwarranted if we think about the crises that have hit the food industry over recent years .
The specific dossier we are debating today concerns official controls on food of animal origin .
The proposal contains special rules for controls on meat , shellfish , fisheries products and milk and dairy products , but of course the debate focuses on the problem of meat inspections .
The proposed system of official controls which are carried out at the fresh meat production stage has the following characteristics :
First , it is based on scientific data .
The official veterinarian has a central role in the overall supervision and inspection system .
It consists of official controls of the systems applied by the business itself and official inspection activities .
In other words , it concerns both the business and the public authorities .
It has espoused the ' from farm to fork ' approach , it addresses both matters relating to health and the treatment of animals and it concerns the frequency and the intensity of official controls , which are dependent on the risks .
I know here that certain Members of the European Parliament will express concern about possible trends towards privatising official controls .
I should like to be absolutely categorical about this ; there is no such danger .
The basic responsibility always lies with the public authorities and the objective is for there to be better allocation of the human resources of the public authorities , depending on the risk presented by the businesses , by which we mean their record of compliance with the rules .
Similarly , this system to which I refer , by which I mean official controls , is aligned with the authorities responsible for food legislation in general , especially as regards the question of responsibility , and provision is made for flexibility for small businesses as and where it is needed .
Similarly , I should like at this point to refer to the discussions and concerns of Members of the European Parliament about the required flexibility which small businesses need to have in comparison with large businesses , and to say that provision really is being made here for flexibility in relation to traditional methods of food production , businesses in remote areas and the need for structural changes within the businesses .
To leave the meat area , to which the basic comments I made earlier apply , let us say that the rules relating to shellfish have also been revised on the basis of scientific opinions .
These new rules mainly aim to protect consumers from risks associated with the consumption of these products .
I shall refer to the proposed amendments in my second intervention at the end of the debate , following the Members ' comments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking those who did such an excellent job of helping me with this report - Members in the political groups , the Commission and the Council .
I was pleased to hear the remarks of the Commissioner as well , because they seem to go in the same direction that we wish to take .
The proposal for a regulation is an integral and important part of the overall endeavour to improve food safety within the EU , product quality in third countries exporting to the EU and to establish European food legislation .
Its primary aim is to achieve better protection for consumers in relation to food products of animal origin for human consumption , and , as the Commissioner mentioned , the official veterinarian is at the heart of the system of official controls .
I think that he has the right technical qualifications and this approach is therefore to be welcomed .
The very detailed demands made on official veterinarians will have to lead to changes in study courses in the Member States . They are also necessary to ensure that scientific knowledge can be transposed into practice .
We should however be careful that official veterinarians , who have been carrying out their responsibilities conscientiously for many years , do not have to take more exams as a result of this proposal for a regulation .
The veterinarians are assisted by official auxiliaries in carrying out their inspections .
For this to work successfully , it is important that both groups of people can work independently .
Monitoring bodies that are in some way dependent on the business that is being monitored cannot , with the best will in the world , take an independent decision .
This is why I am firmly rejecting the idea that the establishment 's own staff can be used or deployed in inspecting the slaughter of pigs and bovine animals in place of official monitors .
Ladies and gentlemen of the Commission , you have plainly been guided by financial constraints on this point .
We have set out to increase food safety in the EU and with these measures you are going to achieve exactly the opposite , which is why we have to reject them .
We should remember that only precise independent findings through official controls focus more on the new concept of national , and ultimately European , risk analysis and are a key element in risk management .
This is also the basis upon which the effectiveness of the European Food Safety Authority depends .
The situation is different with the mandatory application of food business operators ' own controls as an element of strengthening their individual responsibility for the wholesomeness and high quality of their products .
It should therefore be possible , where there is a reduced risk and own controls are taking place , to restrict official controls to checks on the findings of these own controls .
This should be a free decision for the competent authority to take and not compulsory . A risk-based flexible approach in official controls , based on the wholesomeness of the business 's products , should always be the most important factor .
This is much better than an approach based on the intensity of production and also serves to strengthen the position of the competent authority .
Things are again different when traditional production methods are used on farms with lower production and in outlying geographical areas .
Here , the possibility of implementing the regulation is often restricted .
Exceptions to the rules should , however , be limited to flexibility in the attendance of an official inspector and the forwarding of information .
A reduction in hygiene levels cannot be accepted under any circumstances .
The concept of ' from stable to table ' is an important basis for a high level of food safety .
The effectiveness of the system is dependent upon the quality of information going from the farmer to the shop , but - and I would like particularly to draw your attention to this - also back to the farmer .
This is essentially a new approach , one that requires constant emphasis .
The information should , however , be limited to criteria that are important for inspection of the slaughter and food safety .
Information about medical treatment which does not have food safety implications , for example the administering of iron tablets to piglets , does not have to be provided , reducing the amount of information involved .
I think that the greater inclusion of scientific competence in the food production process guarantees that the necessary information is submitted , which may well turn out to be different in each case .
A contentious issue in the EU until now has always been the number of staff for inspections , particularly in slaughterhouses .
I think that we should ask the Commission to make an objective proposal here along the lines of regions and farms .
I know that it is very difficult , but it cannot be avoided .
I am convinced that the new approach will , in any case , lead to an improvement in food safety in the EU .
I am grateful for the cooperation I have enjoyed , and I thank all of you for your attention .
Mr President , I wish to thank the general rapporteur and the lead committee for their work on this important proposal .
It is essential for the sake of consumers and , indeed , producers and suppliers that we have a sensible regime for the protection of public health .
In relation to fisheries and aquaculture products , there are some very particular challenges .
It may not always be appropriate simply to transpose controls which are designed for farmed animals to fishing and aquaculture products .
For example , some of the issues and challenges relating to fish diseases , dioxin levels and so forth are very specific and require regularly updated and verifiable scientific advice on which to base controls and toxin levels .
Bivalve molluscs by their nature pose particular challenges and perhaps the testing regime for scallops , for example , ought not to be identical to that for mussels or other species .
We have to look to species-specific controls in relation to bivalve molluscs .
The current proposal in relation to toxin levels was based on studies carried out in Canada and Japan on mussels , and the effects on the scallop industry of the type of controls which have been envisaged could be very significant .
We need to look very carefully at ensuring - for the sake of consumers but also those who depend on these industries for their livelihood - that risk-based measures are imposed which are reasonable in relation to the problems involved .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me start by warmly congratulating the German veterinarians .
They have proved outstandingly capable of defending their professional interests .
Let me also thank Mr Schnellhardt .
In a number of respects I do not agree with his approach , but he has worked openly and conducted consultation in a very pleasant manner .
Unfortunately , the same cannot be said of all German veterinarians .
There is some misinformation about the content of the proposals in circulation .
The question therefore is whether the outcome of the vote today reflects Parliament 's views .
To be perfectly clear : I am not speaking now on behalf of my group .
Mr Staes has already described it aptly : the flesh is weak .
To put it in even stronger terms , part of the meat sector is especially weak when it comes to dealing summarily with abuses itself .
Hormones , foreign proteins , water injections , impurities and harmful bacteria - they will all sound familiar to you .
We have collectively made food safety one of the cornerstones of our mandate .
We have succeeded in laying down the general principles of European food safety policy .
We have all decided that the producer has primary responsibility for his products .
That is a clear and good principle .
Today we are taking a decision about the way in which we in Europe organise our system for controlling products of animal origin .
In other words , where are we controlling , what are we controlling , and who is doing the controlling ?
In the light of the general food legislation this question seems easy to answer .
The producer ensures that his beef steak , his pork steak and his fillet of chicken are in order and the government takes care of final control .
The Commission also wants to offer meat producers , and in particular the pig and calf farms , the scope under strict conditions to accept their responsibility themselves .
Part of the meat sector is indeed keen to accept responsibility and itself bring abuses to an end .
It is a pity that the rapporteur intends to nullify the opportunity that the Commission 's proposal is presenting .
It is of course strange that we first decide to place general responsibility with the producers and that we are now , today , going to reverse it again .
For that reason alone I argue against Amendment No 135 .
I understand that the German veterinarians and the British meat inspectors have still to accustom themselves to the idea that the meat sector can take responsibility for itself .
They think that staff of meat farms have no capability or are not in the position to monitor quality .
To be honest we think that we must in any event move away from authoritarian farms unwilling to tolerate any criticism of the quality of their products from their employees .
But separately from that , I ask everyone to think carefully .
The meat sector is a highly regulated and well-controlled sector , but there is no sector that is talked about so often on account of scandals .
The BBC recently showed a documentary about abuses in the Dutch poultry sector .
More government control will unfortunately not help to purge the sector of malpractice .
On the contrary , it will be counterproductive , because it removes responsibility from farms .
I think that we must place the responsibility with the producer in a way that is recognisable for consumers .
I therefore ask you to consider Amendment No 127 .
We must remove meat from anonymity , for that is the most effective way of improving safety and quality .
If pork steak or fillet of chicken are placed on the market under a clear brand name , it is of the greatest importance for the producer to handle meat very carefully .
Currently farms that fiddle can carry on regardless , because the consumer has absolutely no idea where his fillet of chicken comes from .
Which means that we keep having complaints and incidents .
Naming and shaming is an extremely effective way of improving food safety and quality .
To be perfectly clear , the individual responsibility of farms does not of course replace public responsibility and public control .
Finally , I should like the meat sector to take a critical look at itself .
We must of course take a critical look at ourselves as well .
Our way of working is not very transparent .
The quantity of amendments is too great and too many of them are simply technical in nature .
It is absurd that today we are voting on the position of the health stamp on the rabbit leg , on the testing of meat from hermaphrodite pigs and on the suitability of the udder for human consumption in the event of brucellosis infection .
If we fail to concentrate on the political outlines , our work can only be judged by the meat sector and the veterinarians themselves .
It is therefore very easy to spread misinformation , but , as this is of no help to the consumer , this is where policy itself comes into play .
Mr President , we have a very good report here , thanks in large part to the rapporteur , who leaves us in no doubt that he understands this matter in practice as well as theory .
It has just been said that we have to distinguish between businesses on the basis of size .
I would be cautious about this though , as it is a question of transparency rather than size .
We talk about creating transparency through the ' from stable to table ' concept .
Well , small businesses are transparent precisely because consumers understand them and have direct contact with them . If something is wrong , they report it .
Mr Schnellhardt , you write that ' confidence is good , control is better ' . I would agree with this , but nevertheless , confidence has to be discerning .
We have to know in whom we can put our trust .
The big problem is that meat is marketed anonymously and no one actually understands how .
This anonymity is a cover for business deals that are criminal and practices that only just border on legality and of which the consumer would certainly not approve .

We have just heard about water with protein being added to chicken in order to sell something cheap at an expensive price , and protein so subverted that it is not possible to detect the DNA or determine from which species of animal it comes . These examples show how the ethics in food consumption - if I may use this expression - are being abused as a result of this anonymity and at the cost of the consumer 's health .
And that is why it is a question of increasing not just confidence , but legitimate confidence .
This has to do with making consumers more discerning .
Of course , producers do have responsibility , and we have talked here about their individual responsibility , but so do consumers , who have to take responsibility for their health by informing themselves .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank my colleague , Mr Schnellhardt , who has drawn upon his professional background to produce a very technically sound report .
Adequate food controls are important in order to guarantee the greatest possible protection of consumers .
They ensure the safety , for example , of raw meat , game , molluscs , milk and dairy products .
In future , therefore , food producers and processors will have to reveal all the different steps involved in their work .
Details will have to be noted about the feedingstuffs used and the state of health of the animals .
It will then be possible to trace food and its component parts back to the place of origin , in accordance with the transparent production chain .
This is the only way for food authorities to react faster when there is a problem or to detect shortcomings in quality as soon as possible and to remove them .
In the Commission 's proposal , it is emphasised that small- and medium-sized enterprises are most affected , and , for them , the new hygiene rules represent a huge burden .
The increase in expenditure will , however , result in a significant increase in food safety for the consumer , provided that the demands on businesses are bearable and affordable .
Against this background , the rapporteur and I have jointly tabled some amendments , which take into consideration the flexibility that is essential for artisanal small businesses without , however , reducing the hygiene requirements .
I think it is important that these artisanal small businesses should be recognised in the definition of the Regulation .
We do have large slaughterhouses in Europe , but we also have a host of small butcher 's shops .
That is why there has to be some flexibility to adapt official controls to the size of the business .
Inspecting a large slaughterhouse , in which thousands of animals are slaughtered and processed on a daily basis , is in nature and intensity different to inspecting an artisanal small business , in which fewer animals are processed .
There also has to be flexibility with regard to the frequency of controls on smaller businesses .
We need a rule stipulating when a business is to be inspected and by whom .
An inspection plan from the competent authorities , which has been preceded by a risk analysis , should be sufficient .
Health-based requirements should only be involved if they are actually relevant for people 's health .
What I expect from this Regulation is greater individual responsibility for producers and processors .
European consumers will benefit directly from this .
However , I am also very concerned that we , as legislators , should give consideration to the traditional small-business structure in Europe , in order to guarantee that both the production and supply of food is sustainable , adequate and safe , even in the less-populated areas of Europe .
Mr President , this report has been somewhat controversial and the many amendments show that it remains so today .
Food safety is a key priority for consumers and this regulation will lay down specific rules for the organisation of official controls on products of animal origin intended for human consumption .
Food scares are only too familiar to European Union consumers .
Just a few weeks ago the BBC TV programme Panorama exposed a scandal connected with poultry .
It found that chickens for human consumption have been injected with beef and pork protein .
The programme revealed how processors were pumping chickens full of water in an effort to make them look bigger .
There is still much to be done to protect consumer safety throughout the European Union and in the enlargement countries .
If we want proper European Union rules for the organisation of controls on products of animal origin intended for human consumption , we need a directive which will promote consumer confidence and prevent scandals from happening .
However , it is widely recognised that these controls are carried out differently in the different Member States .
In some they are carried out by a veterinarian , in others by highly-skilled and qualified meat inspectors .
There is growing concern , of which the rapporteur is very much aware , that the independence of meat inspectors in the UK could be put on the line with this report .
As their representatives have said , at the moment their independence gives them powers which they would not have if they were employed by the firm where they are working .
For example , one meat inspector told me that she would stop a production line if a chicken head had not been cut off properly - something which should be welcomed given the importance of this House places on animal welfare .
Similarly , if there is a problem with the quality of meat , the inspector has the power to stop that piece of meat moving from the production line to the supermarket .
If the inspectors lost their independence and were employed by the firms in which they worked , food safety would go out of the window to increase profit .
This report should be welcomed ; but we must recognise the difference between Member States in terms of controls and the importance in the UK of retaining the independence of the meat inspectorate .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteur for his report - one aspect of which has a particular significance for my constituency in Wales - and , as other Members have covered most aspects of the report , I would like to focus on that particular issue .
The report covers animal products other than meat , including aquaculture .
As we have had particular problems in Wales concerning the testing of cockles , this is very important for us at this time .
The harvesting of cockles is a long-standing and much-valued industry in coastal areas of Wales , such as the Burry Inlet and the Welsh Dee .
About 3 000 people are employed directly , mainly small businesses and self-employed people .
However , for two years the major cockle fisheries in these areas have been closed , causing significant hardship and even bankruptcy .
The cause of the closure was the discovery of unidentified toxins during testing , even though not a single case of illness has been reported .
Directive 2002 / 225 / EC allows for either of two different test methods to be used to detect toxins , and the method used in the UK has been seriously questioned in recent months .
As an earlier speaker mentioned , public and producer confidence is essential .
The main issue here , and the one relevant to this report , is that to date there is no standard toxicity test for bivalve safety within the EU .
This has meant that during the period when the cockle beds have been closed in Wales , cockles from other EU countries , which have not been subject to the same tests , could be , and have been , imported into Wales and sold .
The purpose of this report is to improve controls under the food hygiene package , and our first priority is the health of the public .
To do that we need very clear and detailed rules , but there must be a level playing field across Europe , and in this case that means a harmonised and more effective method of testing .
This report will take us in that direction and it is very welcome .
Mr President , I wish to begin with a point of order .
I understand that there is now to be no debate on the Malliori report .
Mrs Malliori 's report has been parodied and attacked in some countries , including my own , and we are owed a small debate on it .
I am sorry that is not possible , and I know Mrs Malliori will want to speak about this .
I salute Mr Schnellhardt for his report and diligence .
I agree with almost everything he says .
On the margin , there are some areas - for example the attendance of veterinarians , fallen stock , etc. where there might be too much regulation .
However , when it comes to the inspection of the premises where foodstuffs are being prepared , there must be independent examination .
In my own country audits conducted by our Food Safety Authority have shown frequent evasions and omissions in terms of the way in which food is prepared , specific risk materials are dealt with and other matters are looked at .
We are told that nowadays we can relate everything to safety within the plant , the employees and so on .
Who would dare to question the right and power of the employees to report on devious practices within their own plant ?
The fact is , as has been referred to in this debate , the preparation of some foodstuffs - as shown , for example , in the Panorama programme - has been quite disgraceful .
I do not believe that employees in those plants would be courageous enough and willing to report these practices to authority .
Therefore , we need independent inspectors ; we do not need to remove them from the meat and veal sector .
If we are wise in this regard , we will stick to the principle that beyond the HACCP system there always needs to be independent inspection of last resort .
The consumer demands it , public safety requires it .
Mr President , I should like to compliment the Commission on its proposal and I hope that Parliament will not depart from it too much .
The Commission is demonstrating progressive insight , that is , you can increase the control of food and certainly of meat by placing greater responsibility with the people who have to carry out the control .
On this point I should like to echo the words of our group spokesperson , Mrs Grossetête .
On the basis of Christian Democratic principles you could say that you want to place more individual responsibility where it belongs .
This means that farms that are well organised , that have a good branding system , can do more themselves and that at the same time there must be scope for small enterprises to continue their work .
It also means that the present way of working in poultry meat will have to be extended to veal and pork .
It further means that responsibility as regards the from-the-land-to-the-plate guarantee must be made good and at the same time that no deviations can be tolerated in the so-called INR system .
I do not entirely agree with the rapporteur 's position that a veterinarian should have the final decision as to whether or not an animal is safe for the food chain in cases where there is no question of airtight administrative processing .
After all , you cannot see everything on the outside .
I am against Amendment No 135 and in favour of Amendment No 127 , and I anticipate the vote with confidence .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report by my colleague , Mr Schnellhardt , is of course part of a far larger project .
Mr Schnellhardt 's education makes him an expert , which is why his reports are extremely sound and often , perhaps , even a little too technical for the layman .
But that probably says more about him than about us !
I would like , therefore , to start by congratulating him on the document we have before us .
We need food safety .
This is something that we are all aware of , and that we support .
This report is even more significant , though , because meat , milk and fish are basic foodstuffs .
Professional controls are of crucial importance here .
To adopt highly comprehensive standards is not enough if , at the same time , we either ignore controls and sanctions or take insufficient notice of them .
Official controls are in the safe hands of veterinarians here and I hope they are duly appreciated , even by the consumer .
Mr President , of course I completely understand that fellow Members coming in to the room might not give much attention to the subject under discussion . I am frequently in the same boat as them .
But if you could at least see to it that the noise level improves , I might even be able to hear myself speak above this terrible din .
I had hoped that you might at least listen to me , Mr President , as Mrs Diamantopoulou is doing .
( The President cut off the speaker and called for quiet in the Chamber )
Thank you , Mr President .
The problem of the size and transparency of businesses has been touched upon many times .
Commissioner , I think that we simply need more flexibility for smaller businesses .
We cannot treat large slaughterhouses like artisanal small businesses .
I would ask you , therefore , to give appropriate consideration to creating the conditions for small- and medium-sized businesses to survive , whilst , at the same time , taking into account the vital matter of consumer protection .
Mr President , I shall try to be very brief and to the point , by omitting any reference to amendments on which we agree and concentrating on the amendments on which there are certain reservations .
Let us start with the question of flexibility for small businesses raised by the last speaker and by numerous other Members of the European Parliament .
We totally agree on the need to safeguard the flexibility of small businesses , in accordance with the guidelines laid down in the first and second package of health rules .
I referred in my first intervention to special cases in which flexibility is addressed with particular sensitivity .
Thus , the Commission accepts Amendments Nos 3 , 11 , 12 and 138 , provided that certain changes are made to their wording .
A new definition of artisanal small businesses , however , as proposed in the amendment , is not considered necessary .
A second basic element to which numerous speakers referred concerns the role of the official veterinarian in abattoirs .
The Commission can support the introduction of flexibility in risk analysis .
I referred to this in my first intervention and this will apply to both large and small businesses .
The Commission can therefore accept Amendments Nos 134 , 141 and 142 .
Amendments Nos 85 and 86 are not accepted , because we believe that they will restrict flexibility without any justification .
As far as the use of the business 's staff to carry out certain control duties is concerned , the Commission expresses its satisfaction because there is agreement with the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Point 6 of Amendment No 21 on poultry meat and rabbit meat is not in keeping with the approach which has been adopted for fresh meat , as provided for in Annex I to the proposal .
The proposal in Amendment No 87 to separate production and control responsibilities within the business is considered particularly constructive .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 127 , 135 , 136 , 139 and 140 because they are not in keeping with the line taken by the Committee on the Environment or the line taken by the Commission and the authorities responsible for European feedingstuffs legislation .
I would therefore ask you to re-analyse the content of these amendments and not to proceed to vote for them .
As regards the information which must be provided when animals are slaughtered , the Commission can also agree to allow flexibility .
However , the relevant arrangements must not undermine the system as a whole .
Consequently , Amendments Nos 71 , 72 , 73 , 101 , 102 , 103 and 107 are not accepted .
Now to the question of marine biotoxins in shellfish . The Commission text is based on scientific proof .
This applies to the serious risks affecting food safety .
The introduction of excessive flexibility at this point is of no benefit to consumers ; consequently , the Commission does not accept Amendment No 6 , the first part of Amendment No 122 or Amendment No 123 .
Amendments Nos 4 , 25 and 70 repeat the requirements already provided for in our proposal for official controls to be carried out on feedingstuffs and food which the Commission submitted last March .
Finally , as regards the recurring question of comitology , the Commission considers that one major issue is its having the possibility to take measures to implement or adjust annexes , so that they can take account of current scientific developments .
I would say that the Commission does , in fact , have a problem with the proposal by the Committee on the Environment proposing that this order be abolished . Consequently , we do not agree with Amendment No 38 but we do agree with Amendment No 130 .
The Commission 's position on all the amendments may be obtained from the secretariat .
Mr President , the recommendations on health are some of the most important action points in the White Paper on food safety .
My thanks to Mr Schnellhardt and all the members of this committee who helped with this dossier , which is especially important to producers and consumers .
Mr President , I am sorry that , because of the time , we have a change to the agenda and my report will have to be postponed until 3 in the afternoon .
I would ask , citing Rule 145 of the Rules of Procedure and on behalf of my political group , for my report , which is outside the compromise package and concerns labelling , to be voted without debate and would merely ask the Commission to make the relevant statement .
Thank you , Mrs Malliori .
Mr President , I have been approached by several colleagues who are concerned at the level of lobbying outside the entrance to Parliament .
I would like to respectfully request colleagues and those who are lobbying for the signing of the register to allow Members the leeway and the freedom to sign these resolutions without having to go through ' a wall of fire ' to get into the Chamber .
I am sorry to have to raise this issue , but it is becoming a bit of a problem for us , and I notice that quite a number of colleagues are concerned about it .
I thank you for giving me the opportunity to say this .
Thank you , Mrs Banotti , you are completely right , as always .
Mr President , I would like to come back to Mrs Malliori 's request .
I spoke on this subject about a week ago , to be exact on the last day of the part-session .
The problem is that the agenda is adopted on Monday , but not adhered to by Thursday .
I believe it is inaccurate for Mrs Malliori to say that her report is being postponed until this afternoon .

Today 's agenda states that the time allocated to all reports - from Mrs Jöns 's through to Mrs Fourtou 's - is 10 a.m. to 4.30 p.m. , which gives us until 4.30 p.m. to discuss this report .
If it becomes the accepted thing to request that reports are dealt with without debate in order to be finished by 12 noon on Thursday , then people should say on Monday that a debate is not required when we are adopting the agenda .
Last time , I said that this was a dangerous precedent , and indeed it is one .
We have had two hours for the topical and urgent debate on the reform of the Rules of Procedure taken away from us for nothing , on the grounds that this time was needed for other work , and leaving us with just one hour .
This time should then either be used or given back for the topical and urgent debate .
Mr Posselt spoke against the proposal by Mrs Malliori .
Do you wish to speak on the same issue , Mrs McKenna ?
Do you wish to speak in favour of the proposal ?
Mr President , on this point I do not mind what we do .
Mrs Malliori would like this to be passed through Parliament today and she has to leave this afternoon .
She is anxious that it should get through under the Greek presidency .
I do not want to be difficult in saying that we would vote against it , but , as Mr Posselt has said , we have to be careful about setting precedents .
As Mrs Malliori has said , the key thing is that we would like from the Commission a clear statement on the labelling .
The Commission has made commitments concerning labelling in other legislation .
We would like a statement from the Commission on this now , regardless of what this Chamber decides on and whether or not we have a debate .
. Mr President , the rapporteur has today tabled a package of amendments to which both the Council and the Commission can agree .
The Commission would like to thank Mrs Malliori and would ask the honourable Members to support her efforts .
On the question of labelling , the Commission cannot support Amendment No 12 , for the following reason : The Commission is of the opinion that if a food has a smoky taste , the consumer should be informed whether the product contains smoke flavourings or has been smoked conventionally .
However , in order to maintain the consistency of our legislative framework , this should be addressed in the Labelling Directive and not in the current proposal .
The Commission is currently developing a proposal for legislation including an amendment to the Labelling Directive so that the term ' smoke flavourings ' would have to appear in the list of ingredients if the smoky taste of the food was due to the addition of smoke flavourings .
Thank you , Commissioner .
As there was a speech against the proposal by Mrs Malliori and one in favour , we shall proceed directly to the vote on her proposal in the sense that her report is to be voted on without a debate .
The proposal by Mrs Malliori is approved and her report will be put to the vote without a debate .
Mr President , I have just two points , which are however important because they are questions of principle .
Firstly , in future we should decide on Monday whether a matter is important enough to require debate or not .
On Monday , we scheduled this matter for Thursday afternoon , so why are we cancelling it now ?
If it is important , it makes no difference whether it is discussed in the morning or in the afternoon .
Secondly - and this is a crucial point which I last brought up during another debate on a Thursday afternoon - you have , or your predecessor has , just taken a vote which is not permissible .
According to our Rules of Procedure , only the President of Parliament can decide whether to cancel a debate .
It is his decision alone , and there are extremely important reasons for this .
We voted to establish the agenda on Monday and I have to clarify whether or not this decision to change it is the President 's .
According to the Rules of Procedure , this decision is his alone , but in this case he has not taken on that responsibility .
( Applause )
We will not debate this any further , Mr Posselt .
In my opinion you have misread the Rules .
The term ' President ' applies to the individual who is in the Chair at that time , so it is ' President ' or ' Vice-President ' .
Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca rightly applied Rule 145 .
As to the point about being flexible or rigid , we need to keep some flexibility in our agenda
Mr President , I do apologise , but I would like to stress that the vote was illegal , because minorities are guaranteed the right to freedom of expression .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , on a point of order , I have it on excellent authority that overnight an updated text has been published by the Commission on this most important and key horizontal regulation .
It deals with changes in set-aside , WTO proofing , changes in leasing of land and a whole range of other issues .
We have yet to see this document .
I would like Commissioner Fischler to tell us whether it will affect the outcome of what we are about to vote on today As our Permanent Representatives and agricultural attachés have just received this document this morning , we have had no chance to consider it .
I can explain this very quickly .
There is no new Commission proposal .
What has been sent out is just a record of what has been discussed so far in the Council 's working group , and it does not have any bearing upon the text that we are voting on here .
Mr President , the next vote is on Amendment No 33 .
Part 3 of the preamble to this amendment concerns an external source of protection .
The German version of the text reads ' suitable external source of protection ' and the original text reads ' qualified external source of protection ' .
The two things are not the same , and therefore I should like the German version to be corrected so that it is in line with the original , even though it may not read like good German .
I should also like this point to be recorded in the minutes .
Mr President , we have tried to work closely with Mr Cunha and the other rapporteurs to ensure that when we take the final vote on this we comply with Rule 63a of our Rules of Procedure .
The amendments tabled by the Committee on Budgets state that the figures do comply with the financial perspectives up to 2006 .
However , during this vote several amendments have been adopted which have not been assessed .
The assessments are carried out in conjunction with the Commission to ensure that the figures are within the financial perspective .
In the light of the votes on these amendments , could the Commission inform us whether those figures remain within the financial perspective ?
If they do , that is fine ; if they do not , then the wording needs to be changed from ' do comply ' to ' do not comply ' , for factual reasons if nothing else .
If Commissioner Fischler does not know the answer now , I suggest , if the House agrees with Mr Cunha , that when the assessment is finalised we make sure that the correct wording goes in the final text for the Official Journal .
That seems perfectly reasonable .
Unless there are strong objections , it makes sense to ensure that the text corresponds with what we have decided on .
Mr President , I think that the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets is right .
The purpose of the amendments that we adopted is clearly that ultimately everything should remain within the budget .
I would therefore say that there will be sufficient room for manoeuvre in this matter to amend , shall we say , the wording , should this be necessary , to ensure that this is the case .
Mr President , it is exactly the same point .
Four amendments have been voted which are in addition to what the committee voted .
Our amendments say they are compatible .
Unless we can get an assurance right now that they are , then we need to change the wording to ' not ' .
Can I ask you to follow the same procedure ?
This will apply to all the other reports on this item and will save me from constantly getting up .
- I am always in favour of preventing you having to jump up and down , so your point has been noted , Mr Wynn .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0174 / 2003 ) by Dominique F.C. Souchet , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the market in cereals ( COM ( 2003 ) 23 - C5-0042 / 2003 - 2003 / 0008 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0175 / 2003 ) by Dominique F.C. Souchet , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the market in dried fodder for the marketing years 2004 / 05 to 2007 / 08 ( COM ( 2003 ) 23 - C5-0044 / 2003 - 2003 / 0010 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0183 / 2003 ) by Carlos Bautista Ojeda , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the market in rice ( COM ( 2003 ) 23 - C5-0043 / 2003 - 2003 / 0009 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0177 / 2003 ) by Elisabeth Jeggle , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing a levy in the milk and milk-products sector ( COM ( 2003 ) 23 - C5-0046 / 2003 - 2003 / 0012 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0181 / 2003 ) by Elisabeth Jeggle , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1255 / 1999 on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products ( COM ( 2003 ) 23 - C5-0045 / 2003 - 2003 / 0011 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0189 / 2003 ) by María Rodríguez Ramos , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on multifunctional agriculture and the reform of the CAP ( 2003 / 2048 ( INI ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution
Mr President , during the debate on the Oostlander report yesterday the rapporteur asked me whether I wanted to submit Amendment No 11 - which was intended as a replacement for paragraph 52 - as an addition to paragraph 52 .
I said at the time that I was willing to do so .
Afterwards uncertainty arose about how the text of paragraph 52 would then read once Amendment No 11 , again as an addition , had been adopted .
To avoid any misunderstanding therefore , I should like to read out the text of paragraph 52 in English as it would read following adoption of Amendment No 11 as an addition to paragraph 52 .
Mr President , I would like to make it clear that , if this is an addition , my group will agree to it .
Mr President , I initially assented to an addition , but since the word ' conditions ' has been added here to the added texts , I do not think that this is the proposal that we discussed yesterday .
I am therefore against the submission of this oral amendment .
There seems to be some confusion as to whether this is an oral amendment .
Mr President , it is not an oral amendment !
We shall thus vote on Amendment No 11 as an addition .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution
Mr President , I therefore propose removing the obligatory aspect of my proposal and at the same time clarifying the content in the following format : ' calls on the Member States to introduce the gender dimension into the broadcasting of sporting competitions ' .
Mr President , I apologise for coming back to the same problem .
I certainly do not wish to be difficult .
However , the right to freedom of expression is highly protected .
Even if , for example , the Conference of Presidents decides to deal with a report without debate , this decision can be overturned by 32 Members .
Now though , a new procedure is creeping in .
On Monday , we decide to debate a matter on Thursday afternoon and Members assume that this debate is going to take place .
But on Thursday afternoon , a Member says that they do not wish to have the debate because they have to leave . That is what happened last time , and it happened this week too .
The agenda stipulates that , if this happens , just one speaker should be called upon to speak for each group .
But this procedure is not being followed either , and instead , we are referred to a rule which says that the agenda can also be changed on a proposal from the President .
But firstly this was not a proposal from the President , secondly it must remain an exception , thirdly the President gave no reason , and fourthly I have to say that there was no important reason .
When I asked you about it , your answer was simply that we needed ' to keep some flexibility in our agenda ' .
This is about the right of freedom of expression , a right guaranteed to minorities .
I would very much like the Bureau to clarify under what conditions the President can propose that a point be taken off an agenda that has been jointly decided by us on Monday , and whether or not he has to give his reasons for doing so .
Otherwise this minority right will be regularly set aside on Thursday afternoons if there happens to be a majority vote in favour of it .
Then we might as well forget all the articles protecting this minority right in the Rules of Procedure , particularly Article 111 .
We are not going to agree , Mr Posselt , because I stand by my original interpretation of Rule 145 .
However , I am happy to send this to the Committee on Constitutional Affairs for its interpretation .
Rule 145 makes it very clear , however , that at any time during a debate the list of speakers may be closed .
We had a proposal from the floor that the President then adopted in his own name and put before the House .
The House then voted in accordance with Rule 145 .
I am not going to debate this with you , Mr Posselt , because I want to go for lunch , and I am not going to agree with you .
As I said , I shall refer the matter to the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
Mr President , regarding the question that Mr Posselt has raised , I would just like to say that I think you acted correctly .
I would , however , prefer to give my opinion on this matter later in view of the votes that still have to be taken .
In the new Rules of Procedure , there is a provision allowing the Council and Commission speaking time to comment on the report after we have heard from the rapporteur .
There seem to be more and more cases now where the rapporteur speaks for five minutes , and then the Council for fifteen minutes and the Commission for ten to fifteen minutes , and often not even really on the subject of the report .
This means that Members themselves are receiving less and less time to discuss it .
I would therefore ask that the speechwriters of the Commission and Council Presidency be told to comply as far as possible with the speaking time of five minutes , with a maximum time of ten minutes .
Otherwise a good provision in our new Rules of Procedure is misused to give lengthy explanations , which often have nothing to do with the report .
I would ask the President , if he agrees with me , to notify both institutions of this .
Mr President , the three times that Mr Posselt stood up I did not respond , but on the fourth occasion I should very much like to do so , because we all know that this is not really a question of how long the debates here last .
Mr Posselt is concerned about whether Strasbourg will remain the meeting place of the European Parliament .
In the first place it seems important to me that the democratically taken decisions of this assembly are respected .
It also seems important to me that those who find it so terribly important that we continue to meet in Strasbourg actually turn up .
As you know , most of the French and German Members are the greatest advocates of this assembly in Strasbourg , but they are not present at the moment .
This is in contrast to those who would like to meet in Brussels .
Mr President , in my opinion , Mr van Hulten 's approach is not the right one .
This does not have to do with those who were in favour of Fridays , but who were never here then .
It has to do with those who were not in favour of Fridays but who now treat Thursday in the same way they used to treat Friday , that is , by being absent .
Today , some of the leading players who were not in favour of Fridays have been gone since midday .
We need to finally get through to these people !
. ( PT ) This report on the financial participation of employees makes a significant contribution to overcoming the capital versus labour split .
Employees who participate in both the profits and the capital of companies will be more motivated and more productive and consequently the company will be more competitive and profitable .
Furthermore , financial participation contributes to achieving two aims : completing the European social model and increasing employment .
This is a sound report and I have therefore voted in favour of it .
I share the principles stated for funding financial participation models , specifically : participation must be voluntary , schemes must be clear , transparent and simple , unreasonable risks for employees and a pro-cyclical impact linked to fluctuations in the economic climate should be avoided , and schemes must be compatible with worker mobility .
I regret , however , that the European Commission has proposed few solutions for SMEs , since studies need to be carried out on the various forms of participation in SMEs and because alternatives must be considered .
. ( PT ) Following recent reports that have called into question the reliability of the controls organised in various Member States , updating the rules on official controls of products of animal origin is crucial , particularly in the case of fresh meat , bivalve molluscs and milk .
I welcome the proposal for a regulation and , of the new rules , I would highlight the role given to veterinarians , the increased intensity and frequency of controls , the sound scientific basis of controls and greater flexibility for small companies .
. ( PT ) This proposal for a directive forms part of the process of updating Community legislation on general food hygiene rules , on health policy issues related to the marketing of products of animal origin and on official controls of products of animal origin .
Simplifying bureaucracy and , at the same time , maintaining high standards in this field are of particular importance , since we now have incontrovertible proof that the standards of hygiene presented to the consuming public have not always been uniform or reliable .
The measures recommended in the proposal will consequently enable us to hold all those involved at any stage of the food chain more accountable , allowing for higher levels of consumer confidence , which has been dealt severe blows by recent crises .
We will , therefore , have to promote coherence and transparency when implementing this new legal framework , not forgetting the specific needs of small producers , who tend to be further removed from the places where information is disseminated and changes to legislation are made .
I believe that the European Commission must consider the proposal for an amendment put forward by the rapporteur , focusing on the need to allow States to adapt to the new rules .
I have therefore voted in favour of the report .
. ( PT ) Authorisation for smoke flavourings in food is at the moment totally deregulated in the European Union - some Member States have restrictions in place and others have no legislation at all in this area .
A definition of legislation was therefore needed , so that the authorisation procedure could be harmonised .
I also welcome the definition of a positive list produced by the European Food Safety Authority and based on the latest scientific knowledge .
It is therefore to be hoped that the precautionary principle - the basis for every European food policy - will also apply whenever a new application for a smoke flavouring is made .
. ( PT ) I have voted in favour of this report , which highlights the importance of clarifying rules in the field of human health .
I therefore agree , in addition to the technical issues , with the rapporteur 's suggestion that medical devices should be reclassified . She proposes a legal framework and that a distinction should be made between medical devices having a pharmacological effect , and others .
Similarly , I agree with the idea that Member States should adopt the measures necessary to ensure that single-use devices are not reused .
Lastly , I decided also to support the report when it states that it is crucial to include explicit provisions on public access to documents .
Distributing and promoting information to the citizens , especially in this field , must be pursued as a priority , in order to ensure both citizen participation and the high level of consumer protection we wish to see .
We are critical of the aforementioned reports on the reform of the common agricultural policy .
In our view , the reports represent an out-of-date agricultural policy which does not match the conditions and needs of modern global society .
As an example , mention might be made of the protectionist demand for ' an overall area-based compensatory payment for rice producers and ? a fixed import duty ' , together with the emphasis upon the system of import duties and export subsidies as a way of stabilising the internal market in relation to the price fluctuations on the world market .
In comparison , the Commission 's proposal appears as a step in the right direction .
We have therefore chosen to vote against these reports in their entirety .
Mr President , the proposals for the reform of the CAP made by Mr Fischler are being driven by the World Trade Organisation , and farmers need to realise that should be their real target .
I am disturbed that the Commissioner shows more concern for trade liberalisation than good farming practice .
EU environmental and food safety laws can form a safety net between farming and the World Trade Organisation .
Farmers need to wake up and stop opposing environmental legislation , such as the nitrates directive , and realise that these laws could protect them against the WTO .
The principle of cross-compliance , which means compliance with environmental and safety laws , is an important part of Parliament 's proposals .
The Commission is right to propose making compliance with relevant food safety rules a must for receiving subsidies .
However , it is vital that the same standards apply to imported foodstuffs , otherwise the antibiotics only just banned in the EU could make their way back onto our plates .
Parliament 's compromise shows the way forward and contains a substantial shift of money towards rural development .
It accepts modulation while differentiating between advantaged and disadvantaged regions and , therefore , will give better compensation for poorer regions - and this is welcome .
However , we also need to prevent the dumping of CAP-supported goods outside the European Union , which drives down world prices at great cost to the developing world and effectively prevents the most needy farmers from accessing European markets .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commission and Mr Cunha for their hard work .
We in the British Conservative delegation reluctantly took the decision that we were unable to support the recommendations in the Cunha report .
We see the need for reform , and the need for reform for our farmers .
Therefore we cannot support horizontal or partial decoupling and as that was an integral part of Mr Cunha 's report , we are unable to support that .

However , we support the Commission in its legislative resolution and want the Council to come to an agreement as soon as it possibly can .
We believe that the Commission 's proposals are along the right lines .
I would add that Mr Cunha is an esteemed Member of this House ; he is also a personal friend .
However , we believe , and I personally believe , that farmers need security .
Mr Cunha 's report would probably mean a second reform and we could not accept it .
We wish to see the progressive deregulation of agriculture , together with a reduction in the size of the agricultural subsidies , and we are therefore voting against this proposal .
The Commission 's draft mid-term review was a step in the right direction towards deregulated agriculture benefiting agricultural production .
There are serious defects in the Commission 's proposal .
We are opposed to all forms of modulation because they fail to promote rational agriculture .
We also believe that compensation should be linked to the area utilised .
The compromise proposal on which we have now voted would produce locking effects that would be damaging to European agriculture and a retrograde step in the reform process .
Fifty per cent of European farmers are over 55 years old .
The Commission 's proposal might be seen more as a good pension proposal for farmers than as a plan for phasing out the policy of subsidies .
No clear ground rules are provided , however , for the eight per cent of European farmers who are under 35 years of age and who are the future of agriculture .
. ( PT ) We have voted in favour of rejecting this report because it accepts , albeit in a somewhat watered-down form , the principle of decoupling aid from production , because it does not contain any real proposal for reducing and setting a limit for CAP aid and because , in certain aspects , it makes the original proposal worse .
Furthermore , what it proposes is not a partial decoupling ; it is actually a total decoupling of aid for arable crops and for male bovines .
It reiterates the need for obligatory national co-financing for rural development measures and makes what is known as modulation optional , which calls into question not only the principle but also the Community redistribution of savings , and this would damage Portugal .
This proposal for modulation differentiates between cuts to be made for the less-favoured regions and raises the exemption threshold by EUR 2 500 , but ignores differences between producers , and mainly penalises the medium-sized rather than the largest producers .
We regret the fact that our proposals have not been adopted , specifically those concerning modulation ; doubling the additional amount of aid for farmers who receive less than EUR 5 000 and exempting farmers who receive less than EUR 10 000 from cuts , which would be funded to a limit of EUR 100 000 per farmer .
- ( FR ) Will Parliament be heard ?
That is the question that we should ask ourselves today , the day before the Agriculture Summit in Luxembourg .
Having achieved unanimity on agriculture , which should be welcomed , the most important question is whether the Council will be able to grasp the opportunity and incorporate Parliament 's position into its plans for the future organisation of the common agricultural policy .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance regret that codecision does not apply to agriculture .
If it did , European farmers and consumers would have benefited so much more from the way that mentalities have rapidly changed for the better : towards moving on from costly , wasteful agriculture that destroys the countryside , towards agriculture that respects men and women , their work , the land and the environment .
In short , ecologically responsible agriculture , which the Group of the Greens has always advocated .
This reform of the CAP over 10 years is a commitment to a new type of modern agriculture , which takes into account all of the social , economic and environmental realities of the agricultural profession .
That is the type of agriculture which is the aim of the agreement reached in this House and that can only be welcomed , although it is surprising how different positions were not long ago .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 , paragraph 1 , of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( NL ) Since industrialisation , food prices have been kept artificially low , which has also enabled industrial wages to remain low .
Since then , farmers have been forced to produce more and more for ever decreasing rewards .
The EU subsidy system was a means of achieving greater economies of scale and increasing production per hectare .
Revenues from taxes go some way towards compensating farmers for their lack of income .
The survival of small-scale farmers and villages in southern Europe has become highly dependent on this subsidy policy .
They therefore regard the current common agricultural policy as the best the EU can offer , even if they would like to see funds allocated more fairly .
They regard every change as a brutal , neoliberal attack .
They are afraid that a new system will only serve as a subsidy on land ownership and land speculation and will not be able to stop the depopulation of the countryside .
In northern Europe , on the other hand , most of the small farmers have already been ' cleared away ' , and public opinion regards the agricultural funds as a kind of bureaucracy , a waste of money and environmental pollution which must be brought to an end as soon as possible .
I did and do agree with the demand to switch from production subsidies to income guarantees and the protection of the landscape .
The current proposal , however , seems to be primarily aimed at winning over the Americans in the WTO with a view to exporting other EU products .
.
The vast majority of reports we have just voted upon I can support and agree with .
Jeggle and Souchet often cause me little problems but Mr Cunha 's report is different .
The current CAP , which has been reformed on many different occasions down the years , has become top-heavy with red tape and bureaucracy , and I rather feel that what we are proposing is to heap more misery on top of what already exists .
What do we have now ?
De-coupling , modulation , degressivity and cross-compliance in place of good farming practice and an honest return for honest endeavours .
I sincerely believe that partial de-coupling will prove to be the worst of all worlds and provide no encouragement for the industry in the future , or do anything to streamline the industry or encourage young people to make a career in agriculture .
This will immediately mean more controls and inspections and less time for the farmer to tend his stock .
I will vote against to ensure that in the longer term the Northern Ireland agriculture industry is not destroyed in the name of efficiency .
.
The British Conservatives voted against the Commission proposal as amended , but in favour of the legislative resolution . We did this , not because we support the contents of Parliament 's report , but because it is imperative that Parliament gives an opinion so that Council may proceed to a decision .
Europe 's farmers must be given a clear direction for the future .
We support Commissioners Fischler 's proposals to reform the CAP and believe it is long overdue .
We are completely behind the plans to decouple payments away from production , and welcome the freeing up of agriculture .
We also believe that the Fischler proposals will ensure the future of European agriculture in an enlarged Europe of 25 Member States .
The proposals as they are in Parliament 's text would only confuse and complicate an already over-bureaucratic system , and force agriculture into even further decline .
The Commission reforms will put us in a strong position when we sit around the table at the WTO talks in Cancun .
We hope that Commissioner Fischler sticks to his guns , and pushes ahead with his plans in Luxembourg next week .
We , and European farmers , wish him every success !
There is no doubt that the EU 's agricultural aid must be reformed with a view to creating a healthy world market .
Unfortunately , the proposal for reform does not address the issue of export subsidies which , in our opinion , are what it is most important to change and which have the most thoroughly distorting effect upon world markets and upon poor countries ' ability to exploit their comparative advantages .
The Commission 's proposal does , however , acknowledge the multifunctionality of agriculture and would make increased modulation possible , that is to say increased flexibility when it comes to supporting tasks other than actual food production , such as the conservation of biodiversity and the cultivated landscape , or to taking other types of environmental measure .
It would also make it easier for other reforms to be implemented further down the line .
At the same time , decoupling presents obvious risks of disengagement and resistance to change which would , for example , obstruct the badly needed transition from one generation to the next within the agricultural community .
From these two perspectives , the European Parliament 's proposal is therefore a compromise , providing scope for further necessary changes in the future .
Overall , we have therefore chosen , despite many objections , to support the report in the final vote .
The June Movement opposes the EU 's massive agricultural aid , which discriminates against the developing countries , the new EU countries , the environment and ecological interests .
The consumer pays twice : he or she pays via tax for the aid and then pays the artificially high prices for everyday goods .
Even if extensive farming and ecological interests were to go and be given slightly better conditions , it would still be unfair to third countries , the new EU countries and EU citizens .
The June Movement wishes to see the aid completely done away with and is unable to support a redistribution of the aid whereby new areas are brought under the umbrella of aid arrangements of one kind or another .
The June Movement believes that the only real way to abolish discrimination is by creating equal conditions through cutting back on agricultural aid with a view to phasing it out entirely .
. We fully support the Commission 's original proposal for CAP reform as set out and unamended by the European Parliament , with the exception of Amendments 38 and 99 , referring to health and safety .
The CAP must be reformed .
Payments must be subject to mandatory cross-compliance with the environment , rural economy , and animal welfare Directives .
The position adopted by the European Parliament will perpetuate a system which is damaging to the environment , the rural economy and animal welfare , and prejudices high levels of health and safety and harms produce in the developing world .
.
( PT ) Rural development might appear to be a panacea for all the problems and imbalances affecting the various types of agriculture in the EU , but it is also one strand of the strategy to contain CAP spending and to liberalise agricultural markets , in conjunction with enlargement and negotiations at the World Trade Organisation .
The aim of market mechanisms , however , is to bolster prices , and , primarily , income , ignoring the need to resolve existing deep-seated injustices .
Rural development cannot exist without farmers and agricultural production .
The Commission proposal does not increase appropriations for rural development . Instead , it transfers some of the appropriations from the ' markets ' pillar , which will mean some of the CAP 's costs being renationalised .
The proposals contained in this report are broadly to be welcomed , although they uphold the original framework .
Our vote reflects the improvements the report makes , particularly : the support it provides for less-favoured areas , for young farmers , for women in rural areas , for promoting agricultural production and for increasing the amounts of aid under the various instruments , including our proposal for a EUR 100 increase for compensatory allowances for the less-favoured regions .
.
( PT ) I congratulate Mr Olsson on the excellent report he has produced on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1257 / 1999 on support for rural development from the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund ( EAGGF ) and repealing Regulation ( EC ) No 2826 / 2000 .
I fully support this report , especially with regard to the need to help establish conditions for developing farming in the EU regions that are the weakest and which face the greatest problems .
This will enable us to prevent the exodus of these communities from the countryside , and support the preservation of the landscape and consequently of the environment , whilst attempting to improve the standard of living of the communities in those regions .
I also wish to emphasise that the European Parliament must always support the development of a farming policy that respects the environment , making support a priority only for farmers who comply with Community rules , and for young people wishing to become farmers .
It should be emphasised that this is also a means of promoting employment in Europe .
The June Movement opposes the EU 's massive agricultural aid , which discriminates against the developing countries , the new EU countries , the environment and ecological interests .
The consumer pays twice : he or she pays via tax for the aid and then pays the artificially high prices for everyday goods .
Even if extensive farming and ecological interests were to go and be given slightly better conditions , it would still be unfair to third countries , the new EU countries and EU citizens .
The June Movement wishes to see the aid completely done away with and is unable to support a redistribution of the aid whereby new areas are brought under the umbrella of aid arrangements of one kind or another .
The June Movement believes that the only real way to abolish discrimination is by creating equal conditions through cutting back on agricultural aid with a view to phasing it out entirely .
. ( PT ) This proposal for a regulation for the cereals sector highlights the strategy of the latest CAP reforms : lower prices and the gradual deregulation of the markets .
Compensation for income is only partial , with direct aid covering 50 % of the fall in prices .
This strategy promotes the concentration and intensification of production and greater farm size , increasing the desertification of the rural world .
Furthermore , a 45 % reduction in cereal prices has led to an increased cost to the budget of EUR 630 million .
We have supported some of the rapporteur 's proposals , specifically the inclusion of rye on the list of cereals eligible for intervention and the references made to protecting the Community preference , but we do not accept the principle of decoupling aid from production for the cereals sector .
We also reject the idea of aid for the potato starch sector , which supports huge food corporations from only a few Member States , when what is really needed is regulation and support for potatoes for consumption .
A wide-ranging reform of the CAP has become necessary , guaranteeing similar levels of support and market regulation for Mediterranean produce .
Unless this happens , we will not be able to remedy the profound injustices in the distribution of aid and we will be sending the wrong message to producers in regions and countries with climatic conditions that are more suited to other types of production .
The Commission 's proposal follows on from the 1992 revision and abides by the philosophy of reducing intervention prices by 5.9 % and partly compensating for these reductions with direct per-hectare aid .
This proposal serves the interests of the wheat trading and processing industries by ensuring they have cheap raw materials .
At the same time , wheat producers ' incomes are being reduced , because there is 50 % rather than full compensation , prices and compensation remain constant and are not adjusted on the basis of average Community inflation and , finally , with the proposal to abolish monthly increases in the intervention price , the average intervention price is being reduced .
The amendments proposed by the rapporteur of the European Parliament move in a more positive direction than the Commission 's proposals , with the exception of the reference to durum wheat which is , however , regulated under another regulation .
In essence , however , they move in the same direction as the Commission 's proposal and only differ on quantitative elements , without contesting or proposing measures which reverse the Commission 's basic philosophy , and this , despite the correct findings , ultimately renders the report ineffective , the gilding on a policy which favours the interests of the multinationals at the expense of small and medium-sized farmers .
The June Movement opposes the EU 's massive agricultural aid , which discriminates against the developing countries , the new EU countries , the environment and ecological interests .
The consumer pays twice : he or she pays via tax for the aid and then pays the artificially high prices for everyday goods .
Even if extensive farming and ecological interests were to go and be given slightly better conditions , it would still be unfair to third countries , the new EU countries and EU citizens .
The June Movement wishes to see the aid completely done away with and is unable to support a redistribution of the aid whereby new areas are brought under the umbrella of aid arrangements of one kind or another .
The June Movement believes that the only real way to abolish discrimination is by creating equal conditions through cutting back on agricultural aid with a view to phasing it out entirely .
. ( PT ) This proposal for a regulation seeks to phase out the common organisation of the market in the dried fodder sector from the 2008 / 2009 marketing year onwards .
The Commission 's reasoning turns on environmental issues , specifically the use of fossil fuel for dehydrating and even the use of irrigation .
Environmental issues can be resolved by other means , however , such as plans to reduce fossil energy , natural predrying in the sun or the use of renewable energies .
Nevertheless , we must view this sector as yet another source of vegetable protein production , in which the European Union has a growing shortage that already stands at 35 million tonnes of soya equivalent .
In other words , the EU is meeting only 23 % of its vegetable protein needs . This situation will be exacerbated after enlargement .
The consequence of losing this form of production is that we have to import , mainly from the USA , two million tonnes of soya meal equivalent , with all the risks of GMO contamination that this entails .
Accordingly , whilst acknowledging the importance of the environmental factor , we agreed with the rapporteur on the need to continue with the present CMO , to strengthen market instruments and to increase total aid to EUR 68 per tonne from the marketing year 2004 / 2005 onwards .
The June Movement opposes the EU 's massive agricultural aid , which discriminates against the developing countries , the new EU countries , the environment and ecological interests .
The consumer pays twice : he or she pays via tax for the aid and then pays the artificially high prices for everyday goods .
Even if extensive farming and ecological interests were to go and be given slightly better conditions , it would still be unfair to third countries , the new EU countries and EU citizens .
The June Movement wishes to see the aid completely done away with and is unable to support a redistribution of the aid whereby new areas are brought under the umbrella of aid arrangements of one kind or another .
The June Movement believes that the only real way to abolish discrimination is by creating equal conditions through cutting back on agricultural aid with a view to phasing it out entirely .
. ( PT ) The rice sector is currently experiencing difficulties as a result of the imbalances triggered by the simultaneous increase in internal production and the rise in imports , due to the preferences and customs reductions of recent years .
This situation is likely to get worse with the fall in customs tariffs resulting from implementation of the ' Everything but Arms ' initiative , with the forthcoming WTO round and with the possibilities of ' triangulation ' and abuses of inward processing arrangements .
There is , furthermore , a conflict of interest between the producer Member States of the South and the consumer Member States of northern Europe , whose consumers tend to prefer the Indian variety of rice , of which the EU is in short supply .
This proposal for a regulation is unacceptable .
The Commission is proposing a 50 % reduction in the basic intervention price to a basic price of EUR 150 per tonne , compensation at a level of 88 % of that applied to cereals under previous reforms and a limit on quantity , overlooking the specific characteristics of this monoculture , which is concentrated in areas that have specific characteristics , with no opportunity for alternative production .
The proposal also overlooks the fact that this crop entails some of the highest costs in the farming sector in terms of investment in machinery , equipment and installations , which are mostly custom-made . This means that forcing rice-growers to change crops would cause them serious financial difficulties .
We have therefore sided with the rapporteur .
. ( EL ) The objective of the Commission proposal is to diminish Community production and increase imports from third countries .
Rice is cultivated on pathogenic soils in the ? U and Greece for which it is difficult to find an alternative solution .
Thus , we consider unacceptable the quota of 203,000 hectares proposed for Greece , which is less than the previous quota , which we more than covered .
The proposed measures reduce the income of rice producers by increasing the profits of the trading industries , which will buy raw materials at derisory prices , given that the intervention prices will have a proportionate knock-on effect on commercial prices , without compensating for this reduction , despite the Commission 's allegations to the contrary , allegations which are groundless , given that the rate of compensation is calculated on the basis of the difference between the intervention price before the revision and the private storage price after the revision .
The rapporteur 's amendments , although more positive , are ultimately out of kilter with his objective findings about the state of this sector .
He disagrees with the abolition of intervention , but accepts the drastic 50 % reduction in intervention prices , which in essence cancels it out .
He confirms the problem of abundant imports , but does not differentiate from the Commission 's quotas .
That is why , and because his proposals exacerbate rather than radically improve the situation , we shall not be voting in favour of the report .
The June Movement opposes the EU 's massive agricultural aid , which discriminates against the developing countries , the new EU countries , the environment and ecological interests .
The consumer pays twice : he or she pays via tax for the aid and then pays the artificially high prices for everyday goods .
Even if extensive farming and ecological interests were to go and be given slightly better conditions , it would still be unfair to third countries , the new EU countries and EU citizens .
The June Movement wishes to see the aid completely done away with and is unable to support a redistribution of the aid whereby new areas are brought under the umbrella of aid arrangements of one kind or another .
The June Movement believes that the only real way to abolish discrimination is by creating equal conditions through cutting back on agricultural aid with a view to phasing it out entirely .
In this proposal for a regulation , the Commission proposes to prolong a reformed dairy quota system until the 2014 / 15 marketing year , and says nothing about the future .
Pursuing the quota system is crucial to guaranteeing milk production throughout the Union 's territory and to ensuring the continuity of producers ' income .
The end of the quota system , which is what the large countries producing a surplus would like to see , would mean the liberalisation of the sector , greater concentration of production and a considerable reduction in prices , which would harm in particular small and medium-sized producers from the least productive and less-favoured regions .
Across-the-board quota increases must , therefore , be considered for all countries and practical measures must be adopted to combat the concentration of production , both at regional level and in the hands of a few producers .
Account must be taken , however , of specific situations such the current state of affairs in Portugal , particularly in the outermost region of the Azores , where a quota increase must be guaranteed in order not to penalise a sector that has significant socio-economic ramifications , in a region that faces major structural disadvantages .
. ( DE ) I am to a large extent in agreement with the reports on the organisation of the milk market , because the quota arrangements are being retained until 2014 as an instrument to regulate production and guarantee prices , which will give the reliability that is so essential for the continued existence of the family farm and will give farmers the security to enable them to plan accordingly .
However , I am in favour of those proposals on the reports concerning the milk sector that quite rightly point out that it is in the disadvantaged areas in particular that milk production plays a vitally important role , and that for this reason , when deciding on the basis for calculating the milk subsidy , the special situation of individual Member States should be taken into consideration by the differentiated lowering of the intervention price for butter and skimmed milk powder .
In the areas in question an extra EUR 5 per tonne should be paid in subsidies .
I should also like to say , about the agricultural reports overall , that I am not entirely convinced that the compulsion to take action is so great that we should have to shoot all our bolts now , in one go , before the next round of negotiations in Cancun , thereby running the risk of having to make even greater concessions which would lead to the demolition of the common agricultural policy and with it the demise of the small farmer in large parts of Europe .
Finally , the farm budget has been set up until 2013 , which is why the budget-policy constraints that we are always hearing about are not present to the extent that is repeatedly asserted by the Commission and even here in Parliament .
. ( EL ) The proposals for the milk sector perpetuate the unequal treatment of countries such as Greece by keeping quotas at unacceptably low levels , exacerbating their dependency in dairy products and ruining producers with huge coresponsibility levies , due to the unacceptably low quotas allocated to them .
The ? U prefers to strengthen intervention , by withdrawing excess dairy products from oversaturated markets , mainly in the northern countries , than to direct the sums which will be spent on intervention to covering the needs of countries , such as Greece , which cannot meet even half their domestic demand .
It is infuriating that the quota granted in compensation for the reduction in target prices is increased by a larger percentage in the developed and a smaller percentage in the less developed countries .
For example , the proposals make provision for Greece for an increase in the quota of 6 000 - 14 000 tonnes and for 335 000 - 110 000 for Holland .
The country 's livestock farming is being condemned to stagnation and the Greeks are obliged to consume imported pasteurised products because fresh milk does not reach the country in time , despite the fact that there is the potential to increase production and meet its requirements .
We call for a fair redistribution of quotas , on the basis of population criteria , consumption requirements and production potential , which is why we shall vote against the reports , which move in a diametrically opposed direction .
The June Movement opposes the EU 's massive agricultural aid , which discriminates against the developing countries , the new EU countries , the environment and ecological interests .
The consumer pays twice : he or she pays via tax for the aid and then pays the artificially high prices for everyday goods .
Even if extensive farming and ecological interests were to go and be given slightly better conditions , it would still be unfair to third countries , the new EU countries and EU citizens .
The June Movement wishes to see the aid completely done away with and is unable to support a redistribution of the aid whereby new areas are brought under the umbrella of aid arrangements of one kind or another .
The June Movement believes that the only real way to abolish discrimination is by creating equal conditions through cutting back on agricultural aid with a view to phasing it out entirely .
. ( PT ) Milk production is of fundamental importance in the less favoured regions .
It is therefore crucial that minimum prices cover labour and production costs and that family farming and land-based undertakings are protected .
The transfer of production rights without land and lower prices , together with the absence of practical measures for regions with specific difficulties ( such as the closure of joint milking parlours , the lack of support for the costs of transporting milk in inland or mountainous areas , etc . ) , have all led to the concentration of production and to thousands of farmers abandoning their land , specifically in Portugal .
We reject the Commission 's proposal to reduce target prices by 28 % over the next five marketing years .
The lack of measures for combating the concentration of production and speculation on the economic value of milk quotas is unacceptable , as is the fact that no provision is made for updating the level of fat content in order to adjust it to the real average .
We agree with the rapporteur 's proposals for intervention prices to be increased with regard to the Commission proposal , for total compensation for price reductions by means of direct payments and especially with the supplementary subsidy of EUR 5 per tonne for the less favoured regions .
We disagree , however , with the proposal to eliminate indicative prices .
The June Movement opposes the EU 's massive agricultural aid , which discriminates against the developing countries , the new EU countries , the environment and ecological interests .
The consumer pays twice : he or she pays via tax for the aid and then pays the artificially high prices for everyday goods .
Even if extensive farming and ecological interests were to go and be given slightly better conditions , it would still be unfair to third countries , the new EU countries and EU citizens .
The June Movement wishes to see the aid completely done away with and is unable to support a redistribution of the aid whereby new areas are brought under the umbrella of aid arrangements of one kind or another .
The June Movement believes that the only real way to abolish discrimination is by creating equal conditions through cutting back on agricultural aid with a view to phasing it out entirely .
. ( PT ) More has been said today than ever before about multifunctionality in agriculture , particularly in the context of the current CAP reform .
It even appears that many people have only now discovered agriculture 's multifunctional nature . Farm production has always entailed positive externalities for the development of the rural world , contributing to job creation , to the development of other upstream economic activities , to regional planning , the preservation of the environment , the landscape and the cultural heritage .
There must therefore be policies that promote an extensive and tightly-knit network of small and medium-sized family farms and the development of local and regional markets .
This CAP , even with its reforms , clearly bears the greatest responsibility for destroying multifunctionality in agriculture , through the gradual liberalisation of farm markets .
We therefore agree with the rapporteur , who states that rather than ' declarations of intent ' what are needed are concrete measures relating to the CAP , which the Commission 's proposals for reforming the CAP fail to provide .
We support the rapporteur 's proposals but regret the fact that she was not more ambitious .
.
( PT ) I congratulate Mrs Rodriguez Ramos on her excellent report on multifunctionality in farming and the reform of the CAP . I fully support this report , in particular with regard to calling for a European agricultural policy that also takes account of the multiple functions of farming , specifically maintaining the rural population , regional planning and the preservation of the environment , the landscape and the cultural heritage , also introducing the concept of territorial cohesion .
I also wish to underline that the European Parliament prides itself on its action to ensure respect for Europe 's diversity , which means that where farming is concerned , we have a duty also to consider the non-commercial aspects in order to achieve the harmonious development of the European Union .
My initial comment on the new agricultural policy announced by Commissioner Fischler on 10 July 2002 was : ' An appropriate break with the past , but not a solution for the victims by a long chalk ' .
The reform was announced as a reward for quality and food safety , aimed at better protection of the consumer and the environment .
Maintaining and improving the countryside would be less dependent on chasing after ever more intensive production .
My party , the Dutch Socialist Party , has always striven to achieve just such a reversal .
Agricultural organisations and farmers ' representatives in the European Parliament were furious .
This is understandable , as there is unfortunately a major risk of more large groups of farmers going out of business .
Not only the small farmers in France , Spain and Greece , but even the bigger farmers in the Netherlands , who are currently highly dependent on the money they have borrowed from the banks .
Compared with the amount of work and money they have invested , their income is disappointing , and that income may drop even further for some .
Farmers can only get socio-economic security if we have the courage to break away from the logic of the free market and instead are rewarded for countryside management , environmental protection and healthy food .
Otherwise there will still be pressure to supply food even more cheaply than the Americans and other competitors outside the EU by further intensification , further exploitation of the soil and export subsidies .
. ( PT ) I believe that multifunctionality in farming must have a place in the process of reforming the CAP , and I think that the Council and the Commission must accept this idea .
The social , environmental and territorial effects of farming have not , in fact , been given the attention they deserve by the Community institutions , whose farming policies have largely focused on qualitative and economic issues .
It would only be fair to emphasise that the hard-to-measure public goods and positive externalities that result from conventional farming far exceed its direct economic benefits .
It is therefore right that particular attention should be paid to the rural population , that practical measures falling outside the sphere of rural development should be adopted and that the preservation of farming should be encouraged and supported , given the importance at local level of farms . Production must also be geared towards sustainable and high-quality development .
I also agree with the rapporteur 's view that the need to deal with the unpredictable swings of competition in a market in the process of being liberalised must be compatible with the crucial presence of a sufficient number of farmers to ensure proper countryside management .
I have therefore voted in favour of the report .
The June Movement opposes the EU 's massive agricultural aid , which discriminates against the developing countries , the new EU countries , the environment and ecological interests .
The consumer pays twice : he or she pays via tax for the aid and then pays the artificially high prices for everyday goods .
Even if extensive farming and ecological interests were to go and be given slightly better conditions , it would still be unfair to third countries , the new EU countries and EU citizens .
The June Movement wishes to see the aid completely done away with and is unable to support a redistribution of the aid whereby new areas are brought under the umbrella of aid arrangements of one kind or another .
The June Movement believes that the only real way to abolish discrimination is by creating equal conditions through cutting back on agricultural aid with a view to phasing it out entirely .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats I should like to make the following comments about the Oostlander report .
We have agreed to this report , because it would be a way of bringing Turkey closer to European standards .
However , we attach importance to the conclusion that this report should not automatically be the start of anything .
With regard to Turkey 's possible accession to the European Union , many members of our group do not share the view that it should join the European Union , although naturally we would like to have close and friendly relations with it as a partner .
To that extent we believe it is important to state , having given our agreement to the Oostlander report , that , if and when it comes to a decision on Turkey 's membership of the European Union , it will be up to individuals to decide freely , that any such decision lies in the future , and that our agreement to the Oostlander report in no way forms a preliminary decision anticipating any such decision that may be taken in the future .
We chose to vote in favour of the report , despite the rejection of our proposal to delete the wording to the effect that ' the political values of the European Union are chiefly based on the Judaeo-Christian and humanist culture of Europe ' .
We do not like the wording , but because the rest of the report is constructive , we chose to vote in favour of it .
. ( PT ) We do not endorse the content of various points or phrases contained in the resolution including , amongst other aspects , its reference to what it calls the ' Judaeo-Christian and humanist culture of Europe ' or to Turkey 's commitments to NATO .
The resolution details a set of extremely important issues , such as the ban on the activities of various political organisations , the issue of the amnesty granted to political prisoners , the practice of torture and other forms of violence and repression , the army 's control of political life in the country and the military occupation of northern Cyprus and Turkey 's failure to apply the UN resolutions there .
Only the day before yesterday , my parliamentary group drew up an initiative on the situation in Turkey , in which various human rights organisations were involved .
One of the main ideas expressed in the initiative is that - despite the individual changes to the constitution and to legislation that these organisations have welcomed , although in practice some have not really been applied - we must not soften our condemnation of the violence and arbitrary behaviour by the Turkish authorities , and we must step up our solidarity with all those who resist and fight .
For our part , we shall continue to support all initiatives of this type .
. British Labour Euro MPs have supported this resolution because we believe it is essential to recognise the reforms achieved by the Turkish Government , and to give a positive signal of encouragement for further change on their path towards accession in to the European Union .
However , we condemn the reference to one particular religious tradition within the resolution , because we believe this is inconsistent with the multi-ethnic , multi-faith society which is the reality for all of our countries .
In addition , we want to put on record what we believe are misrepresentations in some of the text .
First , in relation to recital D and paragraph 24 , we should recognise that there are a range of electoral systems used in the different European countries , and in fact around one-quarter of current MPs in Turkey are from Kurdish origin . Second , in relation to paragraph 3 , whilst reiterating our strong desire on progress in relation to Cyprus , we point out that this has never been made a direct precondition for Turkish EU accession - and it is wrong to change that in this resolution .
On paragraph 19 , our understanding is that the Loizidou case has now been resolved - and this should be welcomed .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( EL ) The members of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report on the accession of Turkey to the ? U because we believe that it will not benefit the workers and the people of Turkey in general ; it will only benefit the Turkish plutocracy and the EU .
Many believe that the accession of Turkey will contribute towards its democratisation .
That belief led to customs union , to its being proclaimed a candidate country , but not to democratisation .
The repression of its people continued , with the gaols full of political detainees in inhumane conditions .
Arrests , torture and murder continue .
The muzzling of political opposition extends to banning parties such as the Turkish Communist Party and HADEP .
DEHAP is about to be banned .
The army continues to play a sovereign role and there is the daily threat of a coup d 'état .
Its militia continue to occupy 37 % of Cyprus .
The rapporteur does indeed recognise much of the above , but he welcomes the government for its good intentions and proposes speeding up the financing of Turkey with EU taxpayers ' money , which will most probably be used to reinforce the repressive mechanisms .
We condemn the hypocritical policy of the ? U , which is based above all on serving big interests and we stand by those fighting , under harsh conditions , for democracy , peace and social progress in Turkey , certain that radical change will come as their fight develops .
A new party surprisingly came to power in Turkey last year .
Thanks to the 10 percent threshold for obtaining representation in Parliament , this party immediately won a majority , and only one other party remained , that of the more or less social democratic followers of Atatürk .
The new premier , Erdogan , has been depicted as an extremist in the past and has been disenfranchised .
He is now regarded as the leader of the Muslim Democrats , which is supposed to be roughly the same as Christian Democrats in other countries .
You would expect a new governing party like this to take a critical view of the fact that Turkey has a considerable number of political prisoners , that parties are banned , that the army retains much power and that the very large Kurdish population group still does not have normal rights to government , education , the administration of justice , employment and media in their own language .
Up to now this government has also refused to acknowledge these problems and seems not to be doing very much about them .
It is therefore good that Turkey cannot enter into preliminary negotiations about EU membership without conditions , on the basis of the illusion that everything will automatically be better then .
The report could have been clearer and stronger , but I support the idea that Turkey will be able to join once it has become a democracy .
. ( PT ) According to the conclusions of the Lisbon European Council , the aim of the open method of coordination is ' to disseminate best practice and ensure greater convergence towards the main EU goals ' .
The way in which OMC has been applied , however , reveals certain weaknesses .
Hence the need for clarification , specifically in defining the matters to which it should apply ; in mobilising all national players to ensure that participation in the process is not wholly confined to a small elite ; in coordinating it with other Community instruments , making this method a complement to legislation and not ' alternative legislation in disguise ' .
This is why we should give our support to the recommendation to include in the future Constitutional Treaty an article specifically relating to OMC , defining its form and procedures .
I also welcome the call for the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities to be consulted on issues that fall within its sphere of competence and I recognise the merit of the European Commission 's drawing up a study on the effectiveness of the method .
The proposed measures will certainly help to improve OMC and I have therefore voted in favour of this excellent report .
. ( PT ) I have voted in favour of the report , and welcome the initiative by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
I agree with the rapporteur when ( in response to the views put forward by the Convention 's four working groups ) she calls for the open method of coordination to be defined more clearly and to be included in the Treaty .
Each national report must indicate how representatives of civil society , including the social partners , and local , regional and national authorities , including the Parliament , have been consulted .
I have always stood up for and emphasised the importance of the irreplaceable role at local level of national parliaments and communities ( specifically those that are involved or targeted ) in forming and expressing the ' Community will ' , because this does not correspond to a federalist vision of a supposed ' European will ' . It is instead the result of a ' desire to understand ' , a composition of disparate interests , a convergence of values and aims .
Sharing best practices , which forms part of the open method of coordination , is , therefore , an approach that needs to be improved , developed and extended to other areas , because of the useful effect it has had on employment policies .
This approach could lead to genuine convergence and could benefit everyone , without entailing the more or less imposed nature of legislation .
Lastly , I have also supported the suggestion to ask the Commission to draw up a study on the method 's effectiveness .
Mr President , we have just approved the Fraisse report on women in top-level sport .
I am , however , somewhat concerned about what we voted on in paragraph 10 , in which we call on the European Union to provide financial support for the operation of the European Women and Sport network , as I was under the impression that this was a private organisation of which a nephew of Mrs Fraisse is the chairman or at least plays a major role .
In my opinion it is not right that Mrs Fraisse does not disclose these interests .
Before something like this is done by the Commission , I would like us to establish whether any of this is true , because we do not believe that this is a particularly important organisation .
Although the text does not state clearly whether it is a private organisation or not , we looked into this , and this is apparently indeed the case .
I actually think this is unfair .
Various Members of this Parliament had questions on this , but we did not place this on the agenda in the plenary session for reasons of discretion .
I would nevertheless like all this to be investigated .
. ( PT ) Sport is a sector in which major inequalities between men and women still exist .
I therefore agree with this report and support the initiatives intended to reduce unequal treatment in terms of the income , financial resources and vocational retraining of top-level athletes .
Women 's participation must be promoted in positions of leadership , in technical and medical teams and on refereeing and adjudication boards .
Particular attention must be paid to the effects of sport on athletes ' health , to preventing and combating sexual abuse and harassment and to increasing media coverage of women 's sport .
Sport in schools is clearly in decline .
The role of physical and sports education must be emphasised and included in suitable training for teachers and measures must be adopted to enable women to practise sports in their spare time and develop opportunities for practising at their workplace .
Lastly , women 's participation in sport must be promoted in Community programmes and actions , and the appropriate human and financial resources must be provided , as well as the necessary mechanisms for monitoring and following up these actions .
This week the European Parliament is voting on two reports by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities .
Seldom have I seen such a big difference in quality between reports from one committee .
The report on breast cancer in the European Union is excellent , and the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party has therefore voted in favour of this .
The report on women in sport states that sport is an expression of the right to equality and the freedom of all women .
The European Commission is being asked to set up a ' women and sport ' unit ; television stations would have to undertake to broadcast more women 's sports , and they are even calling for sport in the workplace to be regulated in collective labour agreements !
Women 's sport is very good , but that does not make it a fundamental right .
Sport seems to me to be something that people simply have to do and not something that should be imposed by the European Parliament .
The ELDR Group has therefore voted against this report .
.
( PT ) Sport is an activity that has many virtues , such as developing team spirit and learning to help one another in team sports , a good way to use leisure time , clear health benefits , and the opportunities it provides for learning the importance of obeying rules and for developing a sense of ethics , for example .
All initiatives to promote sport are , therefore , always welcome .
In line with the old adage ' a healthy mind in a healthy body ' , sport must start at school and it is extremely important that everyone , both men and women , enjoys identical conditions , which are also appropriate to their level of involvement .
The under-representation of women in decision-making on sporting matters in sports federations and associations is not a problem specific to sport , but is an issue that needs to be duly addressed in this area too .
The Union must encourage women 's participation , although we believe that some of the proposals constitute excessive interference , both in the competence of the Member States and in sports associations ' ability to manage their own affairs - in other words , a dual breach of the principle of subsidiarity .
. ( FR ) I have to admit that this report already has one merit : it amused me .
The title , ' Women and Sport ' , might itself have been confusing , but the content is entirely beyond comprehension !
I have read and reread this crazy report and I have still not grasped the ins and outs of it .
I did pick out some classic passages , on access to sport as a fundamental right , on sport as a highly sexual and stereotyped area where the dominant models of virility and femininity are reproduced but also broken , and on socially discriminatory and sexually stereotyped treatment by the media , which leave us speechless .
But no , I can definitely find no justification for this report other than enabling an MEP to indulge in a style exercise that is worthy of the greatest humorists , So after ' Women and Sport ' roll on a report on ' Sport and sexual minorities ' !
Who was it who said that ' in politics , talking without saying anything and not saying anything for the sake of talking are the two major principles of those who would be better to keep their mouths closed ' ?
. ( PT ) The incidence of breast cancer has been steadily increasing .
The report that has just been adopted argues that the prevention , early detection , diagnosis , treatment and follow-up of the disease must be improved .
According to the WHO , 216 000 new cases of breast cancer were diagnosed in the European Union in 2000 , and in that year 79 000 women died of the disease .
This is the most common cancer in women , affecting one in nine and is the most common cause of death in women between the ages of 35 and 55 .
The risk of developing breast cancer is 60 % higher in Western Europe than in Eastern Europe , hence the proposal to create , by 2008 , the conditions required for a 25 % reduction in the average breast-cancer mortality rate in the EU .
The Member States are invited to offer all women aged between the ages of 50 and at least 69 a mammography every two years , as laid down in the European Directives on Guaranteeing the Quality of Mammographic Screening , since only eight of the fifteen Member States currently have national screening programmes .
All women suffering from this form of cancer must have the right to be treated by multidisciplinary teams .
Hence our vote in favour of the report .
. ( PT ) I congratulate the rapporteur on this report , which is so important and timely .
Its importance and timeliness are confirmed by data from the International Agency for Research on Cancer , which states that in 2000 more than 79 000 women died from breast cancer .
The broad majority achieved in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities also confirms the aptness of the report 's content , since there were only two abstentions and no votes against it .
Amongst the rapporteur 's suggestions , I would highlight making the fight against breast cancer a priority for health policy , implementing a two-yearly screening model for all women between the ages of 50 and 69 and the regular attendance of doctors and paramedical staff on further training courses .
Something else that will be crucial is a clear commitment to cure this and other types of cancer .
I , like many others , believe that cancer remains the real ' disease of the century ' , which must be given priority .
Mr President , I am in something of a crisis as far as the Rules of Procedure are concerned .
We are dealing here with explanations of vote .
We now have written explanations of vote .
They are used to ensure that Parliament does not have to deal with everything .
We now come to Explanation 5 / 2003 .
In the English version , there is a reference to ' crimes ' , while the German version has ' Verbrechen ' .
In the German text a Verbrechen is an offence ( Straftat ) carrying a penalty of at least one year 's imprisonment .
I believe this to be too strong a term , and therefore when I signed I added , ' I sign this subject to the reservation that the correct translation would be Straftat ' .
The same problem occurs in Danish : Forbrydelser also means Verbrechen .
I would ask you to pass on the question to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure as to how we should proceed in such a case .
The interpreter was in despair and said that 260 people had already signed and he could not now replace the German and Danish language versions .
In any case I should like to make it quite clear for the Minutes that my signature was not given for Verbrechen , but for the correct translation of the English word ' crime ' , which is Straftat , a term that includes both Verbrechen and Vergehen .
I do not know what the original language version was , but the normal procedure is to ensure that all versions correspond to the original language .
We have noted the point you have made .
Mr President , I am entitled to make both a personal statement and a statement concerning the Rules of Procedure .
Mr van Hulten has invited me to respect democratic decisions .
It was a democratic decision of this House that this report should be dealt with this afternoon .
Therefore it is not I who have gone against a democratic decision .
Secondly , you have taken Rule 145 as your basis , and I should like to draw your attention to Rule 145 ( 2 ) , which states quite clearly , ' If the proposal or request is carried , only one member may speak from each political group which has not yet provided a speaker in that debate ' .
That means that , if Rule 145 had really been applied , an opportunity to speak would have had to be given to one Member from each group !
I am therefore really asking that these things should be clarified .
The clarification is simple .
Every single speaker in the debate had withdrawn , so there was no debate anyway .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.51 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The Minutes have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
I will also be able to confirm that you were present .
The next item is the report ( A5-0157 / 2003 ) by Mrs Fourtou , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the Commission communication to the European Parliament and the European Ombudsman on relations with the complainant in respect of infringements of Community law [ COM ( 2002 ) 141 - C5-0288 / 2002 - 2002 / 2148 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , respect for Community law is a fundamental part of the future of Europe .
The European Commission , which has to ensure that Community law is applied , has to maintain special relations with citizens who are witnesses to , or the actual or alleged victims of , violations of Community law and who lodge complaints with its services .
The communication that inspired this report demonstrates the Commission 's desire for transparency and efficiency .
As it committed to doing , it publishes in consolidated form its internal rules of procedure governing its relations with the complainant .
It also ensures that it keeps in contact with the complainant throughout the investigation of his complaint according to a strict schedule .
It was following an own initiative report and criticisms made against the European Ombudsman when a complaint was closed , and also repeated requests from the European Parliament , that the European Commission has reconsidered its administrative methods for dealing with relations with the complainant .
It should be noted that the Commission enjoys discretionary powers with regard to assessing complaints and deciding whether or not to commence infringement proceedings and to refer a case to the Court of Justice .
This is not , therefore , about reconsidering the way in which complaints are handled but about enabling citizens to be informed , in particular about the progress of the examination of their complaints .
We note with satisfaction that the Commission 's proposal is entirely a step in the right direction .
We consider that the administrative measures taken by the Commission as regards the consideration of complaints are particularly welcome and that they allow complainants to be regularly informed of the stage reached in the proceedings .
Moreover , we regard the maximum one-year period that the Commission has undertaken to comply with in order to respond to each case as entirely reasonable , given the number of complaints lodged and their complexity .
The only point that seems to me to be missing from this communication , however , is the situation when a complaint and a petition are lodged at the same time .
As you know , the Commission is not the only institution to respond to citizen 's questions regarding the proper functioning of the institutions and the correct application of Community law .
The European Ombudsman and the European Parliament , through its Committee on Petitions , also receive an increasing number of complaints .
A complaint lodged by a citizen may therefore also be the subject of a petition to Parliament lodged by the same citizen .
This is when two complaints are lodged at the same time , each of them being treated differently according to the institution with which it was lodged , according to a different timetable , which , you will understand , is a source of confusion for both citizens and the institutions themselves .
It seems both desirable and logical for decisions made by Community institutions regarding complaints , appeals or petitions to be coordinated between the institutions concerned in order to provide an effective service for citizens .
This is why we are urging the Commission to revise the interinstitutional agreement , which dates from 1989 .
It should also be considered that this was when the position of Ombudsman was introduced and the right of petition was recognised in many Member States , which considerably increased the number of appeal cases .
Despite all of the Commission 's competence in processing complaints , citizens should still use the Committee on Petitions , which considers and responds to the problems raised in a more political way , but the Commission and Parliament obviously complement each other in order to ensure the effective service required .
Moreover , the need for information is going to increase in the years to come , with the arrival of ten new Member States in the Community .
Allow me to finish by mentioning something very promising that the Commission has done : creating Solvit .
The purpose of Solvit is to settle , very quickly - and when I say very quickly I mean within ten weeks , with four additional weeks in the event of additional problems- recurrent cross-border problems concerning the internal market , and to prevent legal actions .
What is different about Solvit is that it involves Member States in a partnership with the Commission for investigating the case .
This is evidence of integration , which is enjoying growing success , and the Commission is to be congratulated on this progress , the ultimate aim of which is to make life simpler for citizens in terms of respect for Community law .
. Mr President , the Commission is pleased to note that Mrs Fourtou 's draft report welcomes the communication on relations with the complainant in respect of infringements of Community law .
This communication serves two purposes .
The first is to raise public awareness of the procedural rules which apply to complaints handled by the Commission .
The second is to tighten internal discipline as regards notification given to complainants at the main stages of proceedings , including , where appropriate , when cases are closed .
The Commission is ready to work with Parliament to examine ways of improving coordination of the two bodies ' response to state measures which are incompatible with Community law , such measures being brought to the institution 's attention either via petitions or complaints .
Mr President , it is well known , and those of us who are members of the Committee on Petitions have been well aware of it for some time now , that this Parliament and the institution of European Ombudsman are not overly happy about the way in which the Commission has been handling complaints by European citizens .
There have frequently been many criticisms in this respect .
Therefore , the Ombudsman , in relation to a complaint concerning the Macedonian Joint Venture , stated at the time that the Commission would have to reconsider its operating methods in respect of complaints by citizens , in other words in respect of the intercommunication between the Commission and European citizens .
So now we have this communication from the Commission , which recognises that the handling of this intercommunication requires a better framework , mainly from an administrative point of view , in the area of permanent personal contact with the citizens who have submitted the complaint or petition , and in the area of the classification of complaints , treating them properly and reasonably .
The report by Mrs Fortou has arrived in this context , and I would like to congratulate her on her work .
The agreement must be maintained up to the end .
We call on the Commission to welcome the proposals in this report , which make a great deal of sense .
I reiterate , therefore , that we give our full backing to this report , and to the Commission we say that we are at a particularly opportune and interesting moment , coinciding as it does with the accession of 10 further Member States , to pursue this action .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to congratulate Mrs Fourtou on her report and to thank her .
My group is of the opinion that the Commission communication is a step in the right direction , since it recognises how important the role of complainant is in the exposure of infringements of Community law .
The Commission must welcome the citizen as the provider of a service , and must look after citizens ' interests .
Only in this way is trust created , and the feeling conveyed that the EU is a Union for its citizens .
The citizen must always be shown ways in which he can assert his rights as a citizen of the Union .
This must also apply to the Commission even if it turns out that the Commission is for once not the right body to which to turn with a complaint .
The citizen must have the feeling that this is what Europe is , and I say Europe because we must remember that many citizens do not make any distinction between the institutions .
The citizen must therefore be given an answer . Therefore I particularly welcome the fact that this communication includes this aspect .
I would have liked the wording to be more clear , however , in particular by stating that the Commission must in all cases show the complainant an alternative means of recourse to law .
Citizens must be dealt with and informed individually and personally .
The Commission must inform the complainant immediately and consistently .
Here it is also important that the complainant really does have the opportunity to present his complaint to the Commission in person and to explain it in more detail .
The good intentions of the communication must now be put into practice and must not be allowed to remain merely a theory on paper .
Like the rapporteur , I too am basically of the opinion that the one-year time limit for processing complaints is sufficient .
That means , however , that the one-year time limit must be the rule and that the citizen is able to rely on really obtaining an answer within one year .
I do not believe the excuse that the Commission does not have enough staff in order to do this to be a valid one .
Like Mrs Fourtou , I regret the fact that the communication did not make any connection with the petition procedure .
For years the Committee on Petitions has been demanding intensified inter-institutional cooperation .
This has already been referred to in the Perry-Keßler report .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating not only the rapporteur on the report but also the Commission on the communication .
For us it represents an important step in recognition of the role and legitimate rights of citizens who file a complaint with the Commission .
It is also the first time the Commission has adopted public rules on how to deal with infringements of Community law by Member States .
Those public rules are often a marked improvement on the practice in a number of our Member States .
Secondly , I recall that when the previous Ombudsman , Mr Jacob Söderman , asked the Commission to adopt rules on how to treat complainants , his recommendation was to recognise that the complainant was a party to an administrative procedure .
While my group considers that this should be the final objective , it also considers that the adopted code is a genuine improvement .
Perhaps there will be an opportunity to advance further through the adoption of an administrative law for the Union 's institutions and agencies .
Thirdly , I want to mention an area on which my colleague , Mr Wyn , and I tabled an amendment which was rejected by the committee - which is unusual because our committee normally shows very good sense .
The report at the moment states that the Commission enjoys a discretionary power in relation to its consideration of complaints .
While we recognise that the Commission needs a certain discretion as to if and when it opens an infringement procedure , the discretion has to be used in compliance with the Commission 's obligations to ensure that Community law is implemented and applied .
Article 211 , which makes the Commission the guardian of the Treaties , and Article 226 , which gives the Commission the right to open infringement procedures , constitute the essential safeguard in the Treaties for the application of the acquis .
Therefore , we are concerned about this view of the Commission 's powers of discretion being extremely wide and would prefer to have them described as providing a certain margin of appreciation .
Finally , I want to stress , as the Convention is coming to a conclusion , the importance of maintaining the Commission 's role in monitoring the implementation of Community law .
The number of complaints received by the Commission and the number of petitions to Parliament clearly show that citizens need that opportunity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur on her very short and succinct report .
It is very much to the point , and that point is that we need more transparency and commitment on the part of the Commission in its administration and towards the citizens of the Union - something that has already been mentioned .
I believe that a time-limit of one year is not only appropriate , but is even very generous .
We have Member States where commitment to schedules is the order of the day .
We should try , together , to get rid of double-tracking when it comes to dealing with complaints .
That has already been mentioned too .
That is one of the objectives of this House , and especially of its Committee on Petitions .
The Commission still has difficulties with administration that is transparent and people-friendly .
It has happened to every one of us that at some time we have had to defend the relatively small number of officials - some seventeen or eighteen thousand - that the Commission employs , because most of the time they behave towards the public as if they had about a hundred thousand .
I do not need to remind you of the game of hide-and-seek that the Commission is currently playing in connection with the EUROSTAT scandal , where one has the feeling that the Commission has not yet learned that modern administration has something to do with transparency .
We only have to look at last year 's report by the Ombudsman , which shows that in the year 2002 , Commissioner , 75 % of complaints were about your institution .
Of those complaints , there were many that could have been settled relatively easily and at little cost .
In fact , 27 % of the complaints by EU citizens were concerned with lack of transparency and refusal to provide information .
Once again it boils down to transparency .
Mr Prodi publicly promised something quite different when he took office three years ago .
A further 15 % of complaints were concerned with avoidable administrative delays .
The issue of late payments has now become legendary in the Union .
I believe that there is great potential here for improvement at little cost .
We just need goodwill , and I think it would be a good idea if we could agree , Commissioner , that , in relation to the commitments that you have entered into , whereby everything will be dealt with within a year , Parliament could receive regular reports from you .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates on cases of breaches of human rights .
The next item is the debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0293 / 2003 by Mr Hartmut Nassauer and Mr Bernd Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the situation in Indonesia , in particular on Aceh ;
B5-0298 / 2003 by Mr Luigi Vinci , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Indonesia , most particularly in Papua and Aceh ;
B5-0301 / 2003 by Mr Bastiaan Belder , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the situation in Indonesia , in particular on Aceh ;
B5-0302 / 2003 by Mr Proinsias De Rossa , Mr Martin Schulz , Mrs Christa Randzio-Plath and Mr Margrietus J. van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in the Indonesian province of Aceh ;
B5-0307 / 2003 by Mr Bob van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Indonesia , most particularly in Papua and Aceh ;
B5-0311 / 2003 by Mrs Matti Wuori , Mrs Patricia McKenna and Mrs Nelly Maes , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the situation in the provinces of Aceh and Papua , Indonesia .
Mr President , today we are looking at one of the most difficult foci of crisis in Asia , one that threatens to become ever more dangerous , and we cannot grasp this subject if we merely fall back on the usual clichés .
Indonesia is a world of many peoples , and , in geographical terms alone , it far exceeds any of our European dimensions .
In that part of the world one cannot measure everything by the same yardstick .
We have the problem that Aceh is an ancient historic Sultanate , which has had a significant cultural influence on the region .
Aceh was a great seafaring nation . Aceh has also had a religious influence on the area .
It was from there that Islam spread so extensively throughout Asia , and the island has developed a very strong and healthy sense of identity .
In the colonial period , Aceh , like many other nations in this region , was simply brought into line with all the others and then , after decolonialisation , it became a part of the new artificial State of Indonesia .
Now we certainly do not want to call into question the integrity of this State of Indonesia , which , on economic and strategic grounds alone , is one of our most important and valuable partners .
On the other hand , we have to look at the reality of the situation , and the reality is that in Indonesia they have made the mistake of trying to solve the problem of the over-populated islands of Bali , Java and Sumatra by coming up with what is known as the Transmigration Policy , in other words they have tried to resettle people from these islands on other islands with a different cultural and historical make-up , and to outvote other population groups , which has led to a whole range of ethnic and religious conflicts .
These conflicts are not , as in the Moluccas , simply conflicts between Muslims and Christians , but in Aceh they are also between Muslims and Muslims , or between different ethnic groups .
For that reason we must approach this subject with great caution .
On the one hand we must demand , very clearly , an end to the use of force in Aceh and an end to the terrorist activities taking place in the region .
On the other hand , however , we must also demand that the Government of Indonesia , which is our partner , meets its obligations , and that means fully implementing the autonomy arrangements for Aceh and ensuring that democracy and the rule of law prevail there , and that , above all , humanitarian organisations , international observers and the international media have access to the region .
Indonesia should have nothing to hide ; it is our partner .
However , the way in which Indonesia deals with the self-aware Aceh province and its freedom is also an important criterion .
Mr President , the borders of the developing world are largely a product of European colonial administration .
People who wanted to stay together were split up because the areas they lived in were divided up between colonial occupiers .
Conversely , people who would have liked to have had an independent state were allotted to large , powerful neighbours who wanted to conquer the areas they lived in .
It is becoming difficult to change the way countries are divided up in a peaceful manner , particularly if oil or metals have been found in the ground in such areas .
Indonesia is a product of more than three centuries of Dutch colonialism .
Five large islands and innumerable small ones were brought together under one administration in order to supply what the nineteenth century author Multatuli called a North Sea robber state with cheap raw materials and commodities .
The two areas in which the Indonesian army is now trying to destroy separatist movements , Aceh on Northern Sumatra and West Papua , were the last to be added to the Dutch colonial empire .
They were occupied by the Dutch colonial army as late as 1900 , and this was preceded by a bloody war in Aceh .
The Netherlands had very little interest in the island of New Guinea , which was initially divided between the Netherlands , Germany and Great Britain and which was inhabited by Papuans whose way of life had not changed since ancient times , until Indonesia broke away from the Netherlands in the War of Independence .
This was the last colonial foothold in Asia at the time .
The Netherlands had to cede this territory 40 years ago under pressure from America , which was looking to establish good relations with Indonesia .
The promised referendum for the residents about whether or not to join Indonesia never materialised .
In 1945 the Netherlands once again tried to divide Indonesia into an independent , densely-populated Java and a number of satellite states in the region linked to the Netherlands .
Many Indonesians , and certainly their rulers and their military , still regard the fact that they made this split impossible as a great success .
The powerful role of the Indonesian army , which has been guarding minerals and suppressing ethnic minorities for many years , can be explained by this , as can the long-standing occupation of the former Portuguese Timor and an earlier attempt to annex the former British Malaysia .
Indonesia 's current problems were caused by Europe and America .
It is therefore a good thing that the European Parliament is concerning itself with these wrongs .
Unlike in the past , this must not be done through military intervention from outside but through diplomatic , and , if necessary , economic pressure .
In order to enable the Indonesian peoples to achieve democracy and self-determination , we must always take these causes and sensitivities on board .
Mr President , the political fragility of the Indonesian confederation is evident .
The proverbial Emerald Belt is threatening to crumble in its easternmost region , Papua , and in the west in Aceh .
The countermeasures coming from Jakarta , particularly the military ones , are still producing a reverse effect .
They are undermining the central authority 's promises of autonomy , both in Papua and in Aceh .
This is encouraging dangerous radicalisation .
Any escalation of the long-standing conflict between Jakarta and GAM rebels could create a new hotbed of international Islamic terrorism , particularly in Aceh , which has always been very passionate about its independence , as the Dutch know to their cost .
This terrifying prospect should encourage Jakarta to act tactfully .
The involvement of the outside world , the Commission and Council , is an absolute must .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , peace and the rule of law in Indonesia have taken a major step backwards , with the breakdown of the ceasefire and renewed hostilities in the province of Aceh on the one hand and with the fresh outbreak of tensions in Irian Jaya , also known as West Papua , on the other .
Indonesia is one of the world 's largest countries , and has the unique feature of suffering not only from the problems arising from its geography and history and , in particular , from the process of decolonisation - to which Mr Meijer referred , and in which lies the root of the problems of the former sultanate of Aceh - but also from the problems posed by Indonesia 's brutal repression and dictatorship and by its expansionist approach , which led to the annexation of Irian Jaya and the military takeover of East Timor .
These two latter facts help us to understand the gravity and complexity of the situation facing that country today .
The decolonisation of East Timor , which followed the fall of the Suharto dictatorship , represented an historic step in reversing both this internal expansionist intent , which was typical of Indonesia , and the attitude of the western world which had , by commission and by omission , supported the takeover of this small South-East Asian nation , which had only recently come into being .
As we know , this was not a peaceful action and could only succeed because external military force was used , after the United Nations proved unable to deal with Indonesia 's armed response on its own .
Having said this , and whilst acknowledging that we should not always declare ourselves against any armed action , all the evidence suggests , as indicated in our joint resolution , that we must do everything possible to bring this armed conflict to an end and to ensure that dialogue reopens between the Indonesian Government and the separatist movements in Aceh , as well as the representatives of Irian Jaya .
Over and above accepting responsibility for all measures necessary to re-establishing the ceasefire in Aceh and dialogue in Irian Jaya , we must also establish an external policy for Indonesia , based on respect for human rights , for minorities and for inter-ethnic and inter-religious dialogue .
These principles must furthermore take precedence over geopolitical or economic considerations , which are always poor counsellors in these situations and which have provided such poor results in the past . These principles must also take precedence over determinist considerations such as territorial integrity or the right to self-determination , which are sometimes difficult to define at the outset .
Aceh never wanted to belong .
That was the case under Dutch colonial rule , and that has actually never changed .
For geographic , ethnic , religious and in particular economic reasons .
Revenues from natural gas are an ongoing source of tension .
Should this go to the Indonesian Government or to the military , the rebels or the inhabitants themselves ?
The population has been terrorised , both by the Indonesian military and by the GAM rebels , since 1976 .
From my own experience I know how dangerous it is just to travel from one place to another in this territory .
Over the years , negotiations between the GAM and the Indonesian military have never delivered anything significant .
The actual reason for this could well be that both parties have an interest in allowing this anarchistic situation to continue because they both earn well from it .
After the last negotiations failed , the Indonesian Government proceeded to launch a large-scale military offensive which could easily degenerate into terrible excesses on both sides .
The Jakarta Government has sworn that it would respect human rights , but who is able to observe that in this mountainous jungle terrain ?
It is therefore of the utmost importance that international observers go to the area that is adequately protected by the military .
The European Union must exert all possible pressure on both the Indonesian Government and on the GAM and urge them to arrive at a peaceful settlement with fair arrangements concerning the distribution of minerals .
Military solutions have never lasted in Aceh .
It is particularly regrettable that Papua 's Special Autonomy Act has been withdrawn and has been replaced by a new law that divides the territory into three provinces .
It finally seemed as if a solution had been reached which would make everybody happy and would guarantee stability .
But Mrs Megawati has paid too much attention to the military and does not have the political courage to implement her own will .
The Papuans no longer want to belong either as a result of this policy , and that cannot have been the intention .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the historic circumstances show that we as the European Community cannot remain disinterested with regard to what is happening in Indonesia , Aceh and Papua New Guinea .
The war which is still continuing and which has been going on for the past 27 years in Aceh shows that the consequences of the colonial era are still having an impact today .
We must convince the Indonesians that political solutions are the only way to settle these political conflicts .
A concrete and clear weapons embargo on the Indonesian Government would be an initial step , but we must also be able to convince the Indonesian Government that a country with 150 million inhabitants and so many thousands of islands should not be governed as a unitary entity .
If there is a will for self-determination and autonomy , both in Aceh and amongst the Papuans , this must be taken into consideration .
12 000 victims in Aceh , cruelty on a daily basis , infringements of citizens ' rights , rapes , attacks on villages ; this must be stopped and a political solution must be found .
In Papua too , they must return to the solution that offers the prospect of autonomy .
We are not in favour of separate states coming into being everywhere , but we cannot allow a disastrous centralism imposed against the will of the people and by military means to be the ultimate solution .
This political issue must be resolved in a fair way , so that peace can prevail and so that the natural wealth that is present in such massive quantities can be extracted for the benefit of the entire population and with the participation of those who have been living there for centuries .
The West must not make itself an accessory to Indonesia 's military solutions , but must continue to press consistently for a political solution that offers the prospect of autonomy , even if it is within the framework of an Indonesian state .
Mr President , Indonesia is currently engaging in its largest military operation since the invasion of East Timor in 1975 , against the GAM rebels in Aceh following the breakdown of a five-month-old cease-fire , and already there are reports of widespread suffering and human rights abuses .
The conflict has its origin in the fact that although the Sultanate of Aceh was never technically incorporated into the Dutch East Indies it was one of the territories handed over by Holland to Indonesia in 1949 , following the UN-sponsored talks between Indonesia and the former colonial power .
The Acehnese , although fellow Muslims , almost immediately began fighting for independence , and the province was given special status .
The unrest is exacerbated by the Indonesian Government 's exploitation of the province 's gas and petroleum resources as well as the policy of transmigration which has seen many Javanese come to live and work in the province 's coastal and industrial belts .
The earlier cease-fire , which was aimed in part , from the EU 's point of view , at ensuring Indonesian support for the worldwide fight against terrorism , whilst protecting the human rights of the Acehnese , is clearly now defunct .
President Megawati understandably wishes to prevent Indonesia falling apart .
The army appears to have persuaded her , unwisely , that a military solution is possible .
It is highly unlikely that the military option is the only one that will work in the long term .
A political solution now needs to be found quickly .
Mr President , the Indonesian Government must formally put on record its opposition to human rights violations such as unlawful killings , including extra-judicial executions , disappearances and torture .
It must make clear to the security forces that any violations will not be tolerated and that perpetrators will be brought to justice .
Both sides have to adhere to international human rights and humanitarian law - and be seen to adhere to them .
There must also be a proper chain of command for security personnel .
They must be made aware that they will be held criminally accountable for carrying out atrocities - not only the people who carry them out , but also those who give the orders .
Crimes against women and children should not be tolerated under any circumstances .
Unfortunately these continue at present .
The Indonesian Government must take measures to protect the human rights defenders and members of the press who speak out about these atrocities .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0297 / 2003 by Mrs Marianne Eriksson , Mr Fausto Bertinotti , Mrs Yasmine Boudjenah and Mrs Luisa Morgantini , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi in Burma ;
B5-0303 / 2003 by Mr Walter Veltroni , Mrs Glenys Kinnock , Mr Margrietus J. van den Berg and Mr Martin Schulz , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi ( Burma ) ;
B5-0305 / 2003 by Mr Geoffrey Van Orden , Mr Nirj Deva , Mr Thomas Mann , Mrs Hanja Maij-Weggen and Mr Lennart Sacrédeus , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on Burma ;
B5-0306 / 2003 by Mr Bob van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on Burma ;
B5-0310 / 2003 by Mrs Patricia McKenna and Mrs Marie Anne Isler Béguin , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Burma .
Mr President , a never-ending drama seems to be unfolding in Burma .
For years , a brutal junta has been terrorising the people of Burma , who live in extreme poverty .
The regime bullies thousands of forced labourers , thousands of political detainees languish in the country 's prisons , and the President , once democratically elected with an overwhelming majority , the holder of the Nobel Prize - and also the holder of the European Parliament 's Sakharov Prize - was imprisoned for years and then , after a short period in which the hope of a thin silver lining of democracy could be seen on the horizon , was arrested again on 31 May this year together with nine other members of the country 's parliament .
As you have no doubt learned from the media , it is not clear how many human lives the enforced military takeover has actually cost , or what fate the Deputy Chairman of the persecuted party , the National League for Democracy , has suffered .
It is possible that the President herself was injured in this latest attack .
This is a really serious reversal , given that exactly a year ago the release of Aung San Suu Kyi raised hopes that the regime was ready to carry out reforms .
In this spirit of hope , a political dialogue was begun , under the supervision of the UN Special Envoy Razali Ismail , but it is to be feared that on his visit , planned for tomorrow , he will be prevented from meeting Aung San Suu Kyi , and that this will result in a further hardening of attitudes .
Military might , political persecution and taking away the freedom of people who , in defiance of all repressive measures , continue to fight for democracy - all these must not be tolerated .
The Council has therefore been invited to reintroduce , with immediate effect , the sanctions against the regime which had been temporarily suspended .
However , it must also be clear that the Council , the Commission and in particular Parliament , in the interests of the people of Burma , do not want to close all doors in Burma .
In other words , we are still ready to help to encourage a process of national reconciliation , but there must also be signs that such a reconciliation process is desired and pursued by all sides .
As long as terror and military might prevail , however , no one can hope for tolerance from the European Parliament and from the other European institutions .
Mr President , the arrest at the weekend of Aung San Suu Kyi , the leader of the Burmese National League for Democracy , is deplorable and shows that the military regime in Burma has no intention of democratic reform .
Reports of personal injuries are all the more alarming .
This turn of events also calls into question the effectiveness of EU action against the military dictatorship .
We demand the immediate release of Aung San Suu Kyi , as well as the release of all political prisoners and the lifting of restrictions against the NLD , universities and other institutions .
The very worrying deterioration in the political situation in the last few days is just the latest twist in a story of consistent human rights abuses .
Anyone who expresses opposition to the regime is subject to harassment and arrest and goes in fear of their life .
Ethnic minorities such as the Karin and the Shan continue to suffer violent oppression , and there are over 130 000 refugees in camps on the Thai-Burma border .
Regrettably we witness yet another example where the efforts of the European Union and the wider international community to encourage change have brought few tangible results .
Clearly we have not yet hit the regime where it hurts .
The EU 's extension of its travel ban against the regime , and assets freeze , were agreed in April but suspended until October in the hope of some improvement in the situation .
The situation has clearly deteriorated , and the Council should take action immediately to implement the measures that it agreed in its common position .
This situation could best be resolved if the Burmese regime were to respect the results of the 1990 elections , as the international community has consistently demanded .
The Burmese generals are really doing everything they can to remain in power .
Opponents are being silenced .
The opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi has spent half of the past 14 years under house arrest .
She has now been arrested again , allegedly for her own safety .
The junta is completely paranoid and controls the administration , justice , the economy and the private lives of the Burmese people .
There is absolutely no democracy whatsoever , and the people are being kept ignorant .
Anyone who has had an education is distrusted .
Every time there is a student demonstration the government closes the university .
The country has been in crisis for the past 14 years , and there is a shortage of everything except corruption , which is flourishing .
The regime practices systematic discrimination against the Rohingya people .
There is absolutely no sign of any rapprochement between the government and the opposition .
In order to pull the wool over the eyes of the West , cosmetic steps are taken every now and again , such as the visit of the UN envoy Razali .
Burma has one of the most corrupt regimes in the world .
The international community has tolerated this for much too long .
The more than 1 000 political prisoners must be released immediately , and all repressive measures must be rescinded .
The European Union must make Burma an important point on the agenda of the ASEAN conference in Bali .
As long as pressure from neighbouring countries remains minimal , the generals will be in no hurry to pack their bags .
The European Union must also further intensify its sanctions policy .
We must put a complete stop to business contact , which also means no investment .
There is a risk that the resoluteness of the generals will result in a feeling that there is actually nothing we can do , but we owe it to the patient and extremely tenacious Aung San Suu Kyi and the poor population of Burma to do everything we can to drive the generals from power .
Mr President , I agree with and support most of what has been said , but I wish to raise two points .
The first concerns the whereabouts of Aung San Suu Kyi .
She has not been seen for many days , in fact since the end of May , when it was reported that up to 70 people were killed by the junta army and that she suffered a head injury .
The fact that she has not been seen and that her whereabouts is unknown raises serious concerns about whether she is alive and what kind of condition she is in .
This Parliament and the institutions have to send a very strong message to the Burmese authorities that international bodies must immediately have access to her .
It is of crucial importance .
We need to know immediately what kind of situation she is in .
My second point concerns the resolution itself , which contained a call for new elections .
I understand now that all the political groups have agreed to this being removed .
I am glad , because it would send a very dangerous signal at this time .
In other words , it would mean giving in to the logic of the generals , not accepting the decision of the people and basically undermining the National League for Democracy .
I am glad that the parties who wanted this in have agreed to take it out , because it would be a really dangerous and very bad signal to send at this time to the military regime in Burma .
Mr President , Commissioner , in Burma twenty leading opposition members have been arrested , including Aung San Suu Kyi , the 1991 winner of the Nobel Peace Prize , the holder of Parliament 's Sakharov Prize , and the President of the League for Democracy .
Over one hundred offices of the League have been closed down , its supporters have been persecuted and arrested , and according to our information just recently seventy sympathisers were killed in the North of the country by armed troops of the military junta .
In the past few years , after the European Union had quite rightly suspended trade-facilitation measures and blocked foreign capital , the first positive effects were felt .
In 2002 Aung San Suu Kyi was released from house arrest , and there were justified hopes of reform , and so the EU decided to withdraw certain sanctions until the end of the year .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is asking that the Government of Burma should now release from arrest the Nobel Prize winner , her fellow-campaigners and the political prisoners .
Persecution and murders must be brought to an immediate end .
Universities , schools and the offices of the League for Democracy must finally be reopened .
We are also asking for free elections under independent international observation .
If the military junta continues to refuse to introduce a course of reforms which is so badly needed , then the visa ban must be extended and capital must remain frozen , without any possibility of licences being granted .
The ASEAN States , the United Nations and the international community must be made to discharge their obligations , so that pressure from Europe receives wide support .
Mr President , allow me to begin by saying that I fully support the calls made in the motion for a resolution .
It must be beyond doubt that there is a need to tighten up the EU 's sanctions against Burma .
With the arrest of Nobel Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi and 19 other members of her party , the military junta has of course again shown that it does not wish to improve conditions of democracy in the country .
The junta 's statement that Aung San Suu Kyi was arrested for the sake of her own safety is an insult to the intelligence of any thinking person , and I entirely agree with Mrs McKenna that we must immediately demand to know where she is , and obtain access to her .
It can therefore only be hoped that more stringent international sanctions will cause the military junta to mend its ideas .
I think it important that the Council should intensify its demands in terms of human rights and continue to support the UN 's special envoy .
It should demand that all prisoners be released unconditionally and that a genuine dialogue with the opposition be resumed , for it is of course only through dialogue involving all the relevant political actors that a solid and legitimate democracy might be re-established .
Mr President , the Commission agrees totally with what has been said here in Parliament .
We are very concerned about the recent events , the harassment and the political violence experienced by Aung San Suu Kyi and the supporters of the National League for Democracy during their movements in northern Burma .
The confirmation by the Burmese authorities that Aung San Suu Kyi and leading members of her party would be detained for their own protection is of great concern and the Commission fully supports all of the calls for the immediate and unconditional release of Aung San Suu Kyi and her party leaders .
The decisions by the Burmese Government to detain Aung San Suu Kyi and her collaborators , to close the offices of the National League for Democracy and to close the universities are significant steps backwards for the international reconciliation process and they must be suspended as soon as possible .
It is now high time for the Burmese Government to show that it is committed to the national reconciliation process by working with Aung San Suu Kyi , the NLD and the other democratic forces in the country to restore democracy and to ensure respect for human rights and the rule of law .
In this respect , and in light of the imminent visit to Burma of the Special Envoy of the United Nations Secretary-General , Mr Razali Ismail , on 6 June , the Commission calls on the Burmese authorities to cooperate fully and constructively with Mr Razali and to allow him to meet freely with Aung San Suu Kyi and the other democratic leaders .
As regards the application of the sanctions mentioned in the Union 's common position on Burma of 28 April 2003 , I can assure the Members of Parliament that the Commission is monitoring the situation very closely and is ready to support the implementation of these sanctions as soon as possible if the situation does not improve .
Allow me to say , from a personal point of view , how much I respect and admire this great politician , Aung San Suu Kyi , winner of our Parliament 's Sakharov prize , the Nobel Prize for Peace , and a torch of democracy and freedom .
I truly hope that she is well and that with the help of all of the democratic forces she will be able to come through this for her own sake and that of her people .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place this afternoon following the debates .
The next item is the joint debate on six motions for resolutions on Zimbabwe :
B5-0287 / 2003 by Mr Geoffrey Van Orden , Mr John Alexander Corrie , Mr Nirj Deva , Mrs Jacqueline Foster , Mr Neil Parish , Mr Charles Tannock , Mrs Mary Elizabeth Banotti , Mr Michael Gahler , Mrs Eija-Riitta Anneli Korhola , Mr Klaus-Heiner Lehne , Mrs Hanja Maij-Weggen and Mr Lennart Sacrédeus , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on Zimbabwe ;
B5-0299 / 2003 by Mr Luigi Vinci , Mr Joaquim Miranda and Mrs Luisa Morgantini , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on Zimbabwe ;
B5-0300 / 2003 by Mr Bastiaan Belder , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the situation in Zimbabwe ;
B5-0304 / 2003 by Mrs Glenys Kinnock and Mr Martin Schulz , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Zimbabwe ;
B5-0308 / 2003 by Mr Bob van den Bos and Mr Jan Mulder , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Zimbabwe ;
B5-0309 / 2003 by Mrs Nelly Maes , Mr Didier Rod , Mr Paul A.A.J.G. Lannoye , Mrs Inger Schörling and Mrs Marie Anne Isler Béguin , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Zimbabwe .
Mr President , on numerous occasions the European Parliament has called for a widening of sanctions against the Mugabe regime and their rigorous enforcement .
Yet there has been effectively no response from the Council .
At the moment when the whole question of democratic accountability in the EU is under discussion , it is time the Council took more notice of European Parliament resolutions .
The Council did renew , but in a weakened form , the sanctions against the regime .
The travel ban against Mugabe and senior members of his regime has not been effectively enforced .
Indeed , only last month the Trade and Industry Minister attended an EU meeting in the EU capital , Brussels , organised by the ACP , an institution created by the EU .
We cannot even manage to enforce a travel ban in respect of our own institutions .
In November last year it was left to the European Parliament to enforce the sanctions by denying the Zimbabwean representatives access to the European Parliament .
That , of course , led to the postponement of that meeting , but we have to face this down .
If African countries are willing to wreck the ACP for the sake of defending Mugabe , let them do it , but let us stop making exceptions all the time with respect to this travel ban .
The situation is very much more serious at the moment .
There are daily troubles in Zimbabwe , food and fuel are increasingly in short supply , inflation is running at 50 % a month , and consumer prices will rise by 300 % at least in the next few months .
Zimbabweans are starving , 12.6 million are in need of food aid , and the strikes and demonstrations which have been taking place are evidence of the failure of the international community to act effectively against Mugabe .
This resolution calls for us to renew our efforts .
Mr President , intimidation , rape , land theft , murder , fraud , electoral fraud , deprivation of liberty , starvation : these are the instruments that Mugabe 's reign of terror uses to throw the once prosperous Zimbabwe ever deeper into ruin in a staggering spiral of violence .
Cries of distress from individual victims are still reaching us today from this humanitarian disaster .
What are we to think , for example , of a secretary of the MDC , the opposition party , who was attacked in her house one night by one of Mugabe 's teams of gangsters ?
The accusation : being a prostitute of the opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai .
The punishment : having the barrel of a gun inserted into her vagina , with death threats and other demands I do not wish to mention here .
It is in this horrifying context that Tsvangirai called on the stricken population to stage a week of peaceful protest .
The dictator , who will stop at nothing , attempted to suppress this cry for help with the now routine arrest of the opposition leader .
Like the present resolution , I also find it incomprehensible and extremely unbelievable that the Council , circumventing the prohibition on travel which it imposed itself , is in consultation with this criminal regime in Brussels .
This is an affront to the Zimbabwean people in need , as is the willingness of other African regimes to maintain contact with the regime .
With the greatest possible emphasis I call on the Commission and the Council to reject this regime without compromise .
In accordance with paragraph 5 , I would also ask the Council to set an example to the international community and actually follow a general strategy of restoring democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights in Zimbabwe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in Zimbabwe too the situation seems to be developing into a never-ending story .
I myself was able to experience the escalation in violence when I visited the country on the occasion of the parliamentary elections as an election observer , albeit under the wrong label , because I was not recognised as representing the European Union .
Over thirty opposition politicians lost their lives in these disputes , and we are now seeing a renewed escalation in violence .
We must now face the fact that not only is Mr Mugabe using live weapons against peaceful demonstrators , but he is also using hunger as a weapon against his people .
It has already been mentioned here today that over half of the population is dependent on food aid .
We too , therefore , find ourselves in a quandary : if we do not want to let the people starve , we have to help them , but in so doing we are also unintentionally helping to keep Mugabe in power .
Prices for essential goods are soaring in Zimbabwe .
The rate of inflation is exploding , and is currently the highest in the world .
The economy is in ruins ; exports and tourism , once flourishing sources of income , have collapsed .
The rule of law , once so dependable , has been set aside , and the most recent outrages have shown that the Council was right to agree to the sanctions against the Mugabe regime .
However , those sanctions are not being consistently applied .
This must be demanded as a matter of urgency !
If we expect these measures to make any impression on the regime , then they must also be consistently applied .
We had this problem with an ACP meeting , which broke up as a result .
We shall continue to come up against this problem , and if the Commission grants a travel permit for ACP talks or other meetings , then the regime will be strengthened still further , and our position , namely that we are in favour of the restoration of the rule of law and democracy and in favour of the protection of human rights , will be weakened .
This in turn weakens our position within the ACP meetings too , where we are , after all , trying to get our African partner countries on our side , and that is certainly no easy task .
We have experienced many disappointments .
We have even experienced the situation in which we have not received support for our position in favour of the rule of law , for the protection of human rights and finally for a life fit for human beings in that country , complete with full democratic rights .
I would like to emphasise , however , that , in a secret ballot , a good quarter of those present at the ACP meeting agreed with us , and some delegates even dared to say so openly , and to condemn , very forcefully , what is happening in Zimbabwe .
However , we must remind all those who sit around the table with Mugabe in Africa that to support such a regime cannot be to follow the path of legality .
We need to make our position absolutely clear here , and so , too , must the Commission .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am happy with the tone set by Mrs Junker , and I would like to ask the British Conservatives to show a little more subtlety each time they put Zimbabwe on the agenda .
We have done this often here , with precious little result .
There has been no other country about which we have accepted so many resolutions with so little effect .
Let us keep things in perspective .
Zimbabwe is not the country with the largest number of victims of war or violence in Africa , but that does not detract from the fact that the situation is deteriorating dramatically .
The economic situation in the country has never been so bad and is worsening every day .
7.2 million of the 12.4 million people are starving , there are violations of human rights , and so on .
Torture is the order of the day , and the arrest of journalists is making a mockery of freedom of the press .
The people of Zimbabwe , however , have the will to bring about a peaceful transition .
The MDC is exerting pressure through strikes and political actions , and we must support this pressure .
We must support Mr Tsvangirai , who was the moral victor in the elections .
If the elections had not been falsified , he would now most likely be the head of state .
The opposition is exerting this pressure , but - and we noticed this during the ACP conferences - more and more African countries are willing to exert pressure .
This has not always produced results , but it was important that Mr Mbeki of South Africa and the president of Nigeria both exerted pressure on 5 May , even if this does not seem to be producing immediate results .
But who are we to think that everything can change in an instant .
How does Europe handle this pressure ?
Parliament is continually asking for all dialogue to be brought to an end .
Is that the right method ?
The Council is obviously pursuing a different method and wants to impose sanctions as long as these do not stand in the way of normal dialogue within the international organisations .
We must know what we want once and for all .
I call on Parliament to exercise pressure and to continue to do so and not to continually remain divided as to the way in which we do this .
I support any healthy measure that will place the Mugabe government against the wall , but I also understand that the people of Zimbabwe , who have already suffered so much for the sake of democracy , also want to avoid a bloody war .
We must know what we want , the Council must know what it wants and must not add a sentence about Zimbabwe in some back room somewhere , like in the G8 .
This will not help us at all .
We share the suffering of the people of Zimbabwe , but we are also dreaming that democracy will ultimately prevail .
Mr President , I wish to address the person who ought to have been in the public gallery today , namely Mr Mugabe .
Your task , Mr Mugabe , was to give the people of Zimbabwe freedom , democracy and the rule of law .
Instead , you have given the people of Zimbabwe oppression , terror , ill-treatment , torture and killing .
Your task , Mr Mugabe , was to give the people of Zimbabwe a new future and a new equality , including equality of rights .
It was emphatically not to create an inverted racism or to degrade and oppress people because of the colour of their skin , their political views or their party allegiances .
Your task , Mr Mugabe , was to give the people of Zimbabwe food and a future .
It was not to give them hunger , famine , despair and death .
Your task was , moreover , to become a part of Zimbabwe 's history , of its bright and positive history .
It was not to enter the history books as a notorious , cruel , narrow-minded and malicious dictator .
Mr Mugabe , I have had the privilege of meeting many worthy campaigners for human rights and democracy in your splendid country , Zimbabwe .
The violence committed against them by your troops and soldiers will not prevail .
In a year 's time , you will no longer be the leader of Zimbabwe .
Mr President , I wonder how often we want to continue going through the Zimbabwe ritual here in the topical and urgent debate process .
We have passed so many resolutions that we refer to them only en bloc , and hardly even bother to count them anymore .
I could really just play back a recording of my last speech , because fundamentally nothing has changed there , unfortunately .
If anything things have just become worse for the people in Zimbabwe .
Even those who have written for our esteemed Commissioner the words that she is just about to say to us could probably , in the main , have substituted what they wrote last time , because the situation has not changed .
The real political problem facing the EU is not so much what it does as what it does not do .
I would like to say to the Council , which as usual is not present , that one can do wrong even by doing nothing .
Must it come to a situation like the one in the Congo ?
What Mrs Maes said was right : there are worse situations in Africa than the one in Zimbabwe .
Do conditions have to become like those in the Congo ?
How many deaths will it take before the Council at least stops making the Zimbabwe Minister for Industry and Trade welcome in the EU , or even takes effective action against Mugabe ?
We are sending an intervention force to the Congo .
Obviously the requisite number of people must have been killed there .
In the case of Zimbabwe , however , we did not even refuse entry to a minister .
I am very much in favour of our attempting , jointly , under French leadership , to restore peace in the Congo , but I would also like to say clearly that we cannot accept it when France , on the subject of Zimbabwe , has for years prevented or delayed effective measures or has actively blocked them .
The Council must obviously face up to its responsibilities here and , if necessary , we must invite the relevant individual governments to come and explain themselves to the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Motions for resolutions on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law :
Joint motion , tabled on behalf of the PPE-DE , PSE , ELDR , Verts / ALE , GUE / NGL and EDD Groups , on the situation in Indonesia , in particular in the provinces of Aceh and Papua ( B5-0293 / 2003 , B5-0298 / 2003 , B5-0301 / 2003 , B5-0302 / 2003 , B5-0307 / 2003 , B5-0311 / 2003 )
( Before the vote )
Mr President , could you accept , by way of a verbal amendment , that I am left with only the most famous names among human rights activists .
There are untold numbers of them , but the first two , Nazar and Kautsar , must stay .
The others must go , because we do not want to name any more names .
The human rights organisation we want to mention here is Amnesty International .
We urge immediate acquittal instead of release .
Mr President , according to the voting list at this point there was supposed to be an oral amendment presented by a member of the GUE / NGL Group who unfortunately is not here .
I would like to take that oral amendment over , and it was signalled in the debate .
It concerns paragraph 7 , and it removes the words ' and that elections be held under international supervision without delay ' .
The text would then read : ' Demands that the SPDC relinquish its grip on power and that the results of these elections be fully respected ' .
Is anyone opposed to Mrs Lambert tabling this oral amendment ?
Mr van den Bos has the floor .
Mr President , it does not seem to me to be a good idea to stop elections from being held .
That would naturally make a very odd impression .
I understand the Greens ' argument , though .
The opposition parties are of course currently not yet ready for the elections and could be manipulated .
My group would only be in favour of them if the words ' without delay ' could be scrapped .
We would then vote in favour of them .
If matters proceed as formulated by the spokesman , we will vote against them .
Mrs Lambert , are you in agreement with the arguments put forward by Mr van den Bos ?
Mr President , the substance of our oral amendment would mean that what we were asking for effectively is that the results of the earlier elections stand and be implemented .
' Without delay ' changes the meaning of what we are attempting .
We could not accept that , so I presume we will just have to vote .
Mr President , I should like to ask that in future the votes should be held at the time indicated in the order of business , because then it would be possible for Members to be here .
Mr Rübig , it was anticipated that we would proceed to the vote following the debates and that is what we have done .
I should like to thank my colleagues , particularly Mrs Fourtou , Mr Oreja , Mr Manders and Mrs Echerer , for supporting this initiative for a written declaration .
I want to thank all Members who signed it , even if at times they felt overwhelmed by our enthusiasm and over-zealous attempts at persuasion .
It is clear that piracy has now reached epidemic proportions in Europe and poses severe risks to consumer health and safety , with fake toys , medicines and spare parts coming into the EU .
In 2002 alone seizure of such goods doubled in the European Union .
I believe that this declaration sends a strong signal from this House to Member States and to accession countries to act to crack down on piracy .
Parliament has now called for action , with this majority support .
The Italian presidency should now take up this issue and put it to the top of their agenda .
We hope that Member States will not ignore or dismiss this House 's wish for action .
That was the last item on the agenda .
The Minutes of this session will be submitted to Parliament for its approval at the beginning of the next part-session .
I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned .
( The sitting was closed at 4.40 p.m. )
Mr President , this debate on Strasbourg is not scheduled .
Can we move on to the explanation of votes please ?
The deep grievances of Portuguese farmers against this profoundly unfair common agricultural policy are longstanding .
It is always being said that Portugal and its agriculture benefit less than any other European Union Member State from the CAP .
I voted for the amendments advocating the complete rejection of the European Commission 's proposals because I wanted to register politically the fact that the Portuguese people were unhappy and disappointed with the Commission 's original proposals . These did not even begin to constitute a satisfactory response to our legitimate expectations .
Nevertheless , I do acknowledge the excellent work carried out by Mr Cunha , as well as the need for CAP reform . The latter is indispensable both for financial reasons - that is to say , reasons linked to negotiations with the World Trade Organisation - and because of consumers ' demands and the need to respond to a new type of demand , oriented less towards production and more towards the rural world .
I believe that the European Parliam