Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 7 November 2002 .
The final draft agenda , as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 14 November 2002 pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
Monday :
Mr President , this matter concerns the agenda in general - I do not know if it affects Monday .
As you are aware , the Prestige , failing to live up to its name , spilt several tonnes of oil off the Spanish coast , which not only created an oil slick more than 200 kilometres long , but is also a source of great environmental concern and great economic concern for the families affected , which number over 5 000 .
Therefore , Mr President , as I understand that Parliament must be sensitive to our citizens ' concerns , I would ask you to include in our agenda a Commission statement , followed by a debate , so that we can examine the circumstances in which this incident took place , the causes , the measures that the European Union needs to take in order to prevent a recurrence and possible terms for European Union solidarity .
Mr President , I do not know whether this can be done on Monday or on Thursday , due to the Commission statement on climate change , but I would like to establish it clearly now , so that if the rest of the political groups agree , we can include it in our agenda .
Mr President , on a point of order , I wish to ask whether you can confirm whether the reindeer were on the ground or in the air at the time .
If I were to answer it might introduce too much levity to the situation .
I should like to remind colleagues that these speeches should be limited to one minute .
Mr President , as a Galician and as fisheries coordinator of the majority group in this House , I welcome the decision we have taken for the Commission to attend on Thursday in order to explain to us in the finest detail - because we are going to require the finest details - how this extremely serious accident could have occurred .
Mr President , Galicia is black : its beaches , its coastline , its fauna , its fish , its birds ? and the people are facing a black future .
I would like to ask you , Mr President , to declare your solidarity , on behalf of this House , with the Spanish and Galician authorities and to address them directly .
On Thursday we shall call for aid and an enquiry from the Commission .
I would also like to announce , given that this House , in accordance with the new Rules of Procedure , does not allow us to table resolutions , that through the Committee on Fisheries I shall propose a resolution to establish protected European sea-fishing zones in susceptible areas , which will increase the required distances to be maintained between these zones and ships carrying dangerous goods and bring forward the obligation for this type of ship to have a double hull , which is currently laid down for the year 2015 , and I shall call for it to be brought forward to the year 2005 .
Mr President , I am telling you this as an Irishman and a Celt : we cannot allow another disaster of this kind to occur in Europe .
We must increase control and prevent our environment from being destroyed .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group and also as the Socialist coordinator of the Committee on Fisheries to draw the attention of the House to the oil spill from the Prestige , to which previous speakers have also referred , which took place last week near the coast of my region , Galicia .
On Thursday - the accident happened on Wednesday - I tabled a motion for a resolution before this House and also tabled two motions for resolutions , because I understand there are common interests here : environmental interests , fisheries interests - which the Committee on Fisheries will have to pursue - and interests relating to the maritime transport of dangerous goods , which the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism will have to pursue .
The tanker has already left an oil slick 37 km long which is spreading towards the coast , paradoxically , despite being named Prestige - and you can see that this will indeed be a European problem - it is Bahamas-flagged , with a Philippine-Romanian crew , it was travelling from Lithuania - a candidate country - to Gibraltar , which involves a European Union country , a Member State , in this case the United Kingdom , and was under the command of a Greek captain .
I would call on the Community institutions to strengthen legislation in this field , comply with existing legislation and devote their attention to this kind of disaster by means of European solidarity , such as that provided , for example , in the cases of the natural disasters that have taken place in four Member States over the summer .
Mr President , on a point of order , you are aware that the Joint Parliamentary Assembly is due to begin next Monday in the Hemicycle in Brussels .
I understand that the Conference of Presidents has sent quite a strongly worded letter to the Belgian authorities concerning the prospect of two members of the Zimbabwean delegation being on the visa ban list .
I understand that visas have now been granted to those two ministers from Zanu-PF and they are due to arrive in Brussels tomorrow .
Mr President , could you give us some indication what action the European Parliament will now take on this very serious matter ?
In the light of Parliament 's resolutions which we conveyed immediately after the Conference of Presidents to the Belgian authorities - who had already issued visas and did not wish to withdraw them - I propose that the Conference of Presidents should again this week appraise the current situation .
We should discuss Parliament 's options consistent with its resolutions and consistent with the necessity to be coherent in following up its resolutions and consider declaring these two persons personae non gratae with regard to access to the Parliament itself .
Should the Conference of Presidents make such a decision , it will then convey that decision to the Belgian authorities and to the authorities in Zimbabwe .
That would be my personal preference .
In any event , I guarantee that the matter will be raised in the Conference of Presidents .
It will be for the majority will of the Conference to determine the appropriate action to be taken and then to convey that decision to you and colleagues , and also to those outside the House .
I will pass on that observation to the relevant authorities in the Commission .
I shall say for the record that after the debate on this matter on the last occasion , I communicated on behalf of Parliament our sincere condolences to the relevant authorities , which was the request made of the presidency at that time .
In the light of your request the best thing I can do is to say that I will take personal steps to communicate with the Members before we have these debates .
In the interim , I can tell you that I had an opportunity for the first time to report back to the Conference of Presidents on the results of exploratory discussions on the Statute for Members which I held on behalf of the Conference of Presidents with the relevant Council authorities .
A decision was made last Thursday at the meeting of the Conference of Presidents to invite the rapporteur , Mr Rothley , to again develop our thinking and his report before the Committee on Legal Affairs and Internal Market , with a view , at a date yet to be determined , to discussing the matter and voting on it in plenary .
In the interim period , we could contemplate an oral question or invite the Council to make a statement at the first part-session in December .
When I have had the opportunity this week to report to the Bureau , which is the next body in sequence , having reported to the Conference of Presidents , I will then try to take some steps to ensure that all Members have their own appraisal of the state of the exploration as we made it .
That is a very wise observation on your part , Mr Fatuzzo .
Mr President , on a point of order , because of the historic debates that will take place this part-session there is no Question Time .
I had submitted a question to the Council on the legislative process and the way in which this House is potentially being treated in relation to the proposed directive on legal aid .
The Council intends to adopt this measure at the end of the month on the basis of a different text to that on which Parliament was consulted .
This will avoid the codecision procedure , which would kick in after the end of the month , and it also avoids the strong advice of the Commission that the Council should reconsult Parliament .
I should like to know , on behalf of this House , why the Council feels it has no obligation to reconsult us .
Does it not agree that this action runs absolutely counter to the principle of mutual respect and good faith between these institutions in the legislative process , as set out in the Treaties and endorsed by the Court of Justice ?
Mr President , this is serious and I would ask you to look into it .
Mrs Wallis , in the absence of Question Time , your question is noted .
Let me take up your request to see whether we can have some indication from the Council as to its response on the question of substance you have now posed .
Mr President , on a point or order , I am following on from what Mr van Hulten said concerning Wednesday , 4 December .
As a member of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , I am well aware of the constitutional and practical importance of moving forward with the Statute of Members - even though I would not myself have chosen this particular way of doing it .
However , I note that on the agenda for that day there are major debates on fisheries - the first for ten years - looking at the fisheries industry of Europe at a critical time .
Constituents all over Europe will wonder what the European Parliament is thinking and doing about that .
What the newspapers will tell them is that Parliament delayed discussing it until it had talked about its own pay .
This is a scandalous state of affairs .
I hope that if the Conference of Presidents persists with this agenda in this form it will change the order and bring the fisheries matter - which is of utmost importance - before and ahead of the debate on the Statute of Members .
If colleagues wish to discuss this issue they could raise it at the Conference of Presidents on Thursday .
I remind you that we have just voted on the adoption of the December agenda for Brussels without any discussion or contradiction or proposals from the floor .
I take note of what you have said .
It is still open to the groups to look at the order of discussion on that day .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I welcome the recent acquittal of the British and Dutch plane-spotters on spying charges in Greece and the fact that the appeal court had the integrity to put right the original miscarriage of justice that the conviction represented a year ago .
I recall that it took many years to right similar wrongs in cases in the United Kingdom in the 1980s , so I am pleased that , although a year is an ordeal for the defendants , it was no longer .
But the fact is this prosecution should never have happened and the way it developed raised a lot of concerns about the treatment of defendants and trial standards .
It is therefore essential that we progress the agenda for ensuring high minimum procedural standards of justice for persons accused in criminal proceedings which the Commission will be putting forward in a proposed framework decision next year .
We also need to put flesh on the bones of our human rights commitments in the European Convention on Human Rights and the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Perhaps we could ask the Commission to take note of your question in advance of the statement which will be made by the Commission on Thursday .
Mr President , today we saw at the airport that nature can sometimes turn against technology .
To avoid deliberately upsetting nature , we must draft effective climate policy .
The emission of CO2 must be drastically reduced .
A majority in this Parliament has been pleading for years that environmental costs should be passed on to the consumer .
Environmental tax must be incorporated into air fares , especially in the air transport sector .
So far , however , the European Union has failed , for there is no climate tax .
Fortunately , there is also some good news .
For a fee , the organisation Trees for Travel plants trees after each plane trip you make .
Every time you fly , you can buy a climate certificate to balance out the emission of CO2 from your trip .
Despite a lack of legislation , we can at least put our money where our mouth is .
The Dutch delegation in the Group of the Party of European Socialists has decided to back this initiative and to buy climate certificates in Strasbourg this week for their plane trips .
I urge the President and all the other fellow MEPs who travel regularly by air to do the same .
Mr President , as a Member for a peripheral maritime region , I would also like to express my solidarity with the Galician fishermen affected by the Prestige ecological disaster .
Secondly , I would like to say , as a member of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , and a substitute member of the Committee on Fisheries , that four aspects are significantly affected by this disaster .
I would therefore like the Commission and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Izquierdo Collado , to ensure that this White Paper on transport takes into account , for the year 2010 , something that concerns me and that a Member from the Canaries , Mr Medina , mentioned to me today : the failure by many ships , both Community and other , to follow routes which avoid the exclusive economic zones in certain regions , such as Galicia .

That concludes the item .
Mr President , in 1997 the process by which fixed and mobile telephony and television and the Internet were increasingly coming together was known by the buzz word ' convergence ' .
The Commission adopted a much heralded Green Paper on this subject which promised a brave new world of horizontal regulation across platforms .
The reality was much more prosaic .
Convergence did not happen quite to the extent predicted and the Commission confined itself largely to revising the telecommunications regulation package to take account of new technology .
Since that time , however , we have witnessed a wave of mergers and take-overs in the media with the emergence of vast conglomerates such as AOL Time Warner , CBS , Viacom and Vivendi Universal .
Yet the Commission has not explored the idea of cross-media ownership and media concentration in any detail since its 1994 follow-up to the Green Paper on pluralism and media concentration .
The Commission 's silence on such an important issue seems particularly strange because the European Parliament has been calling for a directive on a level playing field and media pluralism since the 1990s .
I recognise that regulating the media is a highly sensitive issue .
The media is not like any other industry as it lies at the heart of our culture , our way of life .
A diverse and pluralistic media is fundamental to democracy , freedom and cultural diversity .
But in view of the trend towards media concentration , towards the dominance of certain media conglomerates , my group believes it is high time that we come back to this issue .
What are the principles which should underlie our approach ?
First of all we must recognise that a thriving media is the hallmark of a free society .
If control of the media becomes too narrowly restricted in the hands of a small number of people this poses a danger for democracy .
The media needs to be sufficiently diverse for all important points of view in society to be effectively presented .
Otherwise there is a danger that dominant media players can restrict access to information and thereby move public opinion .
Avoiding media concentration is also important to our economy .
Some have argued that with the explosion of different types of media , including digital , satellite and cable television , as well as the Internet , monopolistic control is impossible .
However , many of these different channels of communication are now controlled by the same media conglomerates , which can thereby cross-promote these services and provide incentives or pressure advertisers to buy space or air time in other media they control .
Last but not least , media concentration has implications for our cultural diversity .
A Europe in which the media is dominated by a few major players risks being one in which certain regions , cultures and minority groups are granted less access to the media .
A diverse media is likely to result in more home-grown original content , whereas large media groups may not resist the temptation to fill their air time with cheap imported programmes and repeats .
For the ELDR Group there is a clear case to look again at this issue .
My questions to the Commission today are : what action does the Commission propose to take ?
If the Commissioner takes the view , as I suspect he may , that there is no legal basis for action , I would remind him of the articles of the Treaty governing the single market .
I would remind him too that Article 11 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights guarantees media pluralism and if that Charter is integrated into a new constitutional treaty , as Liberal Democrats hope it will be , would that not provide a necessary legal base for action ?
Will the Commission undertake to bring forward a White Paper updating its 1994 communication in the light of technological change and developments in the industry ?
It seems to me that we cannot ignore the dangers that media concentration poses to our society .
The power of media ownership now frequently extends across national borders .
Given that a free and diverse media is essential to our continent 's democracy , prosperity and cultural vitality , it is high time that politicians face up to their responsibilities and return to this issue .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my group has tabled this question on media concentration and I must say I am very happy that the initiative has spread throughout the House , because we consider that this is not a single-party or single-group issue , but a concern over a matter of constitutional importance to the Union .
We did this because , ten years ago , the Commission put forward a Green Paper on pluralism and the internal market , and proposed - and even drew up - a preliminary draft directive to harmonise national legislation on media ownership .
Since then , nothing has happened , and the Commission , which has the monopoly on initiative , should also show that it deserves this right .
Many things have happened over the past ten years .
Significant technological progress has been made - the Internet over written media , cable , satellite television , digital technology - which have transformed the landscape .
A concentration process has also taken place which goes beyond our borders and means that certain names have spread and now represent the media throughout Europe , such as Murdoch and Berlusconi .
Others have fallen by the wayside , such as Messier and Kirsch , and others are arriving , such as Bloomberg .
We must also take account of the developments that are taking place in the United States , where the federal authorities are making changes in order to increase US technological capacity .
In any event , however , Mr President , my group thinks this is above all a democratic issue , because it refers to one of the bases of the system we live in , namely the protection of freedom of speech , which is one of the cornerstones of a democratic society .
I am not only referring to freedom of speech as we politicians defend it , but also to freedom of speech for all citizens and also for workers in the press and the media , because it does not make sense for us always to advocate greater democracy for workers in other sectors but not in this one .
This should also be extended to the candidate countries , where concern is spreading over the loss of the national character of the media .
Therefore , Commissioner , allow me to play devil 's advocate .
I said that no progress had been made in ten years .
Why has no progress been made ?
It would be interesting to analyse the matter .
Is it because it is very complicated ?
European construction has always been a challenge and what I would therefore say is that if the directive was necessary , and it was necessary to address this issue , in 1992 , it is all the more necessary now .
Secondly - and this is another of the questions we posed - it could be considered that the legal basis is insufficient .
Ten years ago , however , it would appear that it was sufficient .
It would be interesting if the Commission were to explain this to us , or otherwise tell us whether it would be appropriate , for example , for this issue to be considered as a matter of fundamental rights in the Commission proposal to the Convention .
Lastly , Mr President , we are aware that this is what is known as a cross-cutting issue .
I must say that I am very happy that it is the Commissioner responsible for the protection of consumer rights and health who is to respond to this question , because we are always told that this issue concerns the internal market or competition .
It is more than that .
It concerns competition , the internal market , culture and fundamental rights .
There were four Commissioners I was thinking might appear , and it was a pleasant surprise to see Mr Byrne , who also has to defend us as consumers against this uncontrolled invasion not only of audiovisual messages , which are frequently subliminal , but also against uncontrolled advertising and the monopoly in the field of advertising .
I therefore hope that today 's debate , in which all the parliamentary groups are participating and showing interest , will be a step forward , breaking this ten-year silence and allowing the Commission to exercise its monopoly on initiatives in this fundamental area responsibly .
Mr President , these debates on the hot topic of media policy have been going on since 1992 , and Parliament had always taken a democratic approach to the issue .
Since 1997 , though , silence has reigned , but now it seems that I can congratulate Parliament on having , like Sleeping Beauty , woken up .
I would like now to speak on behalf of my group .
I cannot but underline the arguments of those who have spoken before me , and I would like to pick up two of the significant points they made .
Entrepreneurship , on the one hand , has become out of balance with journalistic activity on the other , as it now is also with those who produce creative material .
It is for us to restore this balance .
The EU , which announced the creation of the internal market as one of its priorities , must assume its political responsibility in this process involving consolidation and concentration .
We did not liberalise a few years ago by breaking up media monopolies simply in order to create new media monopolies .
Both economic diversity and pluralism in the media are equally under threat .
The wide-ranging nature of concentrations merits particular attention .
My second point is that one of the pillars of democracy is the separation of powers , something that is of especial concern to my group .
Having successfully accomplished the separation of church and state , I believe we ought now to devote our energies to separating political power and the media .
I am speaking here of a European official culture , especially on the eve of enlargement .
One more practical question for the Commission : in 1997 , the directive on media ownership disappeared back into a drawer , quite possibly as a result of political pressure , although we cannot be certain of that .
We need a better legal basis at European level , but then we know that ; it is a statement we heard all of five years ago , and we do not need to have it repeated .
Why , then , has the Commission only now started to do something about it ?
We are all aware of these problems ; they are not new , and we do not need to reinvent the wheel .
Action is needed , O esteemed Commission !
I repeat that I support the arguments of those who have preceded me on the floor , and , as Mr Barón Crespo said , media policy is not a party issue .
We must not let it become one .
Mrs Fraisse is absent , probably due to transport problems , which we are all suffering today .
Mr Segni therefore has the floor for two minutes .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union 's core concerns include the safeguarding of freedom of information and the freedom and diversity of opinion .
These are among our fundamental values , to which , it is to be hoped , the Convention will give a prominent place in the constitution that will be our common possession .
That being so , Parliament has , over past years , repeatedly done in-depth work on these issues and taken actual developments in the European Union and the Member States as a yardstick when measuring the extent to which these things have become reality .
I do not think one can say that Parliament has been asleep .
It is not only 1997 that should be mentioned here ; I would like to remind you all of what we decided together in 2000 with our position on the fundamental questions relating to the communication and information society in the European Union , and would also refer you to our common position on the revision of the television directive in 2001 .
That was something on which we did not yield .
The only thing is that we have to take a realistic view of how things stand .
So far , the results are clear and unambiguous : we have no option but to draw distinctions .
The media markets continue largely to be the national markets that they were previously , as is unmistakeably clear in the case of the print media .
Secondly , it is the case that in the electronic media field , the television markets are still predominantly national in character .
It must , thirdly , be clear to us that development has progressed further .
Cross-border developments are increasingly taking place in the electronic media , especially where digital technology is brought into play .
This is a question on which we have to focus , examining very carefully what consequences this development is having for the safeguarding of freedom of opinion and information and pluralism of the media in the European Union and in its Member States .
That is why my group , that of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , has put to you a question with reference to this specific development .
We are asking the Commission to draw up a Green Paper on the current situation to take up the question of the structural developments observable today in Europe 's political , economic and legal media .
We additionally ask you to table a proposal for our consideration on what you consider to be appropriate action in order to achieve the objective , which it is to be hoped is shared by us all , of safeguarding the pluralism of the media and of opinion in the European Union .
I do think that , if we travel together in this direction , we will together take a significant step along the road towards guaranteeing diversity of opinion in the European Union .
Mr President , one of the crucial principles of a properly functioning democratic society is freedom of expression and access to information .
In this Chamber , we have again and again emphasised the importance of openness and transparency .
Citizens must have access to information affecting their lives so that they can take part in the democratic debate and make their choices .
The media have a central role to play in this process .
If they do not operate properly , then neither does democracy .
At present , there are media trends that give rise to concern .
The consolidation we have witnessed may lead to less pluralism in the media .
We combat monopolies because they reduce the supply of goods , with a consequent decrease in prosperity , and the same applies to the media market .
Monopolies undermine democratic pluralism and lead to a decrease in democratic prosperity .
Previously , party political media such as newspapers were only able to exercise political criticism within their own medium .
They had no control over what other media put out .
The threat we face today is one of potentially powerful consolidation , which may mean certain points of view not being represented in any medium .
As legislators elected by the people , we are faced with striking a sensitive balance .
To what means can we have recourse to ensure free and diverse media without at the same time setting aside another cardinal principle of a democratic society - that of the distribution of power .
We want to set up basic rules that guarantee a level playing field without tampering with the actual content of the media .
We need , in this Assembly , to comply with our democratic responsibility and make sure that the media comply with theirs .
Mr President , as has been stated repeatedly in this debate , there is undoubtedly a link between freedom of information and democracy , and I feel that this debate must serve , not least , to make Parliament and the European institutions more aware than they have been hitherto of the link between democracy and suppressed freedom of information , of the way the media is used to suppress democracy .
This is the case in many countries with which we have economic or commercial relations and countries such as Iraq , China , Cuba , Vietnam and so forth .
Certainly , safeguarding freedom of information as a guarantee of genuine democracy is a problem for Europe too .
There are two or three points I would like to make in this regard .
Firstly , in my opinion , we need to be very sparing in our calls for European legislation , in our calls for the Commission to impose some sort of constraints on a market - the merging telecommunications and media markets - which , we must not forget , has to be able to withstand the challenges of the international markets inasmuch as European undertakings have to be able to withstand the challenges of the international markets .
Now then , overloading a market which is already struggling - there are linguistic and cultural barriers , for example , which make it difficult for companies to grow - with the additional burdens of constraints and restrictions could be dangerous .
There is , however , a paradox which I would like to point out in this debate .
It is absurd that we who , although not members of national parliaments , are representatives of the European institutions , focus a great deal on market dynamics and concentrations but fail to even mention the powerful force of state media companies in Europe .
Take Italy , for example .
It is right to put the spotlight on the situation and it is right to be concerned , as it is always right to be concerned about the relationship between the media and democracy , but what is not being said is that half the information sector is in the hands of the state , in other words in the hands of the parties .
This is the case almost throughout Europe .
Do we really think that the parties are using their television networks with due respect for the pluralism of information and due respect for the citizens ' right to be informed , or are they serving their own interests and putting across specific information ?
There is another dimension to this , and here I pay tribute to the work of Commissioner Van Miert in the previous Commission .
The existence of state television networks is detrimental to the media and information market .
State television networks take up space which could be used for the creation of competing firms , possibly even European firms , and the charges , licence fees and funding associated with them siphon off resources which could be redistributed in the market and used to create a plurality of competing companies .
We must reflect on all this .
I feel that a comment from the Commission on these matters - state aid , competition , the abuse of dominant positions and so forth in the internal markets - would be appropriate too .
Mrs Fraisse has managed to arrive at Parliament from Basilea and I give her the floor on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , media freedom and independence do not go well with accumulated economic power , not to mention monopolies .
This is especially true when one is dealing with political power wielded by a head of government .
The name to mention here is Berlusconi .
The Italian media tycoon and , in one and the same person , prime minister , along with Mr Murdoch and Herr Kirch , have given the champions of unfettered press freedom a lesson in fear .
That the Kirch empire has collapsed can be of little comfort in view of the pressure exerted on public service broadcasters by commercial enterprises - I am referring to the cost of rights to sporting events among other things - and in view of an increasing concentration of regional , national and worldwide media with growing cross-border involvements .
Media concentration to an illicit degree endangers diversity and pluralism of opinion and the promotion of cultural diversity .
Volume 44 of ' Media Research ' a series of treatises published by the North Rhine-Westphalia Media Institute , has come out in the last couple of days ; it gives a powerful description of media concentration 's adverse effects on society 's democratic and cultural foundations .
It also has to be said without equivocation that the rule of law in Italy is in danger .
It has already had the worst of the fight .
All this leads to only one conclusion , namely that European regulations are needed to limit concentration in the media , because national law does not apply outside the borders of states , or also because - as in Italy - the effort is not even being made .
Reference has already been made to the way the Italian State President 's profound concern has led him to call for an Italian law to deprive the prime minister of practical political control over the services of the public-sector broadcaster RAI , and to restrict his power as a private individual over the media .
Berlusconi is in every respect a special case , and one that it must be hoped will remain unique , involving an array of legal actions relating to tax evasion , forged documents , perjury , payments from slush funds , the bribing of judges and similar things , not all of which have been brought to a conclusion .
We therefore call on the Convention to impose a constitutional ban on any such agglomeration of power , which is positively indecent .
Even the Pope - or so we have heard - is advocating regulations to safeguard pluralism and freedom of opinion .
That , Mr Prodi , Commissioners , is why I say it is now time for you to take some action !
Mr President , I take issue with most of my colleagues who have spoken in the debate so far , as regards their desire to rush into some form of undefined new directive or regulation on so-called concentration and media ownership .
As Mr Byrne pointed out to us in an admirably clear intervention , there is no treaty base for it .
How is it going to be defined ?
How far do you intervene politically in issues of media concentration in areas that , as the Commissioner pointed out very clearly , cut across a whole range of other weapons the Commission has at its disposal to regulate monopoly power , a word that has been freely bandied around this Chamber this evening ?
If there is monopoly power commercially , then the instruments are there to tackle it and they should be used .
I wonder how many colleagues who have contributed to this debate this evening have actually bothered to read the new package that regulates electronic communications .
Mr Watson , who opened the debate , probably has not , because if you look at that regulation - and I was one of the colleagues that worked on it very closely - you will see that it anticipates the fact that we will have convergence and that the big issues that are opened up in the world of convergence are about controlling access to channels .
There are provisions in this regulation to open up access , to make access available on fair reasonable and non-discriminatory terms , again key words we should be thinking about in any context , particularly in media .
It also makes provision for public service broadcasting , an issue that we ought to be discussing more in this context , to allow governments to open up channels where they feel that public channels should be conveyed to the market place .
Those issues are already there .
Do not ignore them .
I agree with what Mrs Hieronymi said .
Certainly we should invite the Commission to look at this problem , but the last thing we should do is to anticipate the results of that analysis .
Mr President , the question of media pluralism is an important subject , which affects the very essence of the values that provide a basis for our work in Europe . This is for reasons that all of us have very much in mind obviously .
Without pluralism , there is no opposition , no freedom and , therefore , no democracy .
Without pluralism , the freedom of audiovisual and cinematographic creation would be jeopardised and therefore the cultural identity of Europe would be at risk .
It is crucial , therefore , to ensure that the principles of diversity , pluralism and independence of the media are applied in the Member States and in the candidate countries .
Media pluralism concerns the broadcasting of information , television and the Internet as well as audiovisual creation .
In a constantly changing media environment , the presence of public service television channels and private television channels , as well as restrictions on mergers and acquisitions between commercial players , are essential in order to maintain audiovisual pluralism and cultural diversity .
Equally , we must ensure that sufficiently diverse information is broadcast from both public and private sources over all media platforms .
That is why the Commission should carry out a thorough assessment of the media situation in each candidate country and in each Member State .
A Green Paper was drafted on this issue in 1997 .
Today , developments in communication technologies , the key role played by the Internet in spreading information and cable television are phenomena which are pushing us to look again at the issue of media concentration .
It is very important , for example , that the Commission begins work as soon as possible on resolving the problems raised by the lack of transparency in granting television licences in the Member States and in the candidate countries .
Once this assessment has been carried out , the Commission will be able to decide to establish competition rules ensuring media pluralism in the event of this proving necessary .
Freedom of expression is fragile and can only be guaranteed if genuine media plurality exists , and this is something we must all monitor on a regular basis .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if we were to accept the suggestions made in this Chamber by speakers such as Mr Segni , for example , and hold one particular person responsible for all the evils of the media sector , we should somehow have to conclude that the deer and other animals which invaded the runway at Strasbourg airport today were , in actual fact , extras from the Mediaset networks which had been recruited and enlisted to prevent this debate from taking place !
That is not the case !
The matter we are discussing is so much more complex and problematic that we must rather be aware that the speed of technological progress is leading , particularly in the field of communications , to the development of new ways of transferring knowledge , new forms of peaceful coexistence of peoples and new lifestyles and mentalities .
In other words , communications generate culture , and culture is transmitted via communications .
One might say that all our lives are now locked in a communication mechanism requiring a complete reassessment of all our basic points of reference .
The huge increase in information sources and the failure to distinguish between their levels of authoritativeness , the progressive replacement of interpersonal relations with a mediated approach and the expression of opinions on the basis of opinion polls which are not founded on fact , are all factors which ultimately lead to various forms of dissociation , which influence our very beliefs and lives .
The recent events in Italy were not the result of this very complex issue of the media .
Rather , what happened was that the left , which had controlled state television in recent years , went so far as to attempt to influence the last elections and , in its endeavours to hold the sword of Damocles over its political opponent 's head , put off the issue of regulating the media sector indefinitely and made it very difficult for the matter to be resolved .
Absence of control and supervision has never brought guarantees or freedom , as many would have us believe .
It ultimately fosters the indiscriminate use of extremely powerful tools which , if abused , have devastating effects on people 's consciences and society .
I therefore call upon the Commission to be the guarantor of this principle of freedom and to propose an appropriate course of action to Parliament and the Council , which could , for example , be the subject of another Green Paper .
Mr President , we pride ourselves on the way in which the principle of competition oils the wheels of the economic system and it must not be allowed to weaken the most vital component of democracy , by which I mean sources of information , and undermine the principle of political competition .
Secondly , in this age of electronic democracy , we should all be investing in guarantees to safeguard our long tradition of democratic values and , first and foremost , the separation of media power from economic power .
May I , therefore , say that this motion should be adopted unanimously and point out that passing legislative and other support measures is a top priority for the democratic future of Europe , that there has been an unwarranted delay in taking action since the Green Paper was published , that the measures required need to be incorporated into general policy on audiovisual media , that we must accept that the traditional rules of market competition are inadequate and that we need an independent competitive network with its sights set on real pluralism and that , for these purposes , restrictions on concentration are compatible with Community law .
All the speakers present in Parliament have now spoken .
I have received six motions for resolutions
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0344 / 2002 ) by Mr Medina Ortega , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the approximation of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the advertising and sponsorship of tobacco products ( COM ( 2001 ) 283 - C5-0274 / 2001 - 2001 / 0119 ( COD ) )
I hope the Members who were still on their way here will be able to attend .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying that I am pleased to be here today to present the Commission 's proposal for a directive on tobacco advertising and sponsorship .
It has been a long time since the Commission adopted this proposal - 18 months to be precise .
It would be an understatement to say that I am disappointed with the slow progress on this proposal so far .
There have been delaying tactics , misinformation and , very often , misleading statements .
It is a great pity that the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market was unable to work more quickly , in contrast to the much quicker response from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , whose members are the true experts in the European Parliament on public health and consumer protection .
They at least clearly understood the importance and urgency of this proposal .
Worldwide , almost 5 million people die every year from tobacco-related diseases .
This is two and a half times the number of deaths from AIDS .
Of those 5 million half a million are European - the equivalent of the population of Copenhagen .
Advertising plays a major role in promoting tobacco use , especially amongst young people .
The tobacco industry needs new recruits to replace those whose consumption of the deadly product has caused their early deaths .
It is against this background that I invite you to look at the present proposal .
This directive is important for the operation of the single market .
Without it the single market for print media , radio and the Internet cannot be guaranteed on account of variations in national legislation on tobacco advertising across the Member States .
The proposal is intended to replace the previous directive on tobacco advertising and sponsorship , annulled by the European Court of Justice two years ago .
The previous directive included a ban on all forms of tobacco advertising and sponsorship .
The Court considered that this general ban did not have the legal support of the Treaty .
However , the Court was not entirely negative in its ruling .
Far from it .
It helpfully confirmed that a directive prohibiting certain forms of advertising and sponsorship could be adopted on the basis of Article 95 of the Treaty .
The new proposal therefore follows very closely the guidelines set out in the Court 's ruling .
The logic behind the present proposal is clear : all Member States have adopted national rules to regulate the advertising and sponsorship of tobacco products .
These regulations , unsurprisingly , vary considerably between Member States .
This divergence has , ironically you might say , been exacerbated by the annulment of the previous directive .
This gives rise to increasing barriers to the free movement between Member States of products and services that serve as support for such advertising and sponsorship .
We aim to eliminate these barriers by harmonising the rules relating to the advertising of tobacco products and related sponsorship to the extent possible in the light of the Court 's ruling .
The proposal foresees a general ban on tobacco advertising in the press . This is an important vector for tobacco promotion , and one that has strong cross-border implications .
The proposal also includes a ban on tobacco advertising on the Internet .
Advertising of tobacco products via radio and the sponsorship of radio programmes by tobacco companies would also be banned on the same lines as television advertising under the television without frontiers directive .
Finally , the proposal deals with sponsorship - banning this for events or activities with cross-border implications .
Overall , the proposal has a much more limited scope than the previous directive .
I know that many of you regret this and I sympathise with this view .
I make no secret of the fact that I would have preferred to present a proposal for a complete ban on advertising for tobacco products .
But , unfortunately , the legal framework does not allow us to go that far .
We have to live in the real world .
We have to recognise the legal constraints .
Our common concern must be to ensure that this new directive can and will stand its ground against any possible future court challenge and to eliminate the market distortion by harmonising current national rules , whilst at the same time promoting public health .
A final thought for now .
This proposal has been very carefully constructed .
Any weakening of its legal position would open the door to challenge which , if successful , would play directly into the hands of the tobacco industry .
We simply cannot afford to let that happen .
Mr President , Commissioner Byrne has made an enormous effort to bring forward a proposal for a directive in a field in which the Court of Justice had rescinded the previous directive on the complete prohibition of tobacco advertising .
In terms of health , I believe that the Community is in a situation worthy of Kafka , because , although we have competence in the field of animal health - from stabling to feedingstuffs and transport - in contrast , in practice our competences in the field of health are minimal .
In other words , the European Union has hardly any competences in the field of human health .
It is able to adopt certain measures , certain recommendations , certain promotional initiatives , such as cooperation between States and with international organisations , but when it comes to legislative harmonisation , in practice we are faced with deadlock .
The Commission has been intelligent enough to try to take maximum advantage of the conclusions of the Court of Justice , what I would call the obiter dicta of the Court of Justice , in the judgment which rescinded the previous Directive on tobacco advertising .
And from the point of view of the Committee on Legal Affairs , the rapporteur in particular has had the greatest sympathy for the efforts of the Commission and Commissioner Byrne to bring forward this proposal for a directive which , as he has said , is much more modest than the previous one .
Nevertheless , the rapporteur must acknowledge that there have been enormous difficulties within the Committee on Legal Affairs and , in order to make the negotiation of this directive possible , has had to accept a series of compromise amendments that make up the current text , which has been adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs .
We do not yet know what the result of the votes next Wednesday on this issue will be .
My impression is that , at the moment , this House is very much divided , since , as some Members claim , certain amendments may even weaken the legal basis proposed by the Commission and , at this moment , specifically , the opinion , for example , of the rapporteur for the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy - who I believe we will hear next - is , of course , opposed to the introduction of amendments .
I have the impression that certain of the amendments , at least , are justified , since they are intended to correct some of the aspects of the directive which would benefit from improvements .
For example , a generalised extension of the prohibition of the use of certain trade marks could prejudice companies which , in reality , do not produce tobacco ; all that happens is that some of the trade marks coincide with those of other companies who do produce it .
I believe that each of these amendments will have to be studied carefully .
I share Mr Byrne 's concern at the delay which has taken place within the Committee on Legal Affairs .
We felt obliged to hold a hearing as a result of the enormous disparity in opinions which had been expressed in committee and , at that hearing , I must acknowledge and point out that the majority of the members of the Committee on Legal Affairs were critical of the Commission 's proposals .
The rapporteur has therefore felt obliged to do some rather deft work , trying to bring together positions in order to produce a first text that would reach the plenum in this House .
It will therefore be this House which really decides next Wednesday on the fate of each of these amendments .
Certain subsequent amendments have been presented , which the rapporteur considers to be acceptable in principle - the amendment by Mrs Hautala , which is intended to strengthen the Commission 's legal basis by means of a recital .
I hope that , next Wednesday , regardless of what happens with each of the amendments in the different votes , the text of the directive as a whole can be approved .
In other words , I hope that the report is adopted so that the negotiation may continue .
Since we are undergoing a co-decision procedure , we all have the opportunity to carry on correcting the deficiencies which may be contrary to the objective of being sure that this new proposal for a directive may pass the test of a further hearing before the Court of Justice , which will undoubtedly take place , because in the field of tobacco there are always hearings before the Court of Justice .
The Commission can rest assured that I have an entirely constructive approach towards the object of achieving a final result in relation to this .
But I will say again that this is a democratic House and the opinions of the Members vary widely .
I even have the impression that there are significant differences between the national delegations within the various parties .
The task of the rapporteur in this case must therefore be one of coordination , of good will , if you like , and above all of coordinating the results obtained next Wednesday in this House with the good intention of the Commission and the Commissioner of adopting a Community regulation in the field of health .
In any event , it should be remembered that the inclusion of a clause on health in the forthcoming European Constitution is still to be dealt with , and I have the impression that the work of the Convention is not moving in that direction at the moment , which is rather worrying .
Mr President , our draftsperson , Mrs ? alliori , has been held up by fog at Strasbourg airport and has asked me , with your permission , to stand in for her .
Every second , someone dies as a direct result of smoking .
This adds up to over 3 million victims a year worldwide , 500 000 of whom are European citizens .
Forty-two per cent of the Community population smokes and they are starting younger and younger .
Sixty per cent of smokers start smoking at 13 and 90 % start before they are 18 .
The gender gap between smokers is narrowing , with an increase in the number of girls smoking and 500 000 babies are born prematurely and underweight because their mothers smoke .
Children in homes in which both parents smoke run a 72 % greater risk of respiratory diseases such as asthma .
These are just some of the reasons why legislators in the Member States of the European Union have felt compelled to restrict tobacco product advertising rights , in order to protect public interests in general and the health of European citizens and young people in particular .
The World Health Organisation framework convention currently being negotiated , which should be completed within the next few months , takes the same approach , stressing that a tobacco advertising and sponsorship ban is one of the most urgent political rules which needs to be applied internationally .
As the House knows , this Commission proposal replaces Directive 43 , the directive which , albeit after ten years ' negotiations , was finally passed by the European Parliament and adopted by the Council in 1998 but , unfortunately , annulled by the Court of Justice in October 2000 .
The purpose of the directive being debated today , eighteen months after the Commission submitted its proposal , is to approximate the various laws , regulations and administrative provisions adopted by the Member States , in order to remove obstacles to the internal market and safeguard the free movement of goods and services and this is in keeping with the rules set out in the directive .
The present directive , which takes account of current legislation in the Member States and the case law of the Court of Justice , adopts parts of the previous directive and bans advertising in printed media , on the Internet and on the radio , together with sponsorship of events with cross-border effects .
It also bans the free distribution of tobacco products , but does not cover indirect advertising .
However , unlike the previous directive , it is not based on the principle of a total ban on all forms of advertising and sponsorship .
I should point out here , however , that the Commission has submitted this more restricted proposal , which takes account of the legal framework set by the Court of Justice , in tandem with a proposal for a recommendation containing the elements which , as I said , have been excluded from this directive .
Unfortunately , the Committee on Legal Affairs has adopted 25 amendments which could lead to further annulment by the Court of Justice and which restrict the scope of the directive still further .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the other hand , agreed with my proposal not to submit any proposed amendments and voted unanimously in favour of the Commission proposal .
Ladies and gentlemen , our decision on Wednesday will have tremendous political implications because it concerns an issue on which the European Parliament and the Council have already expressed a view and taken a decision .
I therefore call on you to vote against all the amendments by the Committee on Legal Affairs .
This is the only way to guarantee a fast procedure and , more importantly , to ensure that we take a decisive , firm , legally tenable step towards a Community policy to control smoking .
According to the scientific data available , this will promote high health standards , especially among the young , who are not just the main target group ; they are the very future of Europe .
Mr President , measures taken by the European Union to combat the spread of smoking go back a long way , as do the legal wrangling and the case law of the Court of Justice and I think we should make sure we learn from these experiences .
The proposed directive seeks to protect public health but takes the ban on the distortion of competition as its legal basis .
This ambivalent situation needs to be borne in mind by everyone championing more effective ways of protecting health from the spread in the use of tobacco which , unfortunately , does not have its own article in the Treaty .
It is therefore only logical that the new proposal should be more modest when it comes to protecting public health than the annulled directive , which also included indirect advertising .
The Committee on Legal Affairs felt the ban needed a cross-border dimension , not just for sponsorship , but also for the press , in order to strengthen its validity .
By definition , national advertising and sponsorships do not affect the internal market .
The legal basis selected only allows advertising to be regulated where it impacts on the internal market .
Consequently , printed matter circulating solely within the territory of one Member State has no cross-border effects and cannot create any obstacle to the internal market or serious distortion of competition .
This is clear both from the proposed arrangements for event sponsorships and from the fact that the proposal for a directive makes no reference whatsoever to outside advertising of tobacco products or advertising in cinemas .
We know that the Committee on Legal Affairs has expressed reservations about certain amendments from the purely legal standpoint .
Mrs Hautala , on the other hand , is operating on a different wavelength altogether and has called for health protection arrangements to be strengthened .
Given that no one here is against health protection measures , the bottom line is that the two sides have to calmly decide which amendments are needed in order to rescue this as a valid directive .
Mr President , there are mainly two elements of relevance here : one is content and the other is procedure .
Let us focus on content first , because it is obviously all too easy to overlook this aspect in a legal discussion of this kind .
Is a ban on tobacco advertising effective if the aim is to prevent its use ?
Yes , of course it is .
Hardly anyone takes up smoking because they like it .
They do so for other reasons .
They may take it up because of peer pressure in the playground , children of parents who smoke take up smoking , and people take up smoking because they associate it with a certain image .
They want to emulate the man making his way through the jungle in a rowing boat , for example , or that other man on horseback somewhere in the wild west with pleasant music playing in the background .
This is why people take up smoking .
Image has everything to do with it .
This is why a ban on tobacco advertising is good .
It is a legitimate product , so why should you ban it ?
Last month , an overwhelming majority of people in this House voted in favour of banning advertising for pharmaceutical products , but , unlike tobacco , these are produced to make people better .
I am in favour of legalising cannabis , but I would not dream of allowing this product to be advertised .
So the problem is more complex than at first sight .
As it happens , there was already an opinion from the European Parliament - and also from the Council , in fact .
In 1998 we stated that we were in favour of a ban on tobacco advertising .
In this connection , the Court said that we had gone too far , with good reason , in my view .
This was completely unrelated to tobacco but had everything to do with the question how far we , as a Union , could go in respect of the Member States .
I believe that the Commission was right to say : okay , this is what Parliament and the Council wanted , they wanted to go as far as possible .
The Commission subsequently consulted the judgment by the Court , and also the opinion of the Advocate General , and copied almost verbatim what was suggested .
I therefore believe that the Commission has done a sterling job , and I shall therefore advise the majority of my group to reject the amendments tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
These do not appear to be essential in order to make the directive more acceptable .
I should like to make two final observations .
First of all , I do think we ought to be careful not to start a smear campaign against the use of tobacco , for example by introducing a complete ban on smoking in public places , or by banning children 's toys , chocolate cigarettes , liquorice pipes and suchlike .
This is taking matters too far , and by doing so we would also lose our allies in the fight against tobacco .
Finally , I should like to take this opportunity to once again draw your attention to an unacceptable anomaly , namely that we are discouraging the use of tobacco products on the one hand and are continuing to heavily subsidise tobacco production in Europe on the other .
Mr President , the problem we have when we talk about tobacco is that we in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy speak from the point of view of public health and not from the point of view of the possible disadvantages of banning tobacco advertising for the internal market .
We therefore prefer the directive which was approved in 1998 .
As the Commissioner has already said , five million people die each year from diseases related to smoking .
Other Members have said thousands of young people start smoking every year , with all the consequences that addiction has in store for them .
Several studies have demonstrated very clearly the effects of this advertising and the sponsorship of certain sporting events in terms of young people starting to smoke earlier .
In fact , 60 % of smokers , according to the statistics , begin before they reach 13 years of age and around 90 % before 18 years .
We therefore much preferred the 1998 Directive , which unfortunately was rescinded by the European Court .
In the case in hand , various Members in the Environment Committee have decided that they are not going to present amendments to the Commission 's proposal because it is better to have a limited directive than no directive at all .
We are therefore only presenting one amendment , which proposes that , in accordance with the Treaty , the Member States should retain competences and be able to regulate this type of issue and even go further .
Furthermore , the draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment points out very clearly that this is one step and that surely , in the future , the European Commission will be able to present proposals on indirect advertising , on the control of expenditure on advertising and on tobacco vending machines .
In short , Mr President , it is better to have a limited directive in this area than no directive at all .
Mr President , it was mentioned here that the previous attempt to achieve a wholesale ban on tobacco advertising at European Union level was overturned by the Court of Justice and it is indeed interesting to read that when this decision was given Advocate General Fenelli said that there was good reason to suppose that a ban on advertising would save around 38 000 lives in the European Union every year .
We might also say that there are very good grounds for bringing in this directive now , even though it is rather less comprehensive in its legal scope than before .
We must proceed in such a way that the Commission 's original proposal is approved in its entirety as far as is possible , and I was very glad that the Commission has shown its support for the cross-party amendment to Recital 1 which we have proposed in this House .
Its purpose is to clarify the fact that indirect advertising remains within the competence of the Member States and that they may enact advertising bans in this area .
In general we want to protect the national bans on tobacco advertising .
It is with great sorrow that it has to be said that the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market have watered the Commission proposal down totally .
It is also to be hoped that every single amendment accepted by the Committee on Legal Affairs will be rejected in this House , because they complicate the issue in many ways .
They obscure the proposal 's legal basis .
They completely rule out the possibility of restricting tobacco advertising in the press and on the radio .
They hamper global efforts to achieve a ban on tobacco advertising , and they also allow the possibility of the indirect advertising of tobacco .
I would especially like to focus attention on Amendments Nos 17 and 24 , which are extremely dangerous .
Hopefully , too , the rapporteur will return to his original position and reject these amendments , which were accepted as compromises by the Committee on Legal Affairs , as they are not compromises at all : they just make this directive utterly pointless .
Mr President , this new directive outlaws tobacco advertising in the printed media in the whole of Europe and will also prohibit the advertising of tobacco products on radio and on the internet .
Equally , sponsorship by tobacco companies of events or activities involving several Member States will be outlawed .
As EU legislators we must bring forward proposals which will help to protect the health of our citizens and I believe that the dangers for our health from cigarette smoking must be vigorously highlighted at every opportunity .
In fact we have a moral obligation to do more than to warn young people , in particular teenagers , of the acute dangers of cigarette smoking for our health .
A recent survey has suggested that child smoking in Germany alone has increased by up to 50 % .
The cigarette industry claimed that their cigarette products are for adults , yet every piece of practical evidence suggests that clever marketing and advertising only results in recruiting the next generation of smokers , who are teenagers .
The budget for the European Commission to highlight the dangers of cigarette smoking is only EUR 6 million and this pales into insignificance when one looks at the staggering levels of money available to the tobacco lobby to put in place innovative pro-tobacco marketing and advertising campaigns .
We need to do more to spell out clearly to young people the brutal consequences for one 's health from cigarette smoking - that three thousand people in Europe die every day from cigarette smoking .
This means that a half a million citizens die needlessly in Europe each year because of an addiction to tobacco products .
Cigarette smoking is the single biggest cause of premature death and illness in the whole of the European Union .
A recent study shows that American male smokers lose 13 years of life to the habit of cigarette smoking and that woman smokers lose 14 and a half years of life from smoking .
If we are going to put in place comprehensive marketing campaigns to warn young people of the dangers of smoking , we need the necessary financial resources to oversee such a programme .
The Commission , Parliament and the EU governments must substantially increase the financial budget for public health campaigns which highlight to teenagers the real dangers of smoking .
Preventing tobacco-related illnesses would do more to help the citizens of the Union than any other life-saving measure , and tobacco companies are wrong to claim that advertising does not promote smoking but only promotes brand loyalty for a legal product .
Advertising does have an influence in promoting smoking ; that is why all Member States in Europe have rules which restrict or ban tobacco advertising in some shape or form .
Advertising for other legally sold products including pharmaceuticals and alcohol is similarly restricted .
This directive does not mean that Member States cannot bring in more stringent measures to curb cigarette smoking if they so wish .
Matters falling outside the remit of directives , such as indirect advertising or billboards and cinema advertising , remain within the competence of the individual Member States .
Mr President , it is a fact that tobacco advertising encourages young people to take up smoking and stops people who already smoke from giving up .
Customer relations of this kind do , however , take their toll .
Given the harmful effects smoking has on health , including for non-smokers due to passive smoking , our group is in favour of a total ban on advertising for tobacco products .
These products are dangerous and can , upon lighting up and inhalation , cause serious diseases which can even prove fatal .
We are therefore very disappointed with the Commission 's new proposal .
Although we realise that , given the judgment by the Court of Justice , the Commission 's options are very limited , this proposal largely overshoots its goal , namely to protect public health .
I shall thus reluctantly endorse the Commission proposal without any further amendments .
This is at present the most viable option in the fight against tobacco advertising .
Six months ago , we in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy held an extensive discussion on this topic .
It is therefore beyond me why the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market should still be tabling all kinds of amendments which will ultimately frustrate the coming into being of this legislation .
If these amendments are adopted , the chances are that the Court will once again declare the directive invalid .
I should , however , like to urge the European Commission to continue its search for ways of reducing the use of tobacco , particularly where young people are concerned .
It is incomprehensible that we should remove all kinds of less dangerous products from the market , but not tobacco .
Once again , the use of tobacco is a euphemism for the injudicious incineration of dangerous carcinogenic substances .
If this involved other products , we would have banned them a long time ago .
I cannot imagine that we would bring toys into circulation which claim 5 million victims annually .
Or that we would accept other products in food which result in 5 million deaths annually , but we do turn a blind eye where tobacco products are concerned .
This is an example of extreme inconsistency .
This is nothing to do with the precautionary principle .
We know that smoking has harmful effects such as these , and this is why we should simply introduce a complete ban on this advertising .

Mr President , Mr Medina Ortega 's report , although insufficient , does in fact review the decision to cancel the 1997 directive on tobacco , and we welcome this .
Tobacco , which kills hundreds of Europeans every day , is a scourge that we must combat in the name of protecting the health of our fellow citizens .
We will not be satisfied with half measures .
Either tobacco is a deadly poison and everything must be done to reduce its use , even eradicate it totally , or tobacco is - mistakenly - believed to be like any other ordinary consumer item and so , there are no grounds to legislate .
In fact , because of the persistence of these opposing views , which Mr Maaten pointed out , people are now beginning to say that Parliament is supporting the growth of a product that it is repressing in other ways .

The text presented by Mr Medina Ortega is heading in the right direction , but the proposed amendments weaken it considerably and we reject them .
It is heading in the right direction because it has been proven that the ban on advertising helped to cut smoking and that there is indeed a link between advertising and excessive consumption .
Strangely enough , the amendments give cross-border problems more attention than is their due .
Thus , some Members seem to think that the existence of borders can have positive economic effects , whereas in many cases , it is the same individuals who are recommending the same borders be broadly opened up , regardless of the consequences .
Today , given our extensive knowledge about the damaging effects of tobacco , it would be criminal to make no attempt to deter increasingly young consumers from becoming addicted to a product the advertisements for which boast of its benefits .
Negligence , indifference and a lack of political courage in the area of public health sow the seeds of crimes against humanity .
It is this irresponsibly lax approach that caused the contaminated blood scandal in France and the mad cow disease scandal in Great Britain .
Today , no one can say that they are not aware and this means that everyone is to be held responsible .
That is why we shall support Mr Medina Ortega 's report .
Mr President , Commissioner , every time we discuss tobacco in this Chamber all hell is let loose .
There are divisions within groups , relations between committees are soured and Members who are usually friends treat each other with mistrust .
Tobacco is a divisive subject for debate because of the many different sides there are to the argument .
There is the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , which , it would seem , is not particularly concerned with public health and gives more importance to the internal market rules .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy would appear not to be aware of the fact that there is no legal basis for proposing a public health policy .
It is all a pretence .
In actual fact , both committees are quite aware of all the facts , but this has now degenerated into role playing .
In any case , whatever line we take , we cannot disregard the fact that Directive 98 / 43 was annulled by the Court of Justice because it lacked an appropriate legal basis .
Therefore , we now have the chance to remedy the situation , if only in part .
Indeed , as the Commissioner himself admitted with great frankness a few minutes ago , the Commission 's latest proposal is decidedly inadequate to provide the kind of protection of public health demanded by the Committee on the Environment .
In any case , as it stands , it seems to be limiting its demands , to be prepared to settle for very little in order to avoid another rejection by the Court of Justice because of the innovations it proposes , although they are very well balanced .
As others have said and I want to reiterate , it would still be an appreciable result if we were to go home with the Commission 's proposal .
As on past occasions , a little is better than nothing .
As shadow rapporteur , I too have recommended that my group vote for the Commission 's proposal without amendments .
We will see what happens tomorrow .
The important thing is that we do not start proposing once again to cut Community aid to tobacco growers on the pretext of protecting their health or , now , to ban advertising .
It is the smokers - and I stress , the smokers - not the growers who must be the targets of these measures to persuade people to give up smoking .
Indeed , the strange thing is that even if the entire Community production were to be terminated , the number of smokers would not have fallen at all ; on the contrary , the smokers would just switch brands and start buying products from third countries .
This change would not bring any improvement at all in conditions of public health , just an increase in the revenue of extra-Community companies , and , worst of all , it would have a considerable negative impact on employment levels in European tobacco-growing areas , in other words in the south of Europe , where more unemployment is the last thing they need .
To sum up , it is right to oppose advertising in the interests of public health but , for goodness ' sake , let us not start proposing once again to cut aid to Community growers .
Mr President , we at the European Parliament must respect the principles of the rule of law , which means that we must uphold judgments of our European Court of Justice .
As we know , with regard to tobacco advertising , this court of law has previously nullified a directive on account of there being an incorrect legal basis .
That does not surprise me , because during the debate of this first directive , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , under my chairmanship at the time , had clearly stated that the European Union had no powers to issue a directive of this kind .
In short , the law has rights too .
I should therefore like to thank Mr Medina Ortega warmly on his achievements as rapporteur on this occasion .
I should like to stress straight away that I shall be backing him during the vote .
After all , the rapporteur has ensured that the directive to be issued now is legally watertight .
It is true that the European Union can impose a ban on tobacco advertising on the Member States if there is a clear cross-border effect .
However , I should like to add that it seems to me to be necessary that the ban on tobacco advertising , if it has a cross-border effect , should be put on an equal footing across all Member States .
Member States that take their own initiatives at present distort the internal market 's organisation and often cause a competitive disadvantage for themselves .
I would take the example of my own country , Belgium , and the sponsoring of major sports events in Belgium .
Our country has already issued a law which bans any form of tobacco advertising from 2003 onwards .
As you can see , this goes much further than the currently proposed European regulation .
Is this wise ?
I think that a general European regulation , as proposed by our rapporteur , should , on account of its general application , ensure that unilateral measures with often unfortunate consequences are avoided in future .
Mr President , Commissioner , I shall not repeat what my colleague Mrs Hautala has already said .
It is clear that my group and I share her point of view .
I would simply like to add to what Mrs Berger said .
I feel that the Commission should put forward a proposal to the European Convention to change the Treaty 's existing legal bases in the area of public health .
Mrs Berger was right to stress the fact that the working group to the Convention has submitted its conclusions which attracted severe criticism in the Convention 's plenary session .
I feel that we absolutely must be able to legislate in the area of public health , as the arguments put forward here regarding subsidiarity do not hold water .
On the one hand , the Council and the Community institutions are preserving their powers of appreciation as to whether or not it is appropriate to legislate .
On the other hand , if we look at the studies carried out by the World Health Organisation , it is evident that in order for a ban on advertising to be effective , it must be applied thoroughly and comprehensively .
The solution to be followed is that of global legislation in this area .
We must at least have the means to pass European legislation , without which - and I refer back to the previous debate on media concentration - what will happen is that economic players will play the national legislation card against the others .
This argument also puts the case for European legislation .
Mr President , while I listened to the Commissioner as carefully as I always do , in my mind was the thought that this is another case of a never-ending conflict between our desires and our capabilities .
Indeed , it is easy to let emotions take over when we discuss matters such as this , but I would remind you that this is a legislative House and that we have to respect the rules we make .
I therefore agree with the position expressed by Mr Medina Ortega in the conclusion to his speech to the effect that , when we draw up the new version of the Treaties , we must reflect once and for all on the European Union 's competences in this field .
The lengthy analysis in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market was a very serious process .
With the first advertising directive having been annulled , the second proposal , although less comprehensive , is still wide-ranging and , in our opinion , it still leaves ample room for further recourse to the Court of Justice .
In terms of primary law , the draft presented does not fully respond to the issues arising from the Court decision .
I feel that , if we are to do the job properly , two minutes are not enough to go into the complexities of legal issues .
I will therefore limit myself to two very brief points .
The first concerns the prohibition on advertising in the press , with regard to which the general statement deriving from the decisions of the Court of Justice on the advertising of tobacco products to the effect that a ban on advertising can be contemplated , in principle , on the basis of Article 95 , should probably be understood according to the very narrow Court interpretation of the Community 's competences in the area of the internal market and not as a kind of carte blanche for the issue of a general ban on the advertising of tobacco products in the press .
This is as the current legislation stands .
The second point is the ban on Internet advertising .
As regards the ban on tobacco advertising through information society services , it is difficult to perceive any potential future barriers to the freedom to provide services or distortions of competition .
At best , such a ban can be based on the need to avoid the possibility of a further ban , and at this point , this means that the principles of Community competence and responsibility are being overturned and reduced to competences in principle , and that is extremely dangerous from a legal point of view .
Mr President , Commissioner , just how harmful tobacco is can be judged , for example , from the fact that people say that if tobacco had been discovered now it would definitely have been banned because it causes so many public health problems .
It does seem strange that we appear to be finding excuses for how we might continue advertising at European level to make this product , as wretched as it is in terms of public health , more tempting for people .
We are now in a situation where we have to pass a directive that is unsatisfactory , but we have already heard the history of this matter .
It was unfortunate that the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market got no further in this : we have had to accept a very unsatisfactory outcome as a compromise .
On the other hand , this directive is being dealt with under the Hughes procedure with the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , and the Commission proposal was unanimously supported by that committee , so we might say that , as a result , the majority strongly back the Commission proposal .
These unfortunate decisions , which the Committee on Legal Affairs has arrived at , can certainly then be amended in the vote on Wednesday .
As , however , we cannot be satisfied with this proposal , even though it is all we now have , it is vital that we should accept Amendment No 26 tabled by Heidi Hautala , which would make it possible to preserve legislation in those countries where it has advanced further .
Mr President , Mr Maaten was right to focus on the content of the debate .
In this connection , I regret that his report is not being debated together with that by Mr Medina Ortega today .
I think that this would certainly have benefited the scope of the debate .
As Mr Tsatsos pointed out , tobacco kills .
In Europe , it claims 548 000 victims a year , or one every minute .
Mr Maaten was right in saying that a tobacco advertising ban works and is lawful .
May I add a few examples ?
Norway has had an advertising ban in place since 1975 .
This has led to a drop in consumption by 31 % .
There have been similar trends in Finland and New Zealand , where a ban since 1978 and 1990 respectively has led to a drop in consumption by 34 % and 33 % respectively .
We should also condemn the anomaly that , although we give tobacco growers EUR 1 billion every year , we find it difficult to produce a comprehensive strategy to restrict the use of tobacco .
Finally , I should also like to draw your attention to the link between the tobacco lobby and politicians .
I would ask you to endorse the amendments by Mrs Stihler and others , also backed by myself , which call for the introduction of a registration system of donations from the tobacco industry to political parties and politicians .
Mr President , I would like to contribute to the debate this evening on behalf of my colleague , Lord Inglewood , who is a victim of the famous deer incident which has extensively been referred to already .
I would like to focus on the principles behind the proposal , rather than the detail , which has been covered very comprehensively by colleagues .
This is a long-standing issue and it arouses understandable emotions .
It is perfectly reasonable that Member States should wish to control tobacco advertising and sponsorship and the Commissioner was quite right in his opening statement where he particularly focused on directing advertising to young people , to try and control new smokers coming into the smoking market .
But I would argue still that the zeal to do this must not override the principles of the European treaties .
We all know that the first time this was tried the Commission was too greedy .
It exceeded those treaty powers and it lost the entire directive .
In the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market - and I remind colleagues that this committee was right the first time round - this proposal runs the same risks .
That is why we invite you to support our amendments .
If you do not support them , you carry the risk of the whole directive falling .
The second point I wish to make concerns the whole question of subsidiarity .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market 's proposal ensures that Member States take that responsibility .
It derogates those powers to Member States .
Mr Fiori said earlier on that it is not what we want to do , it is what is appropriate in the circumstances .
There is a lot of talk about subsidiarity at present .
Many colleagues are engaged in debates on subsidiarity in the ambit of the convention .
This is a real test of that .
You may want to do something , but it is not necessarily in the competence of the European Union to do it .
That is what we are saying in this case .
That we should not discourage Member States from doing it .
This is the real test of how serious you are about the principles of subsidiarity .
That is why you should support the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market 's line when we vote on Wednesday .
Let me first of all deal with some of the technical issues .
Looking at the important question of the Commission 's attitude to the various amendments , there are 26 amendments being proposed .
The Commission can accept amendments 3 , 10 , 22 and 26 in full and amendments 8 , 11 and 17 subject to some minor rewording .
All the others , the Commission rejects .
Throughout this debate , we have heard from many speakers and it is quite clear there are different views .
Indeed there are different views in Member States .
They have in fact sought to regulate the advertising of tobacco products .
I am convinced that there is a correlation between the legal rules in Member States on advertising and the figures for adult consumption of tobacco in those Member States .
If you look at one of the Member States with the highest level of tobacco consumption , Germany , with 37 % , it has a fairly lax approach to advertising in its national law , as compared with Sweden , one of the Member States with the most restrictive advertising legislation .
Sweden 's rate of adult tobacco consumption is 19 % .
So there is quite clearly , in my view , a correlation .
A number of you spoke about that in your contributions .
It is a question of attacking the image of smoking .
Mrs Alvarez Gonzalez referred to the different views of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , the Environment Committee 's desire for public health to be promoted as an important basic consideration in determining these issues .
Those who spoke on the other side of the argument , if I might describe it as such , are seeking to have legal certainty , which , as a lawyer , I would say is not at all unreasonable .
It is an objective that I would seek to pursue myself , not just as a lawyer but as one of my responsibilities as a Commissioner .
We have done that .
We examined very closely the judgment of the Court of Justice in the first advertising directive case .
When the Court looked at the facts of that case and gave its judgment , it clearly said that there were good parts in the legislation and bad parts .
It went on to say that because they were so inextricably bound together , to attempt to extract the good from the bad , to retain the good and eliminate the bad , would amount to legislating by the judiciary and that cannot be done .
That is why the legislation was annulled .
I brought the judgment back to Brussels .
I told my staff to follow it closely and we brought a new draft regulation .
Referring only briefly to one part of the Court 's judgment , paragraph 98 says in principle that a directive prohibiting the advertising of tobacco products in periodicals , magazines and in newspapers could be adopted on the basis of Article No. 100a - now Article 95 - of the Treaty with a view to ensuring the free movement of press products on the lines of Article 13 of Directive 89 / 552 , the television without frontiers directive prohibiting television advertising of tobacco products in order to promote the free broadcasting of television programmes .
The Court has spoken clearly on the subject .
We have followed that carefully in our drafting .
In response to Mr Lechner , who said earlier that there was no evidence of a distortion in the market , I must say that there is plenty of evidence of this .
In the Commission we get letters regularly from people complaining from both sides of the argument , indeed even from the industry , about a distortion in the market because of the different regimes in Member States in relation to this issue .
Mr De Clercq made reference to the movement away from Spa of the Formula 1 championship race .
That is another clear distortion of the market , because Belgium brought in a law which they are saying forces them to move away from Belgium .
That supports my argument that we need to have a level playing field in Europe .
We need to have harmonised legislation on this issue throughout the European Union so that one Member State cannot be played off against another .
This is also my answer to Mr Harbour .
It is not a subsidiarity issue for the very reason that a Belgian has been pinpointed in a particular way and has suffered a loss .
So not only does the Court say it can be done , the Commission says it ought to be done .
But do not just take my word for it .
The Committee on the Environment Committee says that we should have this legislation in the way I have described and I am sure it would agree the few amendments that the Commission concedes .
Even when we look at the first report from the very hardworking Mr Medina Ortega , the rapporteur , there were three suggested amendments and I would have accepted any one of the three .
If I read between the lines of what he has said , and forgive me if I misinterpreting him , I certainly got the impression from his reference to the compromised amendments that he was not speaking with great enthusiasm but was identifying the fact that this House was divided .
Of course , it is .
So maybe we can draw the conclusion that the first thoughts of the rapporteur on this issue , which are closer to those of the Committee on the Environment and to mine , might well be the ones to follow in this debate .
Let us not leave it there .
We have had a number of discussions on tobacco in the Council , including the preliminary discussions on the framework convention on tobacco control , and the breakdown there is 14 to one .
One Member State takes the view that this legislation either should not go through or it should go through in such a form and with such amendments that in my opinion the heart is cut out of the legislation or amendments are added that leave it vulnerable to challenge in the Court of Justice yet again .
So what do I say to those Members of Parliament who are undecided about this ? I would say to them they should follow the views that are expressed by the Court .
Follow the advice of the Commission . Follow the views of the experts in this House , the Committee on the Environment , and follow the first thoughts of the rapporteur .
Think to what extent will Parliament be on its own if it either votes down this legislation or votes it through with the kind of amendments that are being proposed .
It might not be quite alone , but it will be alone with one Member State , the Member State that happens to have the highest consumption of tobacco amongst adults in the European Union .
That is the choice and therefore I would suggest to those who are undecided on this issue how you should cast your vote .
I would suggest you cast it in a way that puts people 's health first , rather than becoming engaged in a pointless debate about the legal niceties when the issues have been resolved by the Court of Justice and those who have examined this issue closely and believe that legal certainty does exist , to the extent that is necessary to support legislation designed to protect public health , as Articles 95 and 152 say .
Both the Commission and Parliament have a duty and an obligation , in this decision-making and law-making , to promote the highest levels of public health .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mr President , I am taking the floor instead of Mr Lipietz , who should have been presenting this report on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , with his customary flair .
Unfortunately , Mr Lipietz was unable to come to Strasbourg for this sitting for pressing personal reasons . I am therefore taking his place , being a member of the same committee and of the same group .
We are all aware that financial conglomerates own a substantial proportion of the domestic financial markets of many Member States .
Some of them belong to bigger groups that are present on the EU 's financial markets .
If the businesses belonging to conglomerates of this type were to face financial difficulties , they could seriously affect the overall financial system .
At the present time , these cross-sector financial groups are not adequately regulated by current legislation .
Therefore , we can only welcome the fact that the Commission , in the spring of 2001 , presented a proposal for a directive to bring in the supervision of financial conglomerates such as these .
The events of the past year , such as the collapse of e-commerce , numerous financial scandals , including the highly publicised collapse of Enron , and also increased pressure on insurance companies in the wake of 11 September , have inevitably highlighted the need for better regulation of this sector .
The Commission proposal and the amendments by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs received Parliament 's firm support at first reading stage at the beginning of this year .
The Council also made swift progress on this dossier by reaching a common position shortly afterwards .
The outcome of the Council 's deliberations is also extremely encouraging . Parliament can most certainly welcome the fact that the Council has retained almost all the elements contained in the amendments adopted by the European Parliament at first reading and that the common position has taken sufficient account of the main concerns expressed by Parliament .
Despite the fact that there are a few areas where the common position could have been improved further , your rapporteur 's major concern is to see this new and enhanced regulatory framework implemented as soon as possible .
He therefore proposes - and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs approved this position almost unanimously - that the common position be adopted in its current form .
This will enable us to ensure that European conglomerates will , in the very near future , be governed by the most up-to-date , most efficient and most effective regulation and controls possible .
Mr President , I wish to begin by paying tribute to the speed and quality of Parliament 's work .
I must also commend the rapporteur on his excellent work .
Financial conglomerates are important players in European financial markets .
A significant number of them are also systemically important groups .
If such a group were to face financial difficulties it could seriously affect financial markets and people 's savings .
Currently the supervision of such groups is not adequately regulated in European financial legislation .
The directive will therefore address an important loophole in our financial legislation .
Its adoption will contribute to financial market stability , the need for which has been demonstrated dramatically over the past months .
The Council has also recognised the importance of this directive and has unanimously agreed on a common position .
The common position has taken into account Parliament 's main concerns expressed at first reading and is faithful to the objectives and the spirit of the Commission proposal .
For all these reasons , I commend the Council common position to Parliament and urge its rapid adoption .
Mr President , if the Council is concerned about the collapse of e-commerce , financial scandals and the resulting deterioration of the situation , there is good reason to be !
The people who have good reason to worry are the employees who have already been made redundant or are about to be made redundant by the companies concerned , even though they are in no way responsible for the anarchy of your economy , which is as unfair as it is irrational .
Confronted with this genuine evil , however , the only solution being proposed is to strengthen prudential rules or to improve supervision , as if the financial conglomerates could be supervised from above by the political authorities responsible for protecting them .
So as to prevent the mere sound of the word ' supervision ' from angering the financial conglomerates , the report promises them that the directive will respect the need for confidentiality .
And so , those who pretend to believe that a few prudential rules and a few coordinators who have no real power can eradicate speculation , scandals and financial crises from the capitalist economy will be those who therefore vote in favour of this report .
Even a vote by the European Parliament cannot turn an insipid recommendation into a magic potion to ward off the evils of capitalism .
Your economy based on the quest for private profits and on competition is even more unpredictable than the weather .
Although we can predict unsettled weather three days in advance , who can predict the ups and downs of the stock market from one day to the next ?
By voting against this text , we are expressing our opposition to an economic system which is stupid and dangerous for society .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , greetings from the United States of America , from where I returned yesterday from a meeting of the delegation responsible for Parliament 's relations with the US , where we had further in-depth discussions with representatives of the US Congress and the US Securities and Exchange Commission specifically on the issue of regulation of the financial markets .
This Directive on the supplementary supervision of credit institutions , insurance undertakings and investment firms in a financial conglomerate has been something that has been of immense interest to companies in the United States too .
Enron and similar finance-sector scandals shook the confidence of investors and market operators in the stability of financial conglomerates on both sides of the Atlantic .
Events in the past few years have undeniably shown that the financial services sector needs to improve its regulation and supervision .
The business and financial markets are global markets .
European legislation thus also has an obvious impact on how financial conglomerates operate in third countries , and vice versa .
For this reason it is absolutely vital that legislators and regulating authorities in the European Union and the United States hold ongoing , intensive talks with one another on how workable the regulations and laws are and the need for change .
For example , many of us Members of the European Parliament have taken a critical view of the securities legislation package passed at the end of October by the US Congress , the Sarbanes-Oxley Act , and in particular the additional obligations it places on companies in the EU .
We still have much work to do to make the mutual recognition of systems possible and stop a jungle of multiple regulatory systems from spreading .
In return , companies in North America must make their views known with regard to how EU legislation affects them .
Many of them opposed this proposal for a directive because they considered it would make things unnecessarily difficult for them in the EU .
The final outcome will hardly satisfy all parties , but we can at least be satisfied that the debate on both sides of the Atlantic has been conducted openly .
In the future too we must take account of all legitimate points of view in order to ensure that global markets operate seamlessly .
The Council has now arrived at a common position .
It is a positive sign that the Council accepted almost all Parliament 's amendments at first reading .
I tabled some amendments at second reading that would have brought the legislation on threshold values in the directive closer to the realities of the market .
Our rapporteur , Mr Lipietz , however , is proposing that the common position should be approved without amendment so that work on implementation might begin without delay .
I am prepared to accept this proposal and I shall support the rapporteur provided that the provisions of the directive can be assessed regularly in terms of their viability and revised if need be .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
report ( A5-0380 / 2002 ) by Mr Stevenson , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the Commission communication on the reform of the common fisheries policy ( ' roadmap ' ) [ COM ( 2002 ) 181 - C5-0330 / 2002 - 2002 / 2174 ( COS ) ]
report ( A5-0360 / 2002 ) by Mr Souchet , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the communication from the Commission setting out a Community Action Plan to integrate environmental protection requirements into the common fisheries policy [ COM ( 2002 ) 186 ? C5-0331 / 2002 - 2002 / 2175 ( COS ) ] .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as deadlines draw near that are decisive for the future of the CFP - leading to its objectives , terms and conditions being redefined - I feel it is crucial that Parliament firmly reiterates the five principles which served as the main theme of my report and which the Committee on Fisheries wanted to highlight with a view to fully integrating environmental protection requirements into the new common fisheries policy .
The first principle is that nothing will be done without the fishermen .
Those working in the fisheries sector are the first to be concerned about the protection of the marine environment and the first to be aware of the need to safeguard it .
They are also the first victims of any impairment of the environment as shown unfortunately by the latest oil spill , which has today caused despair amongst the fishermen of Galicia .
Three years after the Erika disaster , which struck the Vendée region and Brittany , it should not have been possible for the Prestige , an out-dated , dilapidated vessel , to be allowed to sail Community waters .
Our report stresses the need to implement swiftly and comprehensively the packages of directives specifically named Erika I and Erika II .
We refuse to consider fishermen to be predators , to which they are occasionally likened - I might add , wrongly so .
On the contrary , this committee grants fishermen the status of wholly legitimate players in environmental protection and stresses that any measures taken without their backing are more than likely to be inappropriate and ineffective .
The second principle is that we should base decisions regarding the management of fish stocks on scientific knowledge that is as sound and accurate as possible .
The economic and social consequences of these decisions are so great that they cannot be taken lightly .
That is why I welcome the fact that the Committee on Fisheries has retained the request to instruct the Commission to draw up a precise action plan with a view to improving the current but very inadequate system of stock evaluation by integrating into it the practical , empirical and pragmatic knowledge of fishermen , as well as checks on landings and by placing the interdisciplinary nature of biological and socio-economic sciences at the very heart of the process of formulating scientific opinions .
The third principle proposes to retain flexible , reversible management instruments such as TACs and quotas , so that the fishing effort can be adjusted to match the state of resources , in preference to rigid instruments that have an irreversible and socially dramatic impact such as the scrapping of vessels .
The fourth principle calls for fishing gear and techniques to be improved with a view to reducing discards , by-catches and the impact on habitats .
Of course , such measures cannot be adopted in a uniform and centralised manner but must leave enough scope for initiatives from professionals working in the sector .
Fishermen , their professional organisations and coastal communities must be given a right to experiment .
Initiatives in this area must be recognised and encouraged .
This is how very promising experiments on the Atlantic coast came about .
I shall mention , by way of example , those experiments aiming to adapt fishing vessels and gear so that they may be used to collect marine debris or oil spills or even the creation of artificial reefs to facilitate the development of breeding or rest areas for maritime fauna , or even artificial fertilisation techniques in the open sea for sea bass .
My report proposes that such experiments should be eligible for state funding .
The fifth and final principle states that state aid for fleet modernisation , the aim of which is to improve working conditions , on-board safety , energy savings and the quality of fisheries products , is perfectly compatible with the protection of the marine environment .
I am pleased to have been broadly supported by the Committee on Fisheries , which retained all of these positive and constructive proposals , thus rejecting the very negative vision of fishery activities , which strongly permeated the Commission communication .
I hope that Parliament , by voting overwhelmingly in favour of this report , will make it clear to all that the protection of the marine environment will be achieved by working with the fishermen rather than against them .
That is why , instead of adopting accusatory positions , instead of speaking constantly about an industry in decline and of a makeshift policy , the Committee on Fisheries preferred to send a message of confidence and hope to those working in the industry to consolidate their growing respect for the quality of the marine environment , a quality that is one of the crucial objectives that the new common fisheries policy is bound by duty to pursue .
Madam President , I read with attention the report adopted by the Committee on Fisheries on our action plan on environmental integration .
We are happy to note that our views are rather more convergent on this issue of environmental integration than on other reform aspects .
We clearly share the same goals in respect of such important fields of action suggested in the report as environmental protection , improvement of research , including the integration of fishermen 's experience , specific measures for specific problems , the implementation of an ecosystem approach , aids to modernisation , industrial fisheries , sustainable aquaculture and so on .
In fact the Commission has already started or planned several initiatives to respond to these requirements .
Allow me to outline some of them .
We have requested the ICES to study in 2003 the possibilities for operational procedures to integrate fishermen 's experience and knowledge in the assessment and advisory process .
We agree that specific situations require specific measures .
We do not apply the same combinations of management instruments in the Baltic as in the North Sea or the Mediterranean .
We do not intend , either , to set the same targets for different fleets .
To achieve the targets set out in Johannesburg , we are in the process of implementing the bio-diversity action plan with a view to halting bio-diversity decline by 2010 and it is through the reformed CFP that we intend to rebuild stocks sooner than 2015 .
We have recently co-financed an FAO expert meeting to develop operational guidelines to implement an ecosystem-based approach to fisheries management .
In our reform proposals we have excluded the mandatory scrapping of vessels and given more emphasis to multiannual plans using flexible instruments such as TACs , effort regulation and technical measures as main regulatory elements .
We have proposed to maintain aid to modernisation of vessels for reasons of security , working conditions and hygiene , provided that there is no increased fishing efficiency in order to prevent increases in fishing pressure .
We are promoting the elaboration by the main stakeholders of a European code of responsible fishing practice .
The first drafts are already under discussion in the context of the Advisory Committee for Fisheries and Aquaculture .
We have requested that the ICES study the ecological consequences of industrial fisheries and the effects on non-fishery activities , as well as the threats , including global warming , to commercial stocks .
The Commission has initiated debate to promote a coordinated protection of the marine environment .
The recent communication on a strategy to protect and conserve the marine environment gives the main elements of the policy advocated for a holistic treatment of the problem .
We have addressed the Erika oil spill by completing most elements of the package , namely the rules on port state control , certification and checking of security measures and bringing forward the phasing out of single hull tankers .
The creation of an EU compensation fund for oil spills is expected to be finalised by 2003 .
We are constantly putting as much pressure as we can on Member States for a better implementation of the habitats directive in the marine environment as completely and as soon as possible .
Finally , as you have already had the opportunity to study our communication on sustainable aquaculture , you may have noticed how much our intended policy in the area takes into account environmental protection requirements .
As far as fisheries agreements are concerned , you will soon have an opportunity to confirm that the Commission shares your environmental concerns .
The announced communication on partnership agreements will be presented shortly .
Generally speaking , the Commission is on your side regarding the main resolutions of the report .
However , I wish to comment on several statements in the explanatory memorandum .
Firstly , while I recognise the shortcomings of scientific advice , I strongly disagree that this is the main problem of fisheries management .
We all know that the main problem is too many fishermen chasing too few fish .
Secondly , the rapporteur states that it is the Commission is pursuing a policy of capacity reduction .
As I have said before on many occasions , this is simply not correct .
It is not correct , either , that the Commission has proposed the abolition of public aid for modernisation of the fleet .
Finally , I would not agree that industrial fishing has a much greater environmental impact per euro added value than fisheries for human consumption , mainly because I find it odd to measure environmental impact against monetary units , but also because the environmental impact of this kind of fishing has yet to be determined .
To sum up , I do not agree totally with the form but will support the substance of the report and in particular the motion for a resolution .

Madam President , Commissioner , I should first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur on the work he has done and to thank him for this .
Next , I should like clearly to emphasise that reform of the common fisheries policy must be based upon the sustainable development of fisheries .
The sustainability in question must be defensible from an environmental point of view and be conceived in both economic and social terms .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party is able to support the Commission 's proposals for reform , which contain a number of features aimed at sustainability and , therefore , the balance needed if the stock of fish is to be adjusted to the existing number of fishing vessels .
We would remind you that it is very important to secure the fishermen 's understanding for , without that and without cooperation with the fishermen , we shall not be able to achieve the necessary results .
In that connection , we must respect the fact that fishermen all around the EU attend to their tasks in different ways .
It is absolutely crucial to the common fisheries policy that decisions be made on the basis of very clear scientific data .
The Commission must gather this data from the Member States and , at the same time , have the necessary technical and , especially , human administrative and supervisory resources available to it .
We should also very much like to emphasise that the EU must participate more in the development of the international fisheries policy .
It is important for our third-country agreements to be given a central place in this connection .
Madam President , I could almost echo the words of the rapporteur for the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , Mr Busk , when he states that fisheries policy is , above all , a matter of international treaties and everything that takes place outside these .
If we consider the maritime environment - and I am also speaking here in the capacity of shadow rapporteur for Mr Souchet 's report , whom I should at any rate like to warmly congratulate on his report and the balanced way in which he has presented it - it appears that , where the implementation of environmental requirements in the fisheries policy is concerned , only a very small proportion is determined by fisheries policy .
It struck me that the Commissioner said that if we consider the problem from different angles , then what it comes down to is that there are too few fish and too many fishermen .
I wonder if , with regard to the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , this situation is so cut and dried , particularly in the light of the recent disaster with an oil tanker off the coast of Galicia .
If we consider the maritime area covered by European fishermen , then this is only a very small fraction of the total area in the world that is used for fishing .
As Mr Busk has already stated , this also means that it is of key importance for us to conclude sound treaties , particularly outside of the European Union , in order to find the right solution .
At the same time , the Committee on Fisheries and also my own group , of course , recognise the importance of the fishing environment , especially since the environment , including the maritime environment , is decisive for the fishing industry in terms of what can be caught .
This means that if the maritime environment is in a bad state , the fishing industry , in particular , will bear the brunt of this .
At the same time , this sector feels under pressure and the difficult bit is to strike the right balance between economic and ecological aspects .
It would be nice if the Commission 's public statements gave more evidence of this very balance .
A properly motivated fisheries sector can contribute quite easily to a better maritime environment , and this also applies to the legislation needed for this .
On this score , I am pleased that Mr Souchet - and indeed the Stevenson report , which was formerly the Noriega report - devotes particular attention to aquaculture .
There are probably also good opportunities for Europe here , provided that we get the chance on this score to let legislation in this area run parallel with the economy on the one hand and ecology on the other from the word go .
I have to say that the Souchet report has been particularly well received in our group .
We will therefore warmly advise Parliament to vote in favour of the report , assuming that , as the rapporteur has observed , it is essential to take sufficient account of the economic and social aspects of fishing in order to encourage the fisheries industry and environmental legislation .
I would like to congratulate Mr Souchet on this .
Mr President , within the framework of the reform of the CFP which the Commission has decided to present to us in small doses , today we are debating the reports on the ' guideline ' document and the protection of the environment .
I would like to congratulate Mr Souchet on his excellent work because the environment is a fundamental aspect of the CFP , and fishing is the sector most affected by the attacks on the marine environment , as highlighted by the oil slick that is currently threatening the coasts of my region , Galicia .
We know little about the sea and the fragile situation of the resources cannot be explained entirely by over-fishing , as Mr Souchet has rightly said and as the oil slick caused off the coasts of Galicia by the oil tanker Prestige dramatically demonstrates .
I would like to believe that the fishermen and shellfishermen of my region are not going to face this terrible situation alone , but that Europe is going to show solidarity with them and that the European Commission will fully support them .
And I would like to say to the Commission that , since it presented these proposals in May , it has received sufficient messages from this Parliament , from the Council and from the sector to redirect this reform in a different way , bearing in mind that it will always have to be gradual , be provided with sufficient resources and be agreed with the sector , with the Member States and with this House .
I believe that the Commission is hearing this message .
It is a shame that in May , on presenting its proposals for the reform of the CFP , the Commission should have ignored the resolution approved by this Parliament in January on the Green Paper , in which this House urged it to present a proposal for reform to create a sustainable and more Community-focused CFP , in opposition to attempts at renationalisation ; a CFP that is fairer , eliminating the discrimination against certain fleets , showing more solidarity and supporting regions dependent on fishing , basically by means of Community co-funding of the restructuring of the fleet .
Madam President , towards sustainability , that is the future of the fishing industry .
It is important not only to draft these reports , but also to consider aquaculture and safe conditions within the fishing industry .
It is unfortunate that the report was late , although this was followed by very fast work .
Truly impressive .
Further to the votes in the committee meetings , there are now sound reports before us .
Despite this , we should , in addition to the precautionary measures that need to be observed , also consider the situations we are facing .
ICES , the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea , is keen to reduce the catch quota of flatfish even further , while the safe margin is in sight .
This cannot be completely justified .
We should , however , ensure that we do justice to historical catch rights in the new common fisheries policy ; these should not be jeopardised .
Moreover , we should think very carefully about access to the seas .
I am , of course , thinking of the North Sea , but the point I am trying to make is that fishing unquoted species is dangerous , because quoted species are caught along with these .
It is at present extremely difficult to check whether the quoted species are left alone .
Should they be thrown overboard or taken somewhere ?
It has in any event a huge impact on those keeping track of the quotas and is important for the valuable species .
In my view , this additional burden on the stocks is unacceptable , certainly if quotas were to dwindle even further .
People have already taken the pressure off on their own initiatives .
It will therefore be very difficult to sell this .
Policy and management are dependent on the support base within the sector .
In my view , we should prevent the sector from straying too far , and we will also need to involve it in creating and thinking of new solutions .
This is why it is also extremely important for control and sanctions to be harmonised at international level .
As for international fishing , I condemn unilateral measures , for they do not have a positive bearing on sustainable fish stocks .
My final comment is : thank you , rapporteurs who have written the reports .
I think that we have a sound basis to vote on this report in Parliament .
Madam President , it is not by chance that the reform of the CFP is being undertaken in 2002 .
We must adopt it now precisely because , in accordance with their Accession Agreements of 1986 , the transitional period established for the Spanish State and for Portugal are about to expire .
From now on , therefore , these States must have the same rights in Community waters as the nine Member States that established the common fisheries policy at the start of the 1980s .
Despite these obvious statements , Madam President , a majority in the Committee on Fisheries refused , in a totally unacceptable decision , to grant the Spanish and the Portuguese equal rights .
The new CFP ought to acknowledge that the fleets of the fifteen Member States all have the same rights , thereby putting an end to the privileges and discriminations between the citizens , fleets and countries of the European Union .
This pro-European - and I must say also Galician - position that my country has adopted inspired the report that I had the honour of drafting on the policies to be implemented for the reform of the CFP .
Nor did we reject temporary restrictions based solely on the need to conserve fish stocks being established or maintained in this equal treatment of access to Community waters .
We argued for the need to review or , where necessary , replace the principle of relative stability with a principle that is fairer and more consistent with the Treaties in this field .
We argued for international fisheries policy and also joint ventures to be strengthened , and for public aid from the European Union for investment intended to improve conditions on board ships , which are currently very poor , to be maintained .
For these and other reasons rejected by a majority in the committee , I cannot accept the report that now bears the name of the chairman of the Committee on Fisheries .
The report nevertheless upholds some principles with which I agree , which survived the destructive offensive against the amendments tabled and adopted by the majority .
This means that dialogue and a new compromise on the part of everyone where the reform of the CFP is concerned are still possible .
In any event , they are still necessary .
Madam President , I fundamentally disagree with many of the aspects of the European Commission 's proposals on the reform of the common fisheries policy .
However , it is true that a more balanced approach is needed .
The current COM on fisheries policy has not been a success .
It has not done any favours - and in some cases has been discriminatory - to Irish fishermen .
The opportunity must not be missed to redress the current imbalance during this reform process .
That is what Irish fishermen are asking for at the moment , and that is what I am asking for .
One of the issues which is currently being discussed relates to the issue of access to the Irish Box .
The Spanish Government , for example , is claiming that it is entitled from next January to even greater access to the Irish fishing waters .
This simply cannot be allowed to happen .
It would have absolutely disastrous consequences for Irish fishermen , their families and Irish fishing communities .
Fish stocks in the Irish Sea at the present time are at a precariously low level .
Opening up our waters to more Spanish vessels than is presently allowed will only result in a decimation of our stocks .
The Irish Sea is a biologically very sensitive area .
It is the spawning ground for many of our fish species .
Only last week Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries passed an amendment stating clearly that fish balances shall not be disturbed in western waters and therefore it is in this context that relative stability must be understood .
We must protect fishing regions where our fish stocks are under threat and the Irish Box and the Irish Sea is one such region .
The last thing we want is to have our waters opened up to more effort by Spanish fishermen , or indeed any other fishermen .
We need to protect our fish stocks and not decimate them .
Any new conservation measures which are introduced at European Union level must be brought about in consultation with all interested parties involved in all Member States in order to protect what is a very valuable natural resource for all of us .
Madam President , it is on record that the outline regulations on the common fisheries policy were not agreed until eight hours after the Community had opened the accession negotiations with the United Kingdom in 1971 .
The head of the British delegation , Sir Con O 'Neil , remarked that these two events were not unconnected .
Prior to that there had hardly been any interest in a Community fisheries policy because the founding six had virtually no fishing resources .
Britain , Ireland , Denmark and Norway all had rich coastal fisheries and they had been kept in good condition by effective conservation measures .
O 'Neil attests to this ; experts from the British Ministry of Agriculture produced a report showing that British waters were literally teeming with fish , whilst there were very few within the fishing limits of the present Community countries .
The main evidence for this is that Community waters did not attract foreign fishermen , while British waters most certainly did .
After 30 years of the CFP , Britain 's waters no longer teem with fish .
To paraphrase Sir Con : ' These two events are not unconnected ' .
Yet still members of the Committee on Fisheries seem unable to make the connection .
They call for more technical and human resources .
They want more money for research .
They want management plants , sustainable development , integrated policies , multiannual plans , the application of the precautionary principle and , wait for it , target reference points for biomass and fishing mortality .
If jargon were the solution , Member State waters would still be teeming with fish , the CFP would be a world-beater .
But all that jargon does is to hide an uncomfortable truth : the common fisheries policy has not worked , does not work and cannot work no matter how much reform is dressed up in flowery words .
As long as fish are considered to be a common European resource , there will be no sense of ownership or responsibility .
Predatory fishing becomes the norm .
It is an inevitable consequence of the policy and leads to the depletion of stocks .
Reform is not the solution .
The CFP cannot be reformed .
It has proved to be incapable of reform .
It should be scrapped and fisheries should be managed once again by national governments .
Madam President , I am beginning my speech in this debate on fisheries very moved , as you know , by the events that have taken place in Galicia .
I remember that , while I was chairman of the Committee on Fisheries , the tragic accident involving the Erika took place , and our committee put an oral question and adopted a resolution .
At that point we were all united , and I hope we are in this case as well .
I would like to stress - and you know this - that Galicia is the region most dependent on fishing in the whole of Europe and is extraordinarily rich in seafood and fish , which , following the Prestige accident , is going to take many years to recover , above all in the areas most directly affected by the oil slick .
I am going to prepare a motion for a resolution and I believe that the political groups must be united , so that this House can issue a political opinion , so that events of this type never happen again .
I believe that we have a very important political responsibility .
It is terrible to see fishing resources covered in petrol , dead sea birds and the fishermen who live exclusively from the sea .
Sometimes over-fishing is discussed but these issues are not .
I believe it is very important to bear it in mind and I hope , as I have said , that all our colleagues will show solidarity .
With regard to the reports before the plenary , there has been no mention of the Busk report , and I would like to congratulate him , because there is no need for either a debate or for amendments since we have all agreed on the issue of illegal fishing and also the fight against it ; it is therefore important to point it out .
I believe that the report by Mr Souchet has worked out well .
It is a reasonable and positive report , and there are no amendments to it in this House either .
With regard to the report by Mr Stevenson , everybody knows what happened and I am not going to go into details ; today we are dealing with the report which carries the name of the chairman of our committee .
I would simply say to you that my political group has presented certain minimal amendments ; we have tried to clear up certain issues .
I would like to say , and I say this in general , that we are dealing with a communication .
In other words , we are not dealing with a legislative document , but the report by Mr Jové will be , and we will examine that report during the next part-session .
I hope that we can focus all our efforts and use the balanced approach indicated here , in order to adopt the commitments in this report , which will have to be debated , as I have said , at the next part-session in Brussels .
With regard to the amendments we have presented , we have tried to remove the word ' permanent ' from the twelve miles , because the Legal Services of the Council and the European Parliament , as well as the Commission , accept that , since it is a derogation from the Treaty , it cannot be permanent , because that would amount to a modification of the Treaty itself .
Therefore , it is simply a measure that requires a time limit .
Since we are not in agreement on whether it is five , ten , fifteen or twenty years , we have simply asked that we may adopt an agreement on this during the debate on the Jové report .
Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the reform of the common fisheries policy has made some at times majestic waves of argument .
Some of the arguments are reasonable and justified , whereas others are hasty and disproportionate .
The reform of the common fisheries policy is necessary , and no sensible person would deny this .
The depletion of fish stocks is not a fantasy or an exaggeration by ecologists , by those seeking to protect marine life or by pessimistic scientists .
It is a tragic reality for many species .
In the past , we also saw the collapse of some population units , but it was then possible to rebuild them by shifting the fishing effort to other species and to other latitudes .
Today , this is all but impossible .
The example of the collapse of the Newfoundland cod banks , the source of so much history and so much legend in Portugal , my own country , should serve as a warning to us .
Of the more than 35 000 species that populate the seas , only one hundred are of commercial and consumer interest .
This is a fact !
Today , however , we are seeing an impoverishment of biological diversity in the marine environment and the gradual destruction of habitats and ecosystems .
The situation has reached this disturbing point not only as a result of the pressure exerted by fishing ; but other well known reasons have also contributed to this phenomenon .
Fishing is now subject to a dual requirement : the ecological requirement to preserve fish stocks and the political and social requirement to maintain the economic activities of the maritime fishing sector . These activities must , therefore , pay close attention to the state of stocks and not be undertaken in a predatory way or in the form of simple hunting and gathering , as if we were still living in the Stone Age .
Linking the Souchet report on the Community Action Plan to integrate environmental protection requirements into the common fisheries policy with the Stevenson report on the reform of the CFP and the Busk report on monitoring and eradicating illegal fishing was , consequently , an inspired move .
The reform of the common fisheries policy must necessarily be a compromise that balances all strands : the social , the economic , the cultural and the ecological .
Those Members who are most in favour - as they claim - of fishing , should therefore be mindful of the de la Palissian truism : without fish , there can be no fishing .
Madam President , I also support the report by Mr Souchet and am extremely sorry to see the pollution caused by the oil tanker in Galicia .
With regard to the Stevenson report , although it is somewhat contradictory , it does take account of many of the proposals and positions that we called for and which are important to Portugal , specifically the installation of 12-mile coastal zones as a permanent feature of the CFP , the participation of fishermen 's organisations in the decision-making process , socio-economic measures to compensate for the effects of the reform , which must take account of past efforts , greater investment in research and ensuring that there is no legal vacuum .
Two of our proposals that we felt were of the utmost importance were also accepted : the extension of the derogation concerning free access to 50 miles in the case of the most remote regions , as laid down in the Treaty , and strengthening the support mechanisms for the processing industry , specifically the canning industry .
Nevertheless , we disagree with the proposals that are intended to change the report , with some that were rejected in the Committee on Fisheries and which run counter to the positions and proposals that we tabled once again being adopted .
We shall , however , be voting in favour of the proposal which is comparable to an amendment of ours , which is of enormous importance to Portugal , and which has already been adopted in the other report , stating that the six-twelve mile zones should be maintained and defined as a feature of the common fisheries policy , for an unlimited period of time , in order to promote conservation and to encourage the local development of small-scale fishing .
Madam President , I wanted to comment briefly on the report by Mr Stevenson .
I welcome the fact that it calls for the system of access to waters and resources to be maintained as well as the fundamental principle of relative stability .
I regret , however , that the original proposal by Mr Nogueira Román , who wanted to re-focus attention on the economic and social dimension of the common fisheries policy and , therefore , study it at the same time as the issue of fishing effort , has not been retained .
What struck me is that the proposal by the European Commission on the roadmap on reform of the common agricultural policy reflects the lack of priority that the latter gives to the social impact of its plan since this impact only features in seventh place in the list of proposed measures .
As for the Commission communication of 6 November on the measures intended to soften the impact of the reform , it confirms the plan to do away with 28 000 jobs over three years , between 2003 and 2006 , due to the mass scrapping of vessels as predicted by the Commission .
We are naturally waiting for an appropriate time to question the Commission on these dramatic figures , Madam President , which will be when we study this communication .
Madam President , it is unfortunate that we have had to make substantial alterations to the Souchet and Nogueira reports .
The whole scenario is depressing enough already : here we are , sitting in a warm room and endlessly talking , not only with each other but often , alas , at odds with each other .
Out there , though , our environmental accidents and overfishing are making conditions catastrophic for more and more fish stocks .
In here , or so it seems , we prefer to stonewall rather than work on a genuine reform , and the image of the European Union suffers .
We should start by sorting out our own environment , and do it at once .
The Commission proposals may have been late in landing on the table , but they got there well before the summer .
Now that the first snows are falling , we are talking ; but it is only today that we are discussing the timetable for the reform , which is due to enter into force on 1 January of next year , which is only a few weeks away .
Quite apart from the Gallic bias of its content , this timetable started out as a tall order in linguistic terms .
By dint of great efforts and 258 amendments , the Committee on Fisheries was then able to make the timetable readable with a view to genuine reform .
It is curious , though , to take one example , that the committee voted to safeguard the twelve nautical mile zone - and now I am supposed to vote against it on Wednesday !
That I will not do .
Am I a puppet ; are we marionettes ?
Granted , we all want to be re-elected .
Is that why the spirits invoked by the Committee on Fisheries have proved so remarkably changeable ?
We all know that without fish , the fishing industry will die out .
What this is about is protecting the fleet and protection of resources , which are fundamental principles ; there can be no deviation from them and no softening-up of them .
I want the fisheries industry to be economically successful , socially balanced , and to make sense in environmental terms .
We have to face reality and cannot set sail in an ever-increasing fleet in search of the mirage of stocks that last for ever .
I appeal to my fellow-MEPs to break free of their national interests and support me in maintaining our fish stocks !
Madam President , I would like to begin by echoing the comments made by my fellow Members from Galicia and to say that I shall support all their initiatives .
My region was affected by the Amoco Cadiz and Erika disasters ; their region has been struck by the sinking of the Prestige , but the ship 's name does nothing to ease the problems of those living in the region and of the Galician fishermen .
Commissioner , the conception of the new fisheries policy is problematic but the fledgling policy is due to come into force on the evening of 31 December .
I think that the Committee on Fisheries has worked hard to restore a balance between the exploitation of fishery resources and the protection of these resources for future generations , without forgetting the economy of coastal regions .
In any case , we are seeking a better balance between these two areas than that put forward in your proposals , one that corresponds to sustainable development in the correct sense of the word .
This applies , of course , to fish stocks , where this balance is needed , but it also concerns coastal economies .
And we tried to draw your attention , in these three reports and in others , to the implications of the political decisions regarding employment in regions that are dependent on fishing , to the consequences of scrapping boats , since of course , if we scrap them and fish levels increase in the future , there may not be any fishermen left to fish them .
We must keep our heads .
We must also ensure that our fishermen do not use boats that are too old , which they make last longer and that they overload with equipment , thus running all kinds of risks .
Our committee , in all its debates and through its rapporteurs , is seeking to influence the final decisions of the Commission and the Council .
Of course , there are good decisions and we should highlight them , such as controls and sanctions , involving the relevant parties in the decision-making processes , improving knowledge of fishing techniques and resources .
In short , if all this is done , if the balance is maintained , our fishermen will be able to continue to have faith in their work , in their business and we in our regions .
Madam President , the management of EU fisheries is at an important juncture with key stocks in the North Sea and elsewhere in decline and the future of fishing and fish processing industries therefore under threat .
So it is essential that the Commission gets it right , proposing a management system which ensures sustainable fisheries backed up by up-to-date independent and verifiable scientific evidence involving stakeholders and installing confidence in the system .
However , as the first set of CFP reform proposals nears a conclusion , I find myself more cynical about the process and less optimistic about the future for Scotland 's fishing-dependent communities than ever before .
Why should this be so ?
Is a workable EU fisheries policy achievable ?
I have always believed that the only way to succeed in achieving the necessary balance between resource , harvesting and conservation and to better encourage compliance with any management regime is to have a regime with which the stakeholders can have some faith .
That is why I have welcomed the Commission 's support for regional advisory councils as a step in the right direction , towards a much-needed new and better way of doing things .
Actions , however , have to accompany words and I have been shocked by the attitude displayed by the Commission recently in relation to cod and other white fish quotas for next year .
To announce the possible closure of the Scots fishing industry with the ' we know best ' and ' it 's all your own fault ' statements attributed to Commissioner Fischler seems to fly in the face of the stated intention to involve stakeholders more .
This ' tough guy ' approach , presumably designed to make the actual outcome for next year seem relatively palatable , should have no place in a new CFP .
The sad truth is that irreparable damage has been done by the Commission in the last six months to the Scottish confidence in Europe being capable of managing fisheries at all .
With Mr Fischler 's about-turn on deep-water management , followed by the insensitive presentation of the ICES 's advice on cod and its repercussions for Scotland , it is little wonder that conspiracy theories abound .
Does Commissioner Fischler want to be remembered as the architect of a new and successful EU fisheries policy ?
Or the one who brought desolation to communities and destruction to a way of life ?
Sadly at this moment , he seems to me more likely to achieve the latter .
I and the leadership of the Scottish fishing industry have played a constructive role , working with environmental organisations in the consultative process towards CFP reform .
I would like to see the Commission and the Council taking due account of that and giving some return and not penalising the Scots for their efforts .
This Parliament report on the reform of the CFP remedies some of the shortcomings in the Commission proposal , but is remiss with regard to others .
With regard to its positive points , I would highlight three main aspects :
the first is that sustainable fisheries management must be based on a balanced range of measures , not only on the simplistic solution of fleet reduction , but also on a greater selection of fishing methods , on the proper use of the MAGPs and of the TACs and quotas .
Most of all , the recommendation that in any reduction of the fishing effort , lower targets are set for Member States that have already undertaken fleet reduction ;
the second aspect is the clear recommendation that fisheries agreements with third countries , which , if properly implemented are of mutual convenience for both parties , must continue to be an integral part of the CFP .
For this reason , it is right that ships removed from the Community fleet can continue to be included in fleets belonging to joint ventures ;
the third aspect is the desire to find a specific solution to the problem of access to the waters of the outermost regions , which have very delicate balances and ecosystems , such as the Azores , the Island of Madeira and other regions in the European Union .
The aspect that I feel is most negative is the report 's total omission of the structural component .
There are two main reasons for not changing the rules laid down at the Berlin European Council on the funding of fisheries structures .
The first is that fleet modernisation is in itself a priority matter , because otherwise the Community fleet will become uncompetitive : where Portugal is concerned , 40 % of our fleet is over 25 years old and therefore , unless it receives support , it will be unviable .
The second reason is that since appropriations were set in Berlin for fleet modernisation by 2007 and since various ship owners have placed orders on this basis , it is politically unacceptable to now change the rules in mid-stream .
Madam President , we make this subject sound very complicated but for me it boils down to two questions : how much fish can we take , and who can take them ?
If we could agree on those two questions , we would have an amicable solution to all the other questions that arise .
I do not agree with those who say that the common fisheries policy is responsible for the present state of stocks .
The reason the stocks are in their present state is because the scientists were not heeded .
When the Commission took the scientists ' message to the Council of Ministers it was not heeded and its advice was not put into effect .
I do not agree with the present policy , but within its framework stocks could have been conserved if the advice of the Commission had been taken through the years .
The other problem with the common fisheries policy is that on the one hand the Commission has the responsibility but can merely give advice .
The Council of Ministers and the individual states are the people with the ultimate responsibility .
There is a lot of evidence that in the past they did not discharge their responsibility , without fear or favour , in a manner which ensured that every fisherman took what he was entitled to take and every ship got its quota and no more .
The common fisheries policy goes too far .
There was never any need to take fish into common ownership .
It does not make sense .
We have a common agricultural policy .
It does not give me the right or an Irish farmer the right to pick grapes or olives in the south of Spain .
It does not give us the right to harvest forests in Finland or Sweden .
Neither should the common fisheries policy include the common ownership of stocks .
It makes no sense .
As far as I know , nevertheless , there is only one country which loses out and gets less than its natural share .
You will not find a more convinced European integrationist than I am , so I can say that there is one region in the Union , the west of Ireland , that does not get its natural share .
I have no special quarrel with the Spanish , French or British fishermen who come into what are natural waters .
However , in other areas - oil and minerals - and in every form of jurisdiction Member States have over their oceans , natural resources fall within the remit of the national governments .
That should also apply to fish .
It would make a lot more sense .
Madam President , the CFP has totally failed .
It has not maintained the fishing stocks or fishermen 's jobs .
Discarding nearly two million tonnes of healthy fish each year is absolutely ridiculous .
Fish do not swim separately in the sea .
They swim together and the sooner we work that out the better .
The 6- and 12-mile limits must be confirmed permanently .
I am not convinced by the argument that we cannot do it and I shall be voting firmly for the fact that these limits should be etched in stone .
Not only must those 6- and 12-mile limits be there , but they must be managed at a local level and properly devolved from Brussels , not just some token gesture .
If local fishermen have proper ownership of these waters , the conservation measures will work .
In the North Sea cod is disappearing .
Is it a coincidence that the cod are disappearing in the areas where the industrial fishing takes place ?
We take out millions of tonnes of sand eels and scour the sea beds , and the cod eat sand eels .
It is not a coincidence .
We must do something about it .
Norway and Iceland have good fishing stocks and they are not part of the common fisheries policy .
Again , is this a coincidence ?
I would agree here with Mr McCartin .
Do we need to make fishing resources part of the common fisheries policy ?
I will say this quite bluntly : if the Commission cannot run the common fisheries policy properly , then send it back to the Member States and let them do it .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in view of the recent tragedy involving the Prestige , I believe that these are worrying times for both the Galician fishermen , who are awaiting the Commission 's response , and who do not want these terrible events to happen again anywhere , and for all good people who defend the environment and sustainable development .

I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Souchet and Mr Busk on the quality of their reports ; and with regard to the report which in the end the chairman of the committee has taken charge of , I will comment on recital K and Amendment No 23 .
The area reserved for traditional fishing within a band of 6 miles - which was subsequently increased to 12 and extended to all Member States - was extended , for the last time , within the framework of the reform of the common fisheries policy of 1992 , for a period of ten years .
We have therefore been in a provisional situation for thirty years .
It appears that the aim was to allow for a progressive adaptation of the small-scale coastal fleet . And if they have not carried it out , I do not know when they are going to do so .
The European Commission 's proposal on the timetable for the reform of the common fisheries policy advocates permanently maintaining the prohibition of fishing within 12 miles - a proposal , by the way , whose legal validity has been called into question .
I believe that , at a time when we are facing enlargement and we have a Convention under way , paradoxically , this proposal would mark the beginning of a period of renationalisation of Community waters contrary to the principle of equal access for fishing vessels to all European Union stocks , which would also involve the additional risk of a possible future increase of this restricted area if it is adopted as a permanent exception .
Madam President , the Europeans in general and the people who live from the sea , in particular , will not understand why the waters are not communitarised , why we have this restriction - an exception to the principle of free access - why this sector is not being communitarised while the others are .
Therefore , from a strictly legal point of view , the establishment of a permanent exception should be ruled out forever .
I would like to encourage Members to vote against Recital K and Amendment No 23 , which , in my humble opinion , are contrary to Community law and European common sense .
Madam President , thank you for extending the debate to give me a chance to get here and participate .
It took me 16 hours to travel here to Strasbourg today .
Two weeks ago I went to Hobart in Tasmania in less time than it takes to get to Strasbourg .
When I find out that part of the reason for the delay is reindeer running on the runway of the international airport in Strasbourg , I find that utterly incredible .
Firstly , I understand that during the debate a great deal of concern has been expressed about the wreck of the Prestige off the coast of Galicia .
I hope that from what has been said in this debate my colleagues will agree with me that we should be calling for the Commission and the EU institutions to take all possible steps to aid Galicia in dealing with this horrendous problem .
The newspapers in Scotland today were calling it the ' Costa del muerte ' and saying that 3 000 tonnes of oil had already been spilled .
I understand that the tanker contained 70 000 tonnes of oil and the idea of a spillage on that scale is absolutely horrifying .
We are dealing here with a debate in which you have heard Mr Parish expressing a great deal of anger .
You have heard Mr Hudghton also expressing anger from a Scottish perspective .
Part of this debate deals with the Commission 's roadmap .
I should say at the outset that the recent scientific advice from ICES , which recommends the complete closure of the whitefish sector in the UK and Ireland , points to the fact that to have a roadmap is superfluous .
As far as the common fisheries policy is concerned we are on the road to nowhere .
What is the use of debating future fisheries policy in this Chamber tonight if for British and Irish fishermen there is no future ?
What is the point of discussing multi-annual management plans if tax and quotas in the North Sea , the west of Scotland , the Irish Sea and the Kattegat are to be set at zero for at least the next five years ?
What an indictment of the common fisheries policy !
What a sorry state of affairs that after 20 years of failed policies we are now looking at the destruction of an industry that is as old as mankind itself .
In the name of conservation our fishermen have been forced to dump millions of tonnes of prime fish back into the sea dead to comply with the lunatic quota scheme .
In the name of conservation our fishermen have suffered tie-ups , lay-offs , emergency closures , decommissioning , job losses and plunging incomes and now the message from the scientists appears to be that everything they have advised in the past has failed - all the technical conservation measures , all the increased mesh sizes , the square mesh panels to allow young cod to escape , all the emergency closures of cod spawning grounds , the 40 000 square miles of the North Sea closed for 12 weeks last year without one penny of compensation paid to the fishermen , the three years in a row that the Irish Sea has been closed for cod fishing , the massive decommissioning round that took over 100 demersal vessels out of the Scottish fleet alone .
All of these measures recommended by the scientists and ordered by the Commission have apparently failed .
It beggars belief .
There is no place in the common fisheries policy for our roadmap if 20 000 fishermen , fish processors and harbour workers are facing the closure of their industry and the loss of their jobs .
There is no justification for closing the whole whitefish sector .
Seven hundred thousand tonnes of cod were caught in the Northeast Atlantic last year .
That does not sound like a species on the verge of collapse .
Tens of thousands of big mature cod are being caught around the Faroes and Iceland where they have no CFP .
If the cod have migrated northwards due to global warming , pollution or the North Atlantic drift , then no amount of draconian measures will make them return .
It is true the cod have gone from the central part of the North Sea .
Nobody is disputing that .
But their place has been taken by prawns , now one of the biggest fisheries around the British Isles .
We know that cod is a key predator of prawns so it is not surprising that when the cod decline the prawns thrive .
But it is also a fact that prawns feed on cod larvae , so once the cod have gone they may never return .
That has certainly been the case in Canada .
I do not accept that the possible recovery of cod stocks is in any way an adequate justification for the sacrifice of the prawn , haddock , whiting , plaice , and flatfish fisheries .
Nor do I accept that there are anything like sufficient funds in the budget to even meet a fraction of the likely socio-economic impact costs which this catastrophic proposal implies .
So there is no point in discussing a roadmap tonight .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Madam President , Commissioner , in my opinion and in the opinion of the majority of the committee , I would imagine , the two related reports before us this evening have been prepared with undue haste .
Their quality is certainly not in keeping with the legal traditions of Europe and its Member States .
The two reports focus in particular on the approximation of laws on the confiscation of crime-related proceeds , instrumentalities and property .
They specifically concern the possibility of extensive powers of confiscation , in other words the confiscation not so much and not only of the proceeds of the crime itself but also of all the other property in the possession of a person sentenced to a very long prison sentence who cannot prove that the property is of lawful origin .
This part of the report , Commissioner Vitorino , was deleted by the committee , and what remains is therefore the possibility of confiscating crime-related proceeds .
However , a framework decision is not necessary to achieve this result in the European Community , for the legislation of almost all the European countries provides for the compulsory confiscation of crime-related proceeds or , at least , makes this possible .
Precisely in order to overcome the committee 's difficulties in accepting the inversion of the onus of proof - Amendment No 11 , amending Article 3 ( 1 ) - I suggested , by means of an amendment which is very reminiscent of the Italian legislation on the subject , the possibility of confiscating additional property - the property subject precisely to extended powers of confiscation - only where the prosecution has proved that the property possessed is disproportionate to the activity pursued or , in any case , exceeds the person 's income as declared for tax purposes .
The person convicted would then have the chance to prove the lawful origin of the property .
The provisions were therefore toned down but the onus of proof not actually inverted .
The committee was disconcerted , surprised , confused by this , and therefore rejected my amendment .
I therefore call upon the House to adopt this amendment , for this is the only way to include in the legislation extensive powers of confiscation , which is one of the goals of the proposal and , in my opinion , also a useful tool for combating organised crime .
It is based on a dual principle .
The prosecution has to prove that the person 's property is disproportionate : in other words , it has to prove that the value of the property exceeds the person 's real activities and their income as declared for tax purposes , while the person convicted has the option to prove that this property is of lawful origin .
If , however , the report remains in the form adopted by the committee , it will be absolutely useless , for - I stress - the European countries already have similar legislation in place and do not need a European Parliament framework decision .
Madam President , Commissioner , unlike our esteemed rapporteur - the basic approach of whose text I do , however , appreciate - I am convinced that our work is neither superfluous nor useless .
It is an appeal , a valuable reminder precisely for all the Member States , which are called to harmonise their legislation or , in any case , cooperate in the field of justice , in this very sensitive area - the confiscation of crime-related proceeds , instrumentalities and property - too .
It is without a doubt an important instrument because , as we know from daily experience , it is that instrument which will strike at the financial sources supporting organised crime , particularly crime organised on an international scale .
At the centre of this fight is the fight against what is known as money laundering between the international organisations , which now know no bounds either in Europe or worldwide .
I want to tell you something which the unforgettable Italian judge , Giovanni Falcone , said , which is relevant to this aspect of the matter .
As you will remember , he was subsequently assassinated by the Mafia .
At a hearing , ten years ago now , he said : the Mafia have not waited for the completion of the internal market to internationalise their activity .
That is why it is important to provide an international response to this internationalisation of crime from those in charge of the legal systems in the Member States .
It must be said that , in this , we have been preceded by both the United Nations and the Council of Europe , which have produced conventions which are a valuable point of reference for the subject we are debating too .
It must also be said , however , that the proper legislative basis is the action plan endorsed by the Amsterdam European Council of June 1997 and drawn on by the Vienna European Council of December 1998 .
These action plans specify the procedures for implementing international confiscation measures , which are , clearly , intended to supplement the various national measures .
The Council stresses the importance of each Member State- and I quote from the Council text - ' having well-developed and wide ranging legislation in the field of confiscation of the proceeds from crime ' and of ' introducing special procedures for tracing , seizure and confiscation of proceeds from crime ' .
As regards the debate on Mr Di Lello 's report in committee , we tabled a number of amendments which were all adopted by the committee .
Our rapporteur is of the opinion that these amendments impair the original text but we , of course , feel that they enhance it .
I will mention just one in particular - the amendment seeking to invert the onus of proof and transfer it from the defendant to the prosecution .
Madam President , everyone is aware of my group 's reservations about the Member State initiatives concerning the judicial European area .
The most effective and consistent method , in most of the matters that this involves , is the Community initiative , which we hope will be , following the work of the Convention , the prime working method , precisely because only the Commission is in a position to defend and promote the balance of values and principles that are not depleted by the construction of Europe 's security , which is drifting away from the Europeans ' deep-rooted component of rights and freedoms .
The history of the construction of the area of freedom , security and justice is still made up much more of isolated initiatives by the Members States , which make specific contributions concerning security as they see fit , given the concerns of their citizens .
Instead , we are seeing the dissipation of Commission initiatives to approximate legislation , in which efforts to prosecute crime are tempered by the protection of individual values . This is not the Commission 's fault , but a result of differences between the various Member States .
Furthermore , although there is no proof that the national area is the best suited to combating international organised crime , nor will it ever be proven that freedoms are best protected within the strict framework of national borders .
Take for example the motives for requests for accession and the examples of Spain and Portugal , which quickly became part of the European framework , and consequently , stable and deep-seated democracies .
This initiative and this report by Mr Di Lello , which adopt similar mechanisms for the freezing of property and evidence that I myself covered in this Parliament and to which the Council has still not given its agreement , deserve a better fate than the one befalling my report .
Therefore , regardless of the method and some points of relative disagreement , we are voting in favour of this initiative and this report as a sign that Parliament is pursuing its efforts to support the Tampere Council and the Commission 's sensible and genuinely European interpretation of the promises made at the European Council .
Because , Madam President , the electors do not want crime to go unpunished , specifically international crime , for the sake of the judicial sovereignty of each Member State .
Madam President , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on his work .
The seizure or confiscation of the proceeds of crime is indeed , as has been pointed out by the rapporteur too , a genuinely effective tool for combating organised crime .
I would add that the confiscation of goods is also a valuable way of building up compensation funds for the victims of organised crime , victims of heinous crimes which can be linked to terrorism , child abuse , the trafficking of human beings or the trafficking of arms or drugs , victims who - it is worth pointing out - are often victims twice over , firstly because , through no fault of their own , they are the victims of a crime , and secondly because they do not subsequently receive sufficient , timely compensation for the damages suffered .
Approximation of the rules and procedures governing the matter is therefore urgent and essential , especially where cross-border criminal activities are concerned .
With regard to the Kingdom of Denmark 's proposal , I agree with the rapporteur that its scope should be restricted to organised crime offences , and I also support his proposal to place the onus to prove the unlawful origin of property upon the prosecution rather than the defendant .
Last but not least , although I feel it is essential for it to be possible to confiscate crime-related proceeds , where these have been fictitiously transferred to the spouse or cohabitee or to another legal person , the prosecution must prove that the property of the spouse , cohabitee or other legal person does genuinely belong to the convicted person and that the other persons therefore only have fictitious title or access to it .
Madam President , I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Di Lello Finuoli , for his very comprehensive and helpful report on the two Danish initiatives on confiscation .
First , I shall address the framework decision on the confiscation of crime-related proceeds , instrumentalities and property .
As the rapporteur said , it is essential that all Member States adopt rules providing for confiscation in general .
The added value of this initiative , however , is that it addresses extended powers to confiscate the property of a person convicted of a serious crime , especially when the convicted person was involved in organised crime .
The problems that this initiative raises , as the rapporteur has said , are mainly concerned with the idea of extended powers of confiscation which consist essentially of extending confiscation measures to property which is not linked to the crime for which the person has been convicted , permitting confiscation of property belonging to a convicted person if the person cannot prove that he obtained the property through legitimate means , and permitting confiscation of property belonging to the spouse of the convicted person .
In my view , it should be possible to break the link between the offence for which the person has been convicted and the property to be confiscated , especially if that property is itself of illegal origin . However , the scope of application should be limited to serious offences linked to organised crime .
In addition , it is not the relationship between the convicted person and the third party which is important , but the fact that illegally obtained property was transferred to a third person .
So , like the rapporteur , I agree with the general approach adopted by the Danish Presidency .
I also support most of the amendments by the rapporteur , in particular the amendment which introduced the notion of proportionality , so that confiscation does not result in a loss of property disproportionate to the offence committed ; and the amendment which limits the scope of application of extended powers of confiscation to organised crime .
I have some doubts about the amendment the rapporteur has just mentioned , which demands that Member States avoid a reversal of the burden of proof in their legislation .
I sincerely do not see the need to include such a provision in this specific instrument on confiscation as this could be interpreted as conflicting with the principle of subsidiarity .
The Danish initiative envisages a certain flexibility concerning the burden of proof .
In this area , as Mr Di Lello Finuoli mentioned , we have to find the correct balance between combating organised crime on the one hand and on the other respecting the fundamental rights of the accused .
It is not necessary , therefore , to reverse the burden of proof .
However , we should consider the fact that the person convicted in connection with organised crime who cannot justify his lifestyle should face the prospect of confiscation of property unless this person demonstrates that he obtained the property by legitimate means .
As for the second Danish initiative for a framework decision on the execution in the European Union of confiscation orders , this second initiative deals , as Mr Marinho has just said , with the mutual recognition and execution of confiscation orders in the European Union .
It is closely connected with the initiative that has been presented on the freezing and confiscation of property , for which Mr Marinho was the rapporteur , and the Commission intends to maintain the overall coherence between the two initiatives .
Some of the issues raised by the second initiative are now under negotiation in the Council , with regard also to the framework decision concerning the mutual recognition of financial penalties .
We are therefore pleased that the rapporteur shares the positive view of the Commission on this framework decision .
Most of your amendments seek to ensure that decisions are recognised only when issued by judges .
We agree that it is important to be clear about the status of the issuing authority .
The initial text as you have mentioned confused judicial authorities , courts and judges .
This needs to be ratified .
We support your view that it is not appropriate for orders issued by investigating magistrates and prosecutors to fall within the scope of these instruments .
The rapporteur also suggests that the issuing state should be prohibited from imposing a custodial sentence as an alternative to confiscation .
Although we agree with the objective of this amendment , it seems to us that this issue might be better addressed in the first framework decision on the approximation of national rules on confiscation .
I would conclude by thanking the rapporteur and also the House for its patience during this late-night debate .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 10.09 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
Mr President , I was scheduled yesterday to speak in the debate on the media but , unfortunately , because of problems getting to Strasbourg , I was unable to make my timeslot .
I simply want to say that coming from the United Kingdom - renowned for its fogs , not to say for its smogs - I can in no way criticise the climate of Strasbourg .
Indeed , I want to congratulate and thank the airport staff for putting safety first .
I simply want to apologise to the presidency and to the House for missing my timeslot .
I had left my home at 6 a.m. in a brave attempt to be here .
In addition to your comments , which will go on the record , I would point out that you have the opportunity under Rule 120 ( 7 ) to make a written statement that will be appended to verbatim report of the debate in question .
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved . )
The next item is the report ( A5-0371 / 2002 ) by Elmar Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on enlargement : progress report ( COM ( 2002 ) 700 - C5-0474 / 2002 - 2002 / 2160 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , we are now approaching the crucial date .
In 23 days ' time in Copenhagen , we shall hopefully conclude the accession negotiations with 10 candidate countries , give impetus to the negotiations with Bulgaria and Romania and take a decision about the next phase of Turkey 's candidacy .
In that way , we shall approach the objective towards which we have been striving , namely a single , reunified Europe .
That is something which , today , we have anticipated .
We have carried out a trial run , and it emerged that having such a large Parliament with MEPs from 27 countries present here in Parliament is perfectly possible , as is the task of interpreting into 23 languages , as has been done .
Many doubters must now recognise that these things are perfectly possible .
It was an historic event we experienced this morning , and I think Parliament deserves to be applauded for having in this way demonstrated what we shall all be embarking upon in a year and a half 's time , as well as for having demonstrated that the process is feasible and for having in this way helped make the whole process irrevocable , so that there is no way back .
Yesterday was also historic in a way , however .
Yesterday , a ministerial meeting was , for the first time , held in Brussels with the participation of all 25 Member States .
It was , of course , an informal meeting .
It took place directly before the ordinary meeting of the General Affairs Council , and what we decided was of course what we had discussed with the new Member States .
We agreed , for example , that the new countries should accede on 1 May 2004 .
That will provide time for the ratification of the accession treaty and , at the same time , enable the new Member States to participate on an equal footing in the elections to the European Parliament .
It was also agreed that they will be able to have their own Commissioners in the present Commission as from the date of accession , that is to say from 1 May 2004 .
This naturally presupposes an understanding with this Parliament to the effect that 10 Commissioners will be able to accede without portfolios and , presumably , without being approved by Parliament , its being specified however that , when the new Commission is appointed , presumably as per 1 November , all the Commissioners will naturally have , as always , to be approved by Parliament , which by that time will have been newly elected .
We must particularly express our thanks , and demonstrate our respect , for the candidate countries ' contributions .
They have done an impressive piece of work in adjusting to all the criteria we have set .
That , as I understand it , is also the message of the report we are today debating .
The Copenhagen criteria have been the yardstick for measuring the countries ' political and economic reforms .
Radical reforms have been carried out .
Democratic structures have been developed .
Legislation has been introduced to protect human rights , and major progress has been made where minorities are concerned .
In the economic sphere , there has been an impressive transition from the planned economies of the past to market economies .
Price formation has been liberalised , privatisations have been carried out and there has been comprehensive restructuring within industry , agriculture and the financial sector .
Public administration has been reformed so that the EU 's acquis communautaire can be implemented .
When one considers how much effort has been expended in every single one of these areas , one cannot help but admire the candidate countries .
That is why we must not disappoint their justified expectations of now shortly being able to become fully-fledged members .
This impressive progress can be read about in the Commission 's progress report and strategy paper for enlargement , submitted on 9 October .
These described all 10 countries , and the Commission judged that the latter are ready to pursue membership .
Before they become Member States , however , further efforts are of course required .
The Commission has not said that the work has been done and that they are ready .
It has said that they can be ready in time .
As a reaction to the Commission 's progress reports , the candidate countries have clearly intimated that they will step up their efforts in those areas pointed out by the Commission , and these efforts will be supported with EU funds .
Some work remains to be done in the accession negotiations .
The Brussels European Council took a number of important decisions concerning the outstanding financial issues .
Intense negotiations are currently being conducted with the candidate countries on these matters .
Clearly , moreover , a successful outcome demands both effort and a willingness to compromise on the part of everyone involved - the present , as well as the future , Member States .
We are all aware that a certain economic framework has been set , but there is naturally room for negotiation within this framework .
The concluding of the negotiations in Copenhagen in 23 days ' time will be an incredible breakthrough .
There will then follow the work of preparation , signature and ratification .
Parliament will have to give its consent before the treaty can be signed , and Parliament 's statement to the effect that it wishes to approve the treaty as quickly as possible merely illustrates once again Parliament 's role as a driving force for rapid enlargement .
The Copenhagen European Council will not just concern itself with the 10 countries concerned .
Important decisions concerning Bulgaria and Romania , which still have some way to go , will also have to be taken .
In Brussels , clear support was expressed for these countries ' efforts to achieve membership by 2007 .
In response to the conclusions from Brussels , the Copenhagen European Council will have to make decisions concerning detailed timetables , including schedules and increased pre-accession aid , so that the accession process involving these countries can be taken forward .
The decisions taken in Copenhagen will , then , be designed to strengthen Bulgaria 's and Romania 's membership prospects .
With regard to Turkey , the Commission concludes that , since the last progress report , great progress has been made towards fulfilling the political Copenhagen criterion .
That is a gratifying development that must be maintained .
Developments in Turkey over the last year show that the decision taken in Helsinki in 1999 , when Turkey was accorded the status of a candidate country , was a correct one .
At the same time , it is noted that there is still work to be done on the road towards fulfilling the political Copenhagen criterion .
In order further to increase its membership prospects , Turkey was encouraged by the Commission to adopt further reforms and to implement those already adopted .
In view of the Seville conclusions , the Copenhagen European Council will be the key moment in the development of relations between the EU and Turkey .
That is why it is important to keep all the doors open in the run-up to the decision to be taken in 23 days ' time in Copenhagen .
I should like to conclude by thanking Parliament for its clear and unqualified support for enlargement , expressed this morning and reflected in the report submitted . It will also be reflected in the forthcoming debate .
Parliament has been involved in establishing the background against which the whole of the enlargement debate will take place .
It is of course MEPs ' and the people 's support that is so fundamental to the enlargement process .
We must ensure that this is maintained by creating the framework for a thorough and sober debate on enlargement , both in our own countries and in the new Member States .
The European Parliament 's debates on enlargement have an important role to play .
It is in the course of these that the signals are sent to the people of Europe concerning the significance of the decisions we are to take .
That is why I should like again to thank Parliament and the President personally , and also Commissioner Verheugen , for the huge amount of work done by the institutions of the European Union on various fronts .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like first to express very warm thanks to Mr Brok and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy for the report that has been presented , which demonstrates that the matter in hand has been gone into in considerable depth .
I would also like to express my gratitude for the very good cooperation that we have built up over the years .
It is a bit like the mood before Christmas , in which season we find ourselves , when you know you are doing something for the last time , and this is probably the last time that I will be able to thank the Committee on Foreign Affairs for its cooperation , at any rate as regards the big enlargement package .
I want to include in this expression of gratitude Parliament as a whole and in particular its President , Pat Cox .
I regard the initiative that Parliament has devised today as truly worthy of a European Parliament and a demonstration of the fact that those who represent Europe 's citizens here do not take enlargement to be a technical process , but rather a crucial part of giving our continent political unity .
It has also been made clear today that this process of enlargement has , if I may say so , a soul as well .
It has to be said that 2002 was a race over hurdles .
If I may be permitted a brief reminiscence , the problems that we were faced with at the beginning of this year , and the things that have passed before our eyes , included the acquisition of land in Poland , the decommissioning of the Ignalina power plant , the Bene ? decrees in the Czech Republic , elections in Slovakia , the Irish referendum , the Kaliningrad issue , and , finally , the financial package .
We really have gone from one obstacle to another , but we have been able to surmount them all .
Only one single hurdle still lies before us , and that is agreement on the final negotiation package .
Yesterday , the General Affairs Council gave the Presidency and the Commission a clear mandate , along with the required flexibility and the necessary powers , to conduct substantive and immediate talks with the candidate countries , which will involve submitting to them final packages tailor-made for each individual country .
There will be no package of proposals applying to all of them , but we will be meeting each country halfway and attempting to give sufficient attention to those of each country 's problems that are still on the table .
We are able to do that because we had two rounds of intensive discussions with the candidate countries immediately following the Brussels meeting of the European Council , and these were concerned with putting on the table everything that is as yet undecided .
I have already reported on this to the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
A large number of bilateral issues remain to be sorted out directly with the countries concerned .
These range from extraordinarily difficult issues such as , for example , the whole Polish and Hungarian problem with competition , to this or that rather bizarre special case , which has to be taken into account under the circumstances , as it can have an influence - a very great influence , moreover - on public opinion .
On the other hand , this round has taught us that the horizontal issues are in fact seen in the same light everywhere .
Here we are dealing with familiar topics , of which there are , in essence , four , all of them closely interconnected .
In the Budget chapter , there is the cash flow problem , especially in the first year .
There is the issue of the pressure that the financial package as a whole will put on the candidate countries ' budgets in 2004 , 2005 and 2006 .
Let me say this in order to clarify what I mean : the rules under which European funds are made available very definitely amount to an imposition on these countries ' budgets .
In one instance or another , this imposition results in the need to make substantial cuts in areas where I am sure nobody in this House would be happy to have cuts made .
Nevertheless , the country has no other option available to it if it wants to make full use of the funds available .
We are trying to find a way forward here which will enable us to avoid problems of this sort with budgets .
The Brussels Council , like yesterday 's General Affairs Council , on the one hand again confirmed the boundaries within which we have to operate , but also established a certain degree of flexibility , and I want to elucidate what this flexibility involves .
Admittedly , for example , the Council did say that we would reduce the funds set aside for the Structural and Cohesion Funds by EUR 2.5 billion - I might add , by the way , that it did so with the Commission 's agreement , because we too had come to the conclusion that it could be expected to be extremely difficult , over the three years , to actually fully incorporate these funds into the programming .
But it did not change the upper limit for expenditure decided on in Berlin .
When we point out that the Berlin framework has to be strictly adhered to and that the decisions taken in Brussels cannot be altered either , it follows that there is a certain amount of room for manoeuvre .
Looking carefully at what the Franco-German compromise , which brought about agreement in the Council , said about direct payments , one sees that it is only in the third year in which direct payments are to be made - 2006 , when they will reach 35 % - that what was decided in Brussels will be affected .
Agricultural expenditure is to be fixed at the 2006 level .
There is no mention of either 2005 or 2004 .
I want to use these two examples to demonstrate that we are right to say that what is on the table is not an offer that can only be either accepted in its entirety or rejected .
Rather , it leaves a certain amount of room in which negotiations can be conducted in a sensible way .
Once Copenhagen is over , the candidate countries will have do what the Committee on Foreign Affairs ' reports demand of them , that is , concentrate , with our help , on acknowledged deficiencies and weaknesses .
We will again report in detail on the results of these efforts .
Now that 1 May 2004 has been fixed as the date for the accessions , this final report will be put before the Council and Parliament on 1 November , and quite conceivably on 31 October 2003 , thus creating another opportunity for insisting that the commitments they have made should actually be met .
As regards Bulgaria and Romania , the Council yesterday adopted the Commission 's proposal for a more fully developed pre-accession strategy for both these countries , which applies to each country separately , so that there is no concerted strategy , but one for Bulgaria and one for Romania .
There is a difference from previous timetables for negotiations in that we used to always specify dates by which specific decisions had to be taken concerning the negotiations .
That is no longer necessary in this case , as nearly all the chapters have already been opened .
We are now setting benchmarks both in the short and medium terms , as well as those with reference to the date of accession , which each country should have reached by a specific point in time in order that accession , planned for 2007 , can go ahead .
After that , that is to say , post-Copenhagen - as was said in this House this morning - the parliaments will have their moment , when the political decision-making process is set in motion .
I do not need to say very much about this at this juncture , other than that the Commission will obviously be available to help Parliament in every way possible during the first months of 2003 , which will be crucial .
No matter which committee or forum asks for expert advice or expresses a need for discussion , we will be there for them .
That is for us the Number One priority at the beginning of next year , and President Prodi will have more to say about that when , tomorrow , he stands here and presents our work programme .
I believe that Parliament and the Commission will , together , be able to get on top of this extremely difficult task .
I would now like to say something more about Turkey , an issue that will also have a part to play next year .
I agree with the whole of what Mr Brok said - it could have been me speaking - about how the Turkey that will be able to join the European Union will be a quite different Turkey .
It is precisely that that we want to make easier by means of the pre-accession process .
I have to say that I do not see why we are to dispense with a strategy that has been so successful .
It was what we did in Helsinki , more than anything that had preceded it , that got the process of change in Turkey really moving .
As regards the date , the Commission has made its preference perfectly clear .
The Commission continues to insist on all the candidates being treated equally , which means that we can only talk in terms of a date for opening negotiations when the political criteria have indeed been fulfilled , which they very definitely have not been so far .
I also want to tell you that this issue has been brought up quite unilaterally , and without consultation , by the Turks .
Never and nowhere has there been any discussion of the possibility of naming a date for the commencement of negotiations before the political criteria have been fulfilled .
That is a unilateral demand on the part of Turkey , and neither I nor the Commission are willing simply to give in to a situation in which the other side steps up the pressure and says : ' If you do not give in to this pressure , you are causing a crisis in relations between us . '
That is not the way we should be treating each other .
That is something I want to make absolutely clear .
Related to that is the Cyprus question , on which I would like to say something briefly ; here , too , I think that the Helsinki strategy is proving to be the right one .
We would not have got where we are today without the Helsinki conclusions .
I have always taken the view that , when things move in Cyprus , they do so very , very late in the day , which means that two things have to be made abundantly clear in political terms .
Firstly , and whatever happens in the twenty-three days that remain to us , the decision on the accessions - including Cyprus ' - must be taken at Copenhagen .
It cannot be delayed ; it is the fulcrum and pivot of the whole strategy .
The solution we want is of course accession on the basis of fundamental agreement on the package proposed by Kofi Annan , but it goes without saying that it would also be possible to come to the necessary decisions in Copenhagen and then continue with the political process that is meant to bring about a peaceful solution in Cyprus .
It is very definitely not being said that the decision in Copenhagen will represent an end to the peace-making effort if matters have not already been brought to a conclusion before Copenhagen .
A whole range of issues have been raised in connection with the United Nations ' proposals , and these touch on the peace plan 's compatibility with European Community law .
I want to take this opportunity to reiterate that there are certain things that are not negotiable .
They are requirements that must be met .
A Member State must , for example , be capable of contributing to our institutions ' decision-making and must speak with one voice .
It must possess structures of central government strong enough to realise and enforce Community law , and it must adhere to and defend our core values and principles , these being democracy , human rights , the protection of minorities and so on .
The United Nations knew this to be an absolute conditio sine qua non from our point of view , and , having carried out an initial and careful scrutiny , I believe that I can say that the proposals comply with these conditions .
That leaves us with a second difficulty : what is asked of us is a consequence of the principle of two zones and two communities on which the proposal is founded .
What is being asked of us involves the adaptation of the acquis communautaire .
I do not think it necessary for us to engage with these questions at the present moment , but we should do so when they are put to us by those who want to live together in this state in the future .
For as long as they do not express their desire for this state , we do not , I believe , need to answer the question of which rules for co-existing in it are compatible with the acquis communautaire .
The important thing is that we should not be giving anyone the opportunity to use reference to Community law as a way of evading responsibility for the political decision that now has to be taken .
At the end of the day , this is about getting the final result accepted in the Member States and the candidate countries , and so I will say quite clearly that the final package for every single candidate country must also come complete with a decent measure of generosity on our part .
There is no room here for small-mindedness .
We are also getting to the point where we simply have to say that these concerns and aspirations are justified , and that , politically speaking , there will be no other way of explaining to people why joining the EU is the right thing for them to do .
In that event , we will have to meet the candidate countries halfway and make it clear that there will under no circumstances be such a thing as second-class membership .
I am very grateful to the Council Presidency for having already made this clear with reference to the Intergovernmental Conference .
The Commission takes the same view .
Once negotiations are completed , the countries that have done so will be participants with equal rights in the Intergovernmental Conference , and , moreover , right from the word go .
The same applies to the Commission .
All I want to say about safeguards and transitional periods is that these are perfectly normal instruments , which are intended to prevent us getting unpleasant surprises .
They are nothing more than a necessary way of dealing with risks .
I consider the work done by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , which is shortly to be completed , to be a valuable and important help in the final stage of these negotiations , and I would like to give voice to the hope that we will succeed , with the head of steam we are building up , in speeding up the train on the final stretch of its journey and enabling it to arrive punctually at the terminus in Copenhagen .
( Applause )
- rapporteur . ( FR ) Mr President , after 28 years of conflict and occupation , there is now a glimmer of hope for the peaceful reunification of Cyprus .
It is this glimmer of hope which inspired the draft resolution that we shall vote on tomorrow .
We hope that the two sides , who are running short of time and nearing the deadline , will be able to accept , after Copenhagen , the major points contained in Kofi Annan 's balanced proposals .
If so , the reunified and reconciled island of Cyprus will be able to join the European Union .
The Greek Cypriots have already accepted these proposals , within the deadline set by the Secretary-General , whereas the Turkish Cypriots are continuing to drag their feet .
Any intervention by a third party could still destroy the fragile balance of the UN plan .
It could have been destroyed , for example , by the threat from the Turkish Government , which insists that , even after a political solution has been found , Cyprus could not join the European Union before Turkey .
This kind of colonial attitude - which I refer to in passing - would jeopardise the independence and the sovereignty of Cyprus , confirmed by the Security Council resolutions .
It would also steamroller the opinion of the trade unions , opposition parties and the Turkish Cypriot population , 98 % of whom , in a recent survey , voted in favour of joining .
Since each candidate country is being judged on its own merits , a veto of this kind - if it were applied - could only be rejected outright and , in this scenario , the Copenhagen European Council would have the easy task of allowing the Republic of Cyprus to join the European Union , in line with the Helsinki conclusions .
The Turkish Cypriot would unfortunately lose out because this is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity .
In the same vein , I would also like the President-in-Office of the Council and Commissioner Verheugen to reiterate to Parliament that a possible failure of the constitutional referendum in one of the two parts of the island will not jeopardise Cyprus 's accession to the European Union .
We have not quite reached this point yet and today , hopefully , if we make a last-ditch effort , we will not miss out on this historic opportunity .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in his introductory speech , Mr Brok said something that is , basically , applicable to all the candidate countries , but also to the Czech Republic .
There is still room for catching up in both the economic and administrative spheres .
I do not wish to go into them in depth , as these things are basically not problematic , but will be resolved in the near future .
Please permit me to concentrate on one point that is of especial significance - the decrees of President Edward Bene ? , which we have discussed at very great length in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
On behalf of our group , I have tabled a final amendment , which I would like to put before you now .
It reads thus : ' The European Parliament refers to the report commissioned by it and supports its common conclusions , namely that the presidential decrees do not pose an obstacle to Czech accession to the EU , meaning that all Union citizens will enjoy the same rights on Czech territory after accession , that all judgments handed down in absentia have been quashed , and that Law No. 115 of 8 May 1946 has no justification for its existence from the point of view of modern jurisprudence ' - let me repeat - ' that Law No. 115 of 8 May 1946 has no justification for its existence from the point of view of modern jurisprudence ; regards the statements of principle made in the German / Czech Declaration of 21 January 1997 as a sound basis for reconciliation , which represents the moral foundation for European integration ; considers a political gesture by the Czechs to this effect as desirable . '

This text respects the dignity of all those who suffered during the past decades , although it is important again to call to mind the sequence of the historic events .
First came rule by the Nazis , then the Czech lands were occupied by Nazi-ruled Germany , then there was the war , and then came the expulsions .
A very , very large number of people suffered - Czechs , Sudeten Germans , Hungarians , Roma and others .
I believe that this text respects the dignity of all of them , but also respects the dignity of all those who live in the Czech Republic and in the European Union today , of all those who are alive , but had nothing personally to do with these events and who are looking forward , to whom it is the present and the future that matter .
Beyond that , this text makes no demands and exerts no pressure on the Czech Republic .
Let me conclude by saying that , as my final amendment does justice to all sides , I ask you to vote tomorrow to accept it , along with the report as a whole .
Mr President , as rapporteur for Estonia , I find myself thinking back to that remarkable day nine and a half years ago , when I arrived in Estonia for the first time .
Even then , there was tangible evidence of a firm intention of clearing away the past , looking forward , uniting the people 's own abilities with the possibilities of modern technology and bringing about an unparalleled modernisation of the economy and the administration .
It is true that the drastic economic measures brought social hardship in their wake , but such things may also be observed in other countries .
It appears to me , however , that Estonia 's economic structure has in the meantime become healthier than in many other candidate countries .
This increases the possibilities for now giving greater attention to society 's social cohesion .
Although I have already started on the problem areas , I would very much like to recall what Commissioner Verheugen said , that we have to show a bit of generosity now that we have reached the final negotiation stage .
I wish to put this in specific terms by saying that the European Union is not going to be flooded by such things as Estonian milk , which , if it goes anywhere , will end up seeping away into Finland .
We have seen , though , how , for ten years , the Estonians left their agriculture to the mercies of world market conditions .
If we had done that in the European Union , we would surely show particular concern for those who survived such drastic treatment .
Nothing less than that , I believe , should we show to the Estonians where this is concerned .
So please let there be some generosity towards this sector in Estonia !
There are other problems in such areas as the extraction of oil-shale , where structural problems are added to environmental ones , and the curious thing is that it is in this sector that the minority are particularly heavily represented .
There too , I believe , we in the European Union have to take some share in investment .
But , all in all , I want to say to our Estonian friends : ' Tere tulemast ja kõike head , kallit söbrad eestist ! '
In my role as deputy chairman of the delegation for the EU 's relations with Lithuania , I would like to make the brief observation that , when we had our JPC meeting there last week , we had extensive discussions of why we were not very happy about the possible practical effects of the agreement on Kaliningrad .
We fear that the Lithuanian authorities in particular , but also travellers themselves , will have to put up with a certain number of things being technically inadequate or impracticable , and we hope that it may be possible to find even better solutions .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , twelve years ago , the extraordinary event symbolised by the fall of the Berlin Wall , which separated two political blocs , but which also divided a people , to some extent represented a pioneering step in the process of European enlargement towards Central and Eastern Europe .
It was following this reunification that the European Council , meeting in Copenhagen , in 1993 , decided to integrate into the European Union the associated States of Central and Eastern Europe that wished to join .
The Copenhagen European Council made it clear that the accession of these countries would depend on their fulfilment of the obligations inherent in their participation in the Union .
We are all familiar with these obligations , which are known as the Copenhagen criteria , and so there is no need , in this context , to make specific mention of them .
In addition to German reunification , we cannot ignore two other political events that , although lacking the same symbolic power , have taken on particular importance in the development of the next steps in this process of European reunification .
I am referring , first of all , to the Nice Summit , at which the European Heads of State and Government undertook to reform the Community institutions , in the aim of ensuring that these are adapted to a Europe that is enlarged by a further twelve countries .
We are all aware that failure in this area would leave the process of enlargement compromised for many years to come .
Whatever opinion we may have about the institutional solutions that were reached , the fact is that since Nice the candidate countries have at least been aware of their relative positions in the Union and of what they can expect in the future .
Secondly , I am referring to the Gothenburg Summit , which brought the Swedish Presidency to a close .
In their conclusions , Europe 's leaders categorically asserted that the process of enlargement was irreversible , having for the first time set a deadline - the end of 2002 - for closing negotiations with the candidate countries that are ready at that time , with the stated aim of these countries being able to participate as Members in the 2004 elections to the European Parliament .
Today , as 2002 draws to a close and with the European Parliament having met this morning for the first time in plenary sitting with the representatives of all the candidate countries , our duty , and also our desire , is to applaud the extraordinary efforts that these countries have made to adapt their political , economic , social and judicial structures to the model of the European Union , efforts which , above all , have made this moment a victory that belongs to them and which must be acknowledged .
As one Hungarian Member stated this morning , we can only regret the fact that the Communist dictatorship that subjugated these countries for more than forty years prevented them from participating in the marvellous adventure of European integration from the very beginning .
These words do not suggest , however , a lack of awareness of the fact that the Union is an undertaking that involves risk and that , with enlargement , this risk increases through the bringing together of two worlds that , unfortunately , are at highly disparate stages of development , that will accentuate the differences between the richer regions and the less prosperous ones and will increase the proportion of the population living in the least-favoured regions .
It is , therefore , to be expected that questions are raised and that fears are expressed , for example , with regard to regional cohesion policies being less effective or with regard to difficulties of funding structural policies in the economic and social spheres .
It is this Europe , however , so full of challenges and difficulties , whose recent history has accelerated to the speed of light and which has seen all its balances change in a little over half a dozen years , that has separated the strong from the weak and the winners from the timid and those resigned to their fate .
Mr President , one of the countries that has distinguished itself in its efforts to fall into line with the European Union , in the aim of joining it , is Hungary , whose progress and current situation I have sought to monitor as rapporteur for this Parliament .
As expected , the Commission 's last periodic report on Hungary concluded that , given the progress made by the date of its publication , this country would be in a position to conclude negotiations by the end of the year and to assume the obligations arising from accession in accordance with the timetable that had been set .
This comes as no surprise .
Hungary has always been one of the leading candidate countries with regard to the dynamic of negotiations and its achievements , specifically in the economic field , have been hailed as amongst the best in the region .
The Hungarian economy still has one of the best performances in the region , and is characterised by one of the highest growth rates in Europe , the lowest rate of inflation seen in the last ten years , a relatively low unemployment rate , and a steady increase in trade with the European Union .
In the resolutions adopted in the last two years , Parliament has drafted a number of recommendations , specifically intended to encourage the pursuit of reforms in the field of integrating the Roma minority , to strengthen social dialogue and to adopt a media law , or even with regard to observing the rules that govern the public markets .
Today , we can say that progress has been made in these as in many other fields and that the efforts made by the Hungarian authorities have been consistent .
To conclude , I only wish to say that Hungary is in a good position to join the European Union in 2004 , although it must continue to pursue its preparations in line with the commitments it has given throughout the negotiations , and that we hope to have Hungary with us in the next legislature of this Parliament , with the same parliamentary representation enjoyed by the current Members States with an equivalent population .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are living through one of the most important periods in modern European history .
All of us , nations , governments , parliaments , and we here in the European Parliament , are starting and writing a new chapter , with vision and realism , with hope and firmness .
And every country , every nation , must feel equal and secure within this development .
In this sense , Lithuania - for which I am acting as rapporteur - must not feel , when it comes to the final arrangements for Kaliningrad , that it has been treated differently , as far as its sovereignty is concerned , from the other Member States of the European Union .
Malta , for which I am the Socialist Group 's shadow rapporteur , has nothing to fear .
Besides , all of us Mediterranean people , especially those of us from the islands , know that the human spirit creates and develops against the deep blue of the sea and sky and that , as sure as night follows day , the creative spirit will win through .
The political determination of the Union , which must not tolerate any conceptions which might allow third parties to intervene in Union 's activities , is being judged in Cyprus , the most institutionally and economically advanced of the candidate countries .
The Union 's determination to support any solution that respects the acquis communautaire and the need for the Republic of Cyprus to be an operational state is also being judged .
That being so , the integration of Cyprus in the European Union is a foregone conclusion , irrespective of progress made in resolving the political problem .
I trust that Romania and Bulgaria will soon become members of the European Union .
I think Romania in particular is being treated a little more harshly than the other countries and I must point out that its quota of parliamentarians is out of proportion to its population .
As a Greek , I expect that Turkey will soon become a fully paid-up member of the European Union .
By which I mean a democratic Turkey , like all the other European countries .
Kemal Ataturk , who planned a modern state for the Turkish people , will be vindicated once all the institutional reforms have been completed and implemented , once the military leadership obeys and executes the decisions taken by the democratic political leadership in Turkey .
I am positive that the new political leadership in Turkey has realised that the way to build Europe is through democratic procedure , not eastern haggling .
Finally , we are not accountants .
We are politicians who need to pave the way for the new Europe with visionary realism and that is precisely what we shall be judged on and that is where we shall be vindicated .
As a Greek , I wait and hope , as do you Commissioner , for the Treaty for the new Europe of the twenty-first century to be signed in Athens , in the shadow of Pericles ' Acropolis , of Pnyka Hill , the site of the Municipal Church , and of the tribune from which Saint Paul preached to the Athenians .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , with the permission of the Members of this House , I would like to use this speech to make a statement relating to my twin roles , as rapporteur for Malta , and also as co-chairman of the Joint Committee on the Czech Republic .
Today makes me proud , as Parliament has today demonstrated its openness and signalled to the candidates for accession that they are welcome among us .
European parliamentarism has thereby shown signs of being very much alive .
The impression I get from today 's debate with the candidate countries is of how self-evident the whole thing is , that it is normal for Europe to meet together , for the first time in a peaceful , voluntary and democratic way .
For Austria in particular , a country in the heart of Europe , this means that , following Europe 's division by the consequences of the Second World War , a corner has been rounded on the way to a better , more economically and socially stable Europe with an added value in terms of security policy .
We are continuing a Central European tradition , one which has been particularly brought home to us today by the 90th birthday of Otto von Habsburg , the committed MEP and son of an emperor .
We must not , of course , allow the historical perspective to distract our attention from the problems of today .
There is still much to be done in the run-up to accession - corruption has to be combated , just as administrative systems and an independent workable justice system have to be built up .
There must of course be safety in the nuclear field , and so I welcome the expectation expressed in the report on the Czech Republic that the bilateral undertakings negotiated by the European Commission with regard to Temelin will be adhered to in full , and that , furthermore , power stations such as Ignalina and Koslodui , with parts of Bohunice , must be closed down .
We can welcome the transitional arrangements that demonstrate flexibility in making it possible for the labour market and vulnerable sectors of the economy to be protected .
The progressive introduction of direct payments to farmers in the candidate countries - primarily Poland - also makes sense .
Such arrangements are in no way a handicap .
Processes of integration have always been accompanied by transitional arrangements and by temporary safeguard clauses such as those to which you , Mr Verheugen , have referred .
If enlargement were to fail , the Austrian economy would lose EUR 270 million per annum .
The removal of barriers to trade alone amounts to EUR 450 million per annum , meaning that every Austrian is investing EUR 28 per annum in enlargement .
Enlargement of the EU is where our future lies .
There are problems from the past that need to be dealt with , and it is in this sense that the additional clause proposed by Jürgen Schroedter - who is the rapporteur on the Czech Republic - on the subject of the Bene ? decrees , should be understood .
I wish to fully endorse what he said in his speech advocating support for this article .
By giving broad-based support to this amendment , Parliament would be sending out a positive message .
Let me now turn to my own report on Malta .
It is a good thing that there is also a Mediterranean component to enlargement .
Malta is a small island state , and there is no doubt that it is in the European Union that its future lies .
The problems of integration to be overcome have essentially to do with agriculture and subsidies to dockyards .
Malta also has a profoundly European heritage .
Austria has a particular interest in Malta because thousands of our holidaymakers go there every year and because we have a share in the privatised airport .
Speaking in political terms , we hope that the outcome of a referendum on Malta 's accession to the EU will be accepted as the people 's democratic choice , for there will not be a third chance !
Mr President , many of today 's speakers have called this a historic occasion - and rightly so - and I do not want to fall into the trap of repeating them .
However , as a European citizen , the son of a Polish father , and as rapporteur for Poland , I would like to greet and welcome all the members of the Polish parliament who are seated in the visitors ' gallery , both those who are going to become part of our group and all those who will join other groups as well .
The report on Poland emerged from the vote in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy in exactly the form I would have wished , in that all the amendments I supported were adopted and all those to which I was opposed were rejected .
It is a well-balanced report which acknowledges the considerable progress made but expresses a number of reservations regarding the self-interested move of members of the civil service , which is evidence of a rather exaggerated interpretation of the spoil system , and the issue of state control of the press and television .
Some progress had been made in this area but the situation is now once again at a standstill , if not regressing , and so I have tabled an amendment on the matter which I hope will be adopted tomorrow .
I have to say that , throughout my work as rapporteur for Poland , I have constantly borne in mind something which Pope John Paul II said - and I am pleased to be able to mention his name here ; I have not heard it spoken this morning despite the fact that he has been at the forefront of European reunification - something he said during an interview he granted me .
When I asked His Holiness who would benefit most from the reconciliation he so longed for between the two Europes , he replied that the Europe of the former communist countries would be able to bring most to the other Europe because these countries ' experiences under the communist system had taught them wisdom .
This morning 's debate gives me the hope , expressed by President Cox and Commissioner Verheugen too , that this prophecy will come true .
I would like to see more conviction on the part of the Polish Members of the European Parliament - I have to say that we heard some Polish speakers this morning who were not representative - and I would like to see them share with us that strength , that drive which led the Poles to pull down walls , to form Solidarnosc and to pave the way for the fall of communism , which was a decisive factor in the building of our common future .
( Applause )
I am afraid I must remind our guests that the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure do not allow those sitting in the gallery to show either agreement or disagreement with what is being said .
Mr President , today , I will be devoting my entire speech to Slovakia , the country for which I am rapporteur on behalf of Parliament .
Slovakia has reached the final leg of the negotiations on EU membership , which merits congratulations in view of the fact that , four years ago , that country was still in political isolation .
In two consecutive elections , the population left no doubt as to its democratic and pro-European persuasion .
According to opinion polls , support for the EU remains strong .
Today is not the right time to reach a final verdict ; this is something that Parliament will be doing at the beginning of next year .
We still , of course , await the outcome of the Copenhagen Summit , but I am convinced that Slovakia will be capable of bringing the negotiations to a successful end .
Today 's resolution , therefore , also gives a kind of limited snapshot in time ; we will be drawing up the full report next year .
As with the other candidate countries , a great deal needs to be done before its accession in 2004 .
I should like to give Slovakia two priorities in this respect .
In my view , strengthening its administrative capacity is the most important priority .
It must be possible to implement EU rules satisfactorily and to spend EU funds properly .
This is also in line with the aspiration for a more transparent government that will crack down hard on corruption .
Slovakia 's new government has announced initiatives in this connection , and we are awaiting the reports with interest and some trepidation .
In the same framework of a transparent society and transparent government , it is important that they should continue to reform the judiciary and the structure around it .
We still have major anxieties about the situation of the Roma , not only in respect of Slovakia , in fact .
Every time I am directly confronted with their living conditions , I realise that of all the intentions that have been formulated over the past years , too little has as yet been realised in practice .
I know that the problems cannot be solved over the space of a few years .
The implementation of policy costs time and money .
This is why I am asking the Slovakian Government for a kind of multi-annual commitment to solve those problems that will continue to exist post-accession .
The same text can , in fact , be found in the report on the Czech Republic .
Moreover , I am of the view that the position of the Roma in the enlarged European Union will be so unique that the Convention will have no choice but to devote attention to it .
We are asking a great deal .
We are doing this in the expectation that the Slovaks will recognise the fairness of this , just as they can expect fairness in the final assessment .
We cannot ask more from new Member States than from the current Member States .
This is why I take exception to the often unfair criticism levelled at Slovakia , including in my own country .
Slovakia has drawn a line under its Meciar past .
It is the achievements today that count and this is on which we should base our judgment .
Mr President , new cultures , including the culture of Slovenia - the country for which I am the rapporteur - will add value to and , at the same time , bring new security for both themselves and the European family as a whole .
This , then , is the time of half-full glasses , of optimism , of benefits .
Of course , the time of difficulties , of half-empty glasses , will come when the governments have to attempt to win the acceptance of their people .
The European Socialists have always fought for enlargement .
The countries bordering on the Mediterranean , such as Italy , which are the gateway to Central Europe , have played a major role in the process .
We are in favour of opening the doors wide to those who want to become part of the European family .
Clearly , the right to become part of the club is not automatically granted : membership is won through very hard work , as the negotiators of the candidate countries are aware .
I imagine that they might even , on occasion , have been disconcerted by the tough nature of the negotiations .
Slovenia is the wealthiest of the candidate countries , and it has a European institutional tradition too .
The main problem in the phase of preparation for accession was speeding up the administrative aspect of court cases and resolving the problems left over from the previous regime .
The situation was therefore similar to that of a number of other candidate countries but less complex .
At the time when much criticism was being expressed a number of years ago , it was always difficult to find any major sins or shortcomings in Slovenia which were not explained by the nature of daily life or by the number of people passing through the country .
However , all the candidate countries , including Slovenia , will find it difficult to meet their commitments when they actually join Europe .
In any case , the reports of the international organisations on Slovenia talk of a functioning market economy and respect for the Copenhagen criteria setting the level to be achieved .
A paragraph has been included in the report which mentions combating fraud and corruption and combating drug trafficking .
These are phenomena which are certainly present , but to a much lesser degree than in other countries .
Mentioning them may make the text unbalanced : the best solution would be just to delete the paragraph .
Moreover , out of the 102 countries in which the level of corruption has been recorded , Slovenia ranks only twenty-seventh and , what is more , organised a conference on corruption in 2002 .
It therefore cannot be said that nothing is being done in this area .
Lastly , on a technical note , the term ' denationalisation ' which I used in the original text has been translated in some language versions as ' privatisation ' , which has a different meaning .
Mr President , the process of enlargement is one that we all broadly welcome .
While making great demands of the candidate countries , it is a pity that the European Union has not already put its own house in order .
In particular I am thinking of the need for reform of the common agricultural policy and the Commission 's financial management .
It still seems incapable of properly accounting for the massive public funds put at its disposal by our taxpayers .
I also hope that , once the candidates have overcome their first flush of unquestioning enthusiasm for the European Union , they will begin to adopt a more sceptical attitude to many aspects of the European Union project .
After all , since most of them have rejected the ghastly communist experiment that so distorted and corrupted their countries for the past 50 years , I hope they would wish to oppose inappropriate intrusion on their national sovereignty and the tide of leftist political correctness that is too often generated by European Union institutions .
Speaking now as the rapporteur for Bulgaria , I especially welcome the parliamentary delegation from Bulgaria .
I recognise the enormous progress that Bulgaria has made in economic , political and social reform in recent years .
Its ambition to join the European Union by 2007 is realistic and we should say so . We must give it every assistance to achieve this ambition .
Bulgaria has made great strides in recent years .
There is now a properly functioning market economy and progress has been made on privatisation .
The proposals for reforming the civil service and for tackling corruption are also an essential basis for political and economic change .
So much needs to be done in so many areas .
There is a vast grey economy and there is high unemployment , features not entirely unknown in some of the countries that are already European Union Member States .
Macro-economic progress has yet to trickle down into tangible economic benefits for the population at large .
There are still major areas of poverty .
This applies not just to the Roma population , where more vigorous action is required , but to Bulgarians more generally .
The most vulnerable element in any population are the children and I have drawn particular attention to the need for more resources , including Community funds , to be targeted in bringing about major improvements in child welfare and childcare .
I must mention the Kozlodvy nuclear power plant and in particular the closure dates for units 3 and 4 .
Strong opinions have been voiced on this issue and unfortunately it has become a symbolic argument , with people digging in on both sides .
Safety considerations must always be paramount when dealing with nuclear power .
But there seems to be no good reason on safety grounds why closure should not take place in 2008 , rather than 2006 , if this would make a significant difference to Bulgaria 's economic situation .
The EU peer review , conducted under the auspices of the Council , should make this decision , taking account of the results of the IAEA mission in June and an objective analysis of the economic consequences of closure .
Mr President , I wish to thank the Conference of Presidents for creating and sustaining this unique part-session .
I should also like to thank our former colleague , Mr Haarder , and his team because they are creating an historic Danish Presidency .
I pay particular tribute to the Commissioner himself and to his team .
The Commissioner 's powerful leadership has accepted no obstacle that would delay enlargement and he and his team have successfully tackled and overcome immense and daunting problems and have brought us to the happy position we enjoy today .
I welcome most particularly in that context the Romanian parliamentary team .
Romania , in common with other candidate countries in this two-part but single enlargement , has made substantial progress and her progress has been particularly marked since December 1999 when the new government took office , after the Helsinki Conference .
If Romania follows faithfully the Commission 's new and excellent roadmap and has the support of the Commission , the Council of Ministers and Parliament , Romania can most definitely reach her target date for EU entry of 1 January 2007 and reach that date not by right but by her own achievement .
I therefore wish profoundly to retain that target date in Parliament 's report .
I am confident that by the end of this week Romania will become a member of Nato .
By 1 January 2007 , with hard work , consistency , application and our support , she could be here .
I commend Romania 's progress to this House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets , I wish to emphasise that the political and economic advantages of enlargement will of course far outweigh the potential costs to the Budget , but , despite this , there is still a need to give budget policy a framework that is reliable in the medium and long term and capable of gaining the support of a majority on both sides .

We are then , to take one example , talking in terms of a Budget framework with some EUR 15 billion of expenditure in 2006 , but , on the other hand - as we so often forget - we will have our own resources , amounting to some EUR 5 billion , which the new Member States will already have contributed to the European Union 's Budget .
This means that it is important to again clarify the positions on questions of principle relating to the adjustment of the new Financial Perspective , which were voted on in plenary in June .
Since then , the Council , at its Brussels Summit , has also adopted parts of this position taken by Parliament , examples being the principle of progressive integration for direct payments to agriculture , the clarification that , after enlargement , none of the new Member States should become net contributors , and a ruling intended to prevent a country from being in a worse financial position after accession than it was immediately before it .
It is very important to me that the necessary adjustment of the Financial Perspective is to be made on the basis of Article 25 of the Interinstitutional Agreement and on the proposal of the Commission jointly - that is what it says - jointly with the Council and Parliament and by the appropriate majorities .
For example , Mr President-in-Office , I would expect it to be made clear in the Budget conciliation that Parliament is continually to be supplied with comprehensive information on the progress of the negotiations , and I would expect a trialogue on the subject to achieve agreement on how we are to move the Financial Perspective 's adjustment procedure forward over the coming months .
The many issues still open include such questions as : how , for example , are we to understand the formulation by the Berlin European Council , in item 12 of its Final Conclusions , which expressly states that a clear distinction is to be drawn between the new Member States and the expenditure by the old EU ?
Will this statement from Berlin continue to stand or will every heading in the post-enlargement Budget be common to all of us ?
That has to be clarified .
If the accession date is to be 1 May 2003 , will there be a supplementary Budget ?
Does it even make sense to spend , as it were , four months organising pre-accession programmes , leaving them to run their course , and - whether it be in agriculture , structural policy or internal policy - treat the new members as such only after eight months have elapsed ?
It is also , I believe , in issues concerning the new neighbours and partnerships that there has to be a very careful examination of which financial adjustments have to be carried out in such areas as heading 4 , which deals with foreign policy .
This affects both Turkey and other neighbours and new partners , with whom we will have to talk about quite specific new partnerships .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today is marked by a good sense of community and by confidence in Europe 's future .
Positive emotions help to overcome the difficulties that still await the candidate countries .
Processes of economic adjustment call for the greatest political and social commitment on the part of all sides .
The processes of restructuring heavy industry and mining alone will call for an intensification of accompanying measures to combat rising unemployment .
This makes it necessary to use all available measures that might help to prevent it , and to step up the social dialogue in the candidate countries .
That alone will guarantee that social and labour legislation will continue to progress along democratic lines .
We talk a great deal , and on many occasions , about the social dimension of Europe , but deliberately forget to point out that legislation on social affairs is just as important a constituent part of the acquis as are , for example , the provisions on competition .
The transposition of the social acquis has an importance extending right across Europe , as it can be a means towards achieving stability preventing potential conflicts .
In view of this , I ask you to adopt the two amendments in the name of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , tabled by Mr Oostlander and myself .
In the time that remains to us before the candidate countries accede , much remains to be done in the areas of employment policy , economic policy and social policy .
It is incumbent on those Member States that share borders with the candidate countries to support cross-border cooperation and press for advances in it .
Workers in these regions must be helped to come to terms better with changes in the labour market .
This alone will enable us to dismantle prejudices that still affect the freedom of movement of services and workers .
I wish to conclude by emphasising that , in any case , the candidate countries deserve the greatest respect for the efforts they have made to date with accession to the EU in mind .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council and dear parliamentary colleague , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , enlargement is an historical and moral need and a unique opportunity to reconcile this continent with itself .
Underlying the debate we have held this morning and the debate we are holding on Mr Brok 's report - whom I would like to congratulate on his work - is a need : to reflect in depth on ourselves , on our role in the world , on what the European Union project has been , what it is at the moment and what we want it to be within the context of an enlarged Union .
And in terms of this reflection , I believe the work of the European Convention is of fundamental importance and I believe we must seek a suitable formula for involving - as has been requested this morning - the representatives of the candidate countries in the work of the Intergovernmental Conference .
With regard to the short term , I am convinced that , thanks to the efforts of the European Commission , of the Member States and of the candidate countries , within a few weeks , in Copenhagen , we will be able to reach a reasonable and fair agreement .
I also believe that we will be able , on the basis of equal , and therefore non-discriminatory , conditions for all , to mark the way , by means of the pre-accession strategies which have been expressed here this morning and by concluding the negotiations under way .
Nevertheless , Mr President , I believe it is important that we do not get bogged down in the immediate and the present .
I believe that History is not only written as a narrative using the preterite tense . Because , if we do not have a clear vision of our future ambitions and projects , not only will we be unable to design our future , but we will also have great difficulties understanding the past .
Today , Mr President , History is being conjugated in the present tense .
And , in this historic present we are living through , the European Union is taking shape as one of its main protagonists .
Today it is presented as an economic , financial and industrial power , but it has a great and essential need to affirm its presence on the international stage and to provide itself with a security and defence policy which will allow us to confront the new types of threat , especially following the attacks of 11 September .
Mr President , we must overcome the challenges involved in enlargement , we must take advantage of all potential and all synergy , we must build a unified political and economic area which will bring together more than 500 million people , of which , in the initial phase , 300 will use the same currency .
Mr President , I believe that , in summary , it is a question of us , with generosity and a vision of the future , being able , although figures are important , to put ideals before figures .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner Verheugen , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to preface my observations with an expression of my own gratitude and that of my group , for this debate , and also for all the work of reporting on enlargement and of preparation for it , which I address to the Commission among others .
To say this , Commissioner , is not just to pay lip-service , for we have indeed received all the information we needed whenever we needed it .
We have carried on the debate in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , and I also want to thank that committee 's chairman , not only for his report but also for all the cooperation that was involved .
It is my belief that all groups and all the political forces on the committee did their best to accompany this process in a critical frame of mind and have helped to make it , and enlargement , a success .
I have two specific points that I wish to address in addition to what my fellow-Members have said about the individual countries and also about the general aspect , which was apposite and intelligent .
These have to do with two very real problems .
My first point has to do with Cyprus , specifically with the UN Secretary-General 's proposal on the subject , which has been welcomed by all sides .
There is , however , one item in Annex IX that could lead to misunderstandings ; I refer to the proposals relating to Article 1 ( 1 ) on a referendum of the citizens in this divided country when the Basic Agreement is adopted .
The questions in this referendum are to be answered with ' yes ' or ' no ' .
They deal firstly with the new structure of the state and then with Cyprus ' accession to the European Union .
It is my belief that the European Union ought , quite independently of this - I am glad that I can already expect something of you , Commissioner - to decide this question in accordance with the Helsinki accords , and Cyprus should have its say on the subject .
The second issue has to do with Turkey .
I would like to remind you that we are not debating Turkey today , but are engaged in the debate on enlargement , and , although Turkey has had candidate status since 1999 , it is not one of the countries expecting to accede in the immediate future .
The Copenhagen political criteria have still not been fulfilled , despite Turkey 's great efforts in that direction , the great successes it has had and the great progress it has made .
I therefore see no reason to talk in terms of this or that date .
Let me tell you this , Mr President-in-Office of the Council : fixing a date is not an issue , at any rate not for us !
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen and future fellow MEPs up in the public gallery , this is an historic day , a kind of preliminary celebration before the big celebration we are soon to hold together .
It is a celebration that will mark the end of the long journey we have made together with the goal of jointly achieving the unification of Europe .
Strasbourg and the region we are in were witness to the ways in which attempts were made to unify Europe in the past .
All the anonymous graves in which thousands of French and German boys lie buried are a tragic reminder of the way in which violence and compulsion were used to impose European unity .
The Berlin Wall , on the other hand , was , inversely , a way of preventing people from meeting and ideas from being shared .
What is unique about the EU is the brilliant , but historically unusual , idea of bringing people together at the negotiating table instead of through trench warfare .
My colleague , Mrs Paulsen likes to say that the EU is about giving power to bureaucrats rather than to soldiers , and that is quite a good way of putting it .
The EU consists , however , not only of bureaucrats but also of politicians with ideas and visions .
The European Parliament 's combined idea and vision has been the fact that it is convinced of the advantages of developing European cooperation together .
With stubbornness and consistency , we have given impetus to enlargement by establishing clear dates , requirements and staging posts .
There have sometimes been stormy moments for governments and domestic policy , but we have stood firm .
Mr Brok 's report is a clear expression of this agreement .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party supports the report .
For ourselves as liberals , enlargement - or reunification - has been the issue to which we have given top priority for many years .
It is a natural follow-on from the fall of the Berlin Wall and the breakthrough for democracy , freedom and the market economy in Eastern and Central Europe .
The EU has for a long time been incomplete , with members only from Western Europe .
It is only by acting together that we can defend and stand up for our common values and ambitions : freedom , democracy , human rights and a functioning market with growth and prosperity in a Europe that gives the citizen pride of place .
The major challenges to come - the environmental problems , cross-border crime , the role of Europe in the world and our responsibility for a more just world order - also demand joint efforts , such as the work on reforming the European institutions so that they become more democratic and efficient .
I am looking forward to our new fellow MEPs ' contributions and fresh ideas in this area .
Mr President , in a united Europe , we are all different , but we are of equal worth and must be judged by the same yardsticks .
We liberals have stubbornly fought for a situation in which the Copenhagen criteria , especially the political criteria , are respected .
Human rights abuses can never be excused , and we are delighted about the considerable progress that has been made in the candidate countries .
We shall continue to monitor these areas , that is to say respect for minorities , press freedom and good governance in both the old and the new Member States .
We think that it is in this way that the safety clauses should be used , that is to say through continuous examination of how we all apply and respect our common values .
We must make demands upon ourselves , both in the old and the new Member States , which we must not see divided into A and B teams .
Many difficult issues have been resolved during the autumn .
The Danish Presidency has made fantastic efforts , as have the candidate countries .
Certainly , it would be marvellous if , at the end of the year , we could also see a solution to the Cyprus issue .
I hope that everyone can contribute to such a solution .
I also want to appeal for a clear and positive signal to be given to Turkey .
The new government is worth much encouragement and support on our part .
Mr Brok 's report should be interpreted as welcoming those of you in the candidate countries and inviting you to a celebration .
It will be a celebration at which the division between ' we in the EU ' and ' you in the candidate countries ' ceases and at which we all become ' we in the EU ' .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , it does not need to be repeated that this is an historic day , for this House at any rate .
My group , too , sees the enlargement of the European Union as an historic opportunity , and a large majority of us will be endorsing Mr Brok 's report .
It is not entirely clear to me why you , Mr Haarder , like Mrs Malmström just now , spoke in terms of reunification .
What is apparent to me from a reading of European history is that this continent has never actually been united .
What is now underway is made all the greater an achievement by the fact that it involves uniting this continent for the very first time .
I do not want to sound too discordant a note , but I do at least want to mention three problematic aspects that lead me to be somewhat dissatisfied with the report , despite the general approval it enjoys .
For a start , I find it regrettable that nearly all the amendments relating to the great social and employment problems engendered in the candidate countries by enlargement and the processes of transformation have been rejected .
Too little attention is paid to these issues even in practical policy-making .
Secondly , my group continues to be dissatisfied with the way in which , in contrast to earlier accessions to the EU , there is no full guarantee that the new Member States and their citizens will enjoy equal rights from the word go .
I know , Commissioner , that you have done a great deal for the public at large , but the egoism of a number of governments has prevented essential work from being done .
I am well aware of the difficulties involved , but I find it rather problematic when legal and financial discrimination are not prevented from the very outset in a process of enlargement described as an historic task .
Thirdly , we regret the fact that proposals for further efforts in border regions have not been incorporated in the report .
It is my belief that the governments responsible in particular , and quite possibly also the Commission , are doing too little in these regions to give real support as extensive changes take effect .
The possibility cannot at present be excluded that at least some of these regions will become more like enlargement 's transit zones .
Quite apart from the practicalities of the problem , I therefore again call on the Commission and the governments to do everything possible to make what are at present border regions workshops for European integration and enable them to experience its positive effects on people and society , as the former border regions such as for example the Saarland , Lorraine , and Luxembourg so emphatically did .
Mr President , let us hope that Mr Giscard d 'Estaing spawns as much discussion with his Convention proposal as with his remarks about the undesirability of Turkey becoming a member .
All of a sudden , everyone is worked up about the question of whether it has been right or wrong to hold out to Turkey the prospect of membership .
If the truth be told , the two extreme scenarios are not very helpful in this discussion .
On the one hand , there are the people who go along with Turkey 's membership , provided that all the conditions are met , and on the other there are people who say : no , never .
In between these black and white views , there are a large number of people who are trying their best to introduce all kinds of shades of grey .
The contribution by Mr Brok was a typical example of this .
He is unfortunately no longer present , but if I have understood him correctly , he stated today that he believes Turkey should be given a chance .
However , if Turkey met all the EU requirements , then Turkey would no longer be Turkey .
I plead with you , fellow MEPs , and Mr Brok , to stop playing this word game and stop clouding the issue .
Yesterday , there was fog at the airport ; today , you are producing fog in the Chamber .
In the media , Mr Brok spelled out very clearly that he thought that the decision of 1999 to make Turkey a candidate was a mistake and that this mistake should be rectified .
I applaud Mr Brok 's flexibility and I also applaud his opinion here today , but this attitude as he expressed today is not compatible with the support expressed by himself as rapporteur , for one of Mr Ferber 's amendments which states that a special relationship should be established between the EU and Turkey .
This is an alternative to membership .
I am opposed to this and I hope that Mr Brok is too , today and tomorrow .
I urge you to stop clouding the issue and to stop playing word games .
If there is a difference of opinion among us , it is about timing and the different stages in the rapprochement between Turkey and the EU .
This is then no longer a discussion about the purpose of all these efforts , namely membership .
We should do away with those double agendas , the hypocrisy , the saying ' yes ' and hoping ' no ' .
If we give Turkey the green light , this means that the EU will pull out all the stops to make it possible for Turkey to become a member at some point in the future .
What does this mean in practical terms ?
If the new Turkish Government were to seize the opportunities of solving the conflict in Cyprus , if that government were at long last to translate the reforms already decided upon into practice , if , in addition , that government wanted to carry out fresh reforms , as it announced this weekend , with zero tolerance towards incidents of torture , if the self-same government were to release prisoners , including the Sakharov Prize winner Lela Zana ? if all of this happened , then the EU would have no option but to keep up with that country .
I should like to echo the words of Commissioner Verheugen in this connection .
If the candidate countries move in the direction of the EU , then the EU cannot afford to stand still .
This also means that the rapprochement between Turkey and the EU cannot be unilateral .
As far as I am concerned , this means that serious thought should be given in Copenhagen to setting a so-called review date , namely a date , say in a year 's time , on which we will reconsider whether Turkey meets all the conditions and all the political criteria and then , if this finding is positive , to have the courage to set a date for negotiations in the future .
Mr President , much work has been achieved in recent weeks to accelerate the enlargement process , but a number of difficulties have to be overcome before EU enlargement becomes a practical reality .
We must not underestimate the challenges we face in the run-up to the accession of the ten countries to the European Union .
The EU Convention must remember that many candidate countries are due to hold referenda on EU accession .
We should make this as uncomplicated as possible for the people of the candidate countries .
That is where the EU Convention could be running into trouble : it is going too far ahead of the peoples of Europe .
Are we seriously asking the candidate countries to ratify the Accession Treaty by referenda next year only to ask them a year later to ratify another EU treaty on more changes to the day-to-day operation of the Union ?
What would the people of the candidate countries be basing their decision in next year 's referenda on ?
On the existing EU Treaties - including the recently ratified Treaty of Nice - or on an array of new proposals from the EU Convention ?
Have we not learnt anything from the recent referendum on the Treaty of Nice in Ireland ?
The Treaty was fairly modest by any standards , but it was very difficult to explain the issues to the people .
We succeeded in part the second time round in explaining the Treaty , but the lack of understanding of EU issues is still prevalent .
However , some people at the EU Convention are rushing ahead with extensive reform in all matters connected with the day-to-day operation of the Union .
We are presenting conflicting messages and proposals to the people of the candidate countries .
In fact I would go further and say that the EU Convention runs the risk of blurring the enlargement process .
I must remind the House and members of the Convention that the Convention is a consultative process - the real decisions should and must be made by the Council of Ministers .
Let us not underestimate the amount of work which must be completed before enlargement becomes a working success .
The candidate countries must implement the full range of EU directives and regulations .
The enlargement negotiations are broken up into 38 different chapters .
It is going to take the candidate countries time to implement this full body of legislation .
We all know that the accession of ten new countries is not an easy task .
The pace of reform is the main issue .
Diplomats and politicians cannot be allowed to run too far ahead of the people of Europe on the issue of future developments .
We need to bring the people of Europe with us at each stage and we cannot take their support for granted .
From an Irish perspective , any future EU Treaty that appears to supersede the Irish Constitution will be extremely difficult - if not impossible - to sell to the Irish people .
Any proposals that diminish the representation of small Member States within the EU institutions will fly in the face of the principles of equality that are the stated aims of the European Union .
Mr President , there is a great deal of commotion surrounding enlargement .
As far as EU-fähigkeit of the new Member States is concerned , I can be brief : the Brok report offers a good insight into any remaining doubts on the part of the EU .
The candidate countries must focus their efforts on certain areas .
In addition , European and national politicians must clarify to their respective peoples the efforts that have previously been made by the candidate countries .
Another point is Turkey 's candidature .
In Helsinki , intense pressure on the EU meant that that country officially became a candidate Member .
Ankara is now once again trying to press the EU for a date to open the negotiations .
However , it appears clear to me that the EU should resist this pressure for the very good reason that Turkey is a country that does not fit into the EU .
Although it is a democracy , it is certainly not a western one .
Although it is a secular state , culture and history are very different from the current EU Member States , which bear the stamp of Christianity .
We might as well delete the word ' European ' if Turkey becomes an EU Member .
In addition , Turkey has made some progress as a constitutional state , but not enough by a long chalk .
I would , for example , remind you of the difficulties the Christians are facing in that country .
The EU can offer Turkey closer cooperation in various areas , but the candidate status was a mistake that should , ideally , be put right .
The moment of accession , however , is not the EU 's final destination .
What kind of a European Union will we have following enlargement ?
A Europe that is capable of leaving behind old conflicts ?
A Europe that supports peace , solidarity and fair relations among its Member States ?
To me , the ideas about the adoption of the Community method for the CFSP appear to be at odds with these principles .
The discrepancies between the Member States in this area are simply too great .
Integration in this area can for that reason only be achieved by means of coercion .
It is not possible to build a balanced policy on this basis .
Moreover , this area has a lot to do with our sense of identity , which only increases the potential for tension among Member States .
The countries in Europe should be vigilant about nationalism .
However , it is also possible to develop nationalism at European level , whereby we only pursue the status of a world power to greater glorification of ourselves .
Other large countries would then be suspect from the very start .
This strikes me as even more harmful than traditional nationalism .
Enlargement will hopefully bring with it some common sense on this score .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that Mr Gawronski is right : it is the 15-Member State Europe which is likely to benefit most from enlargement .
However , I feel it must be pointed out and , indeed , I hope the Council and the Commission will comment on this , that this is not the end of the process of enlarging the European Union .
There are a dozen Caucasian and Balkan countries which are not even on the list of candidate countries , whose situation is not even on a par with that of Turkey , and they are countries which the European Union needs , just as it needs Turkey , not least in order to prevent the development of any tendencies towards fundamentalism , as a number of Members have said today .
We have heard the reports on each of the candidate countries presented , but I feel that it would have been only right and proper to give these ten countries which are about to join the Union a report on the current situation of each of the current 15 Member States .
I feel that , from the economic perspective , it might have been appropriate for these countries to know that there is a danger of the European continent becoming ' Japanified ' , that Germany , Italy and France too are now incapable of carrying out the structural reforms that they have to , which , considering their size , could have an impact on the economies of the ten candidate countries .
It might also be in the interests of these countries to inform them that the legal systems in some of the 15 countries of the current Union are certainly not worthy of a democracy .
I refer to Belgium and Italy but also to what might appear to be more minor cases , such as what is happening at this time in your country , in Denmark , President-in-Office of the Council , and I am referring , in particular , to the way that the authorities of your country are handling the matter of the detention of the Chechen deputy Prime Minister , Akhmed Zakayev .
I do not think this can be justified in terms of respect for the rule of law .
We are talking about the Europe of democracies , but it may be that we should also be talking about the Europe of democracy . The democracy of this House , the democracy of the Council and the Commission , the democracy of the Union in general , would certainly not satisfy the criteria which we are setting for the candidate countries now .
This is the issue being analysed by the Convention , an issue which I hope will be addressed and resolved with a decision to adopt the United States ' approach , to adopt US-style democracy , not with a return to the European tradition which has done so much harm to our continent .
Mr President , as speakers have already said , this has been an historic day for the current process of enlargement .
I would like to look beyond Copenhagen to see what is going to happen in the next stage .
Some speakers have raised the question of whether Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing 's comments about Turkey were outdated , whether this was the wrong message at the wrong time and whether , if Turkey should become a member , that would really be the end of Europe as we know it .
He is right to raise this issue , because once we say yes definitively to Turkey and give it a date , how can we say no to Ukraine , Belarus and other countries which probably have more of their landmass within Europe than Turkey does ?

Mr Rasmussen , Mr Watson and Mr Haarder have been very liberal in saying that once the political criteria have been met we can give a date for Turkey .
What about the economic criteria in the Copenhagen Declaration of June 1993 ?
Central to that declaration was the question of institutional stability , which we all seem to be forgetting as we go about welcoming countries into the Union .
Do we really think that the Union is going to be stable once Turkey , and perhaps other countries , which will then no doubt be welcomed under the same criteria , have joined , and that the Union can then be effectively managed ?
This question will be examined at the NATO summit on enlargement later this week in Prague .
The question which people are now asking is whether NATO is really capable of acting and whether it will be really effective once it has more central and eastern European countries ?
The same applies to the European Union .
The Helsinki Council made Turkey an official candidate country .
So did the association agreement of 1961 , but will the European Union , with Turkey as a full member , really be fully capable of acting and democratically accountable ?
My thesis is threefold .
Firstly , we should pause once the ten countries have come in and once we are completing the negotiations for Romania and Bulgaria .
To set a date now , or even to set a date for a date , is premature .
Secondly we must examine every single avenue , such as a special partnership with Turkey , before we commit ourselves to the full process of opening accession negotiations .
Perhaps most important of all , the Copenhagen Council should set a process in motion , as Mr Prodi mentioned this morning , to consider our approach to future candidates seeking membership of the Union , so that we know how to deal with them .
In conclusion , the European Council , headed by the Danes , is sleepwalking into the future .
It is easier for everyone to say yes rather than no , but at this stage it seems that no member of the European Council wishes to say yes to Turkey , but none wishes to say no either .
Let us be clear in our thinking and let us have a clear strategy so that we can assure Europe 's citizens that in ten years ' time they will have a stable , prosperous and effective European Union .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I confess to having been somewhat sceptical about the meeting with our colleagues from the candidate countries here in Strasbourg today , which could have been misunderstood as sending a message along the lines of , ' all our problems have been solved , and enlargement is going fine . '
Thank God that was not the case .
It was truly moving to meet all these colleagues speaking different languages and to get the point across to them that there remains much to be done , and that there are still problems and tasks outstanding .
It was also a good opportunity to set before them the fact that we too have a public to whom we have to explain the results of the negotiations and whom we have to win over .
The process of adapting to the European Union 's rules , the acquis communautaire , must be proceeded with .
This Parliament makes a good lobby for enlargement , but the conditions - including the financial ones - have to be right .
Enlargement is , then , not a charitable act or a work of mercy .
It is an attempt at constructing a shared Europe , and that on the basis of the European Union 's progress to date , which has been the result of shared political endeavour .
It is about reversing the effects of Yalta .
It is also about overturning the wartime and post-war order , and I believe that to be in the interests of all of us .
To take an actual example , I do think that the Czech Republic , too , should be able to examine the past in a critical light and look to the future , just as everyone else should refrain from making political capital out of post-war events that , while comprehensible , are very much open to criticism .
If we can convince both sides of this , then we can really build a new future .
I turn now to Turkey , a country which , during the summer , enacted a range of measures to set in motion real progress towards the rule of law and fully-fledged democracy .
Admittedly , the legal measures do not go far enough and have not yet been put into effect , but the government has declared its willingness to do so and also wants to demonstrate its European orientation and its acceptance of the European norm whereby religion and the state are kept separate .
Most of all , we look to this government to resolved the Cyprus problem .
Mr Elles , I consider it a dangerous initiative at this stage to do as one amendment proposes and put Turkey 's chair outside the door and talk only in terms of a special relationship .
Both Muslim citizens and citizens of Turkish descent have a place in the European Union .
I do not believe that we can decide today whether there are to be actual negotiations with Turkey or when they should take place .
It is very much in the interest of all of us to encourage Turkey , and to demonstrate that Islam and a modern democracy can be put on an equal footing , and I reject anything that might be understood to be a disincentive to them to do so .

I will conclude by saying that I was in the Balkans at the beginning of this week , where I saw how enlargement evokes in people a degree of fear - fear of being left out , fear of being left behind .
I ask the Commission and the Council to consider how , in the course of the next six months , they can generate signals that show that the Balkans will have a part in the enlargement process - not today , not tomorrow , but perhaps the day after that , if they do as the candidate countries have done and fulfil the same requirements .
It would be a very positive step to send them a clear signal to this effect !
Mr President , the Cypriot accession will only have truly succeeded once we have seen a profound reconciliation of Greeks and Turks .
Thankfully the proposals of Kofi Annan seem to be a sound constitutional basis for such a reconciliation .
The package borrows cleverly from the Swiss model of the system of government and the Belgian model for European relations .
What is now upon the table seems the best possible deal that the Turkish Cypriots can ever expect .
It provides them with the status of legal and political equality and protects their interests as the smaller community .
It commits the refounded Republic of Cyprus to supporting membership for Turkey itself and its transitional arrangements seem to be able to satisfy most of the demands concerning property , residency and self-esteem .


Mr Erdogan , Mr Simitis , Mr Clerides and Mr Denktash must now prepare themselves to take a dramatic step towards integration and reconciliation and reject partition and revenge .
Mr President , for the first time in history , we are gradually unifying the continent .
It has never once been unified .
However , for the time being , the debate is merely about geographically extending rather than deepening the Union , which is why we actually want the Union .
Political union , economic union , common social policy , integrated ecological intervention here and throughout the world , these are the real reasons we want the Union and I hope and believe in my heart of hearts that our honourable friends from the candidate countries want the same , rather than to discuss other , more minor considerations .
However , now that we are talking about enlargement , what enlargement really needs is equal treatment and respect for the dignity of others .
And it does not always get it .
We have not emphasised sufficiently , I think , even though it is in our resolution , that the unfair arrangement for the number of Members from Hungary and the Czech Republic must be removed as quickly as possible .
It is absurd from every angle .
I mean what are we doing , penny pinching ?
It is beyond me .
It is equally clear that , if enlargement is to succeed , it needs a clear time frame .
Turkey has a right to know what the time frame is for its relations with the European Union .
Bulgaria and Romania have the same right .
Commissioner and Mr President-in-Office , the countries in the black hole in the Balkans have the same right and we say nothing about them , despite the fact that , whichever way you look at it , they are even closer , they are right at the centre of the continent of Europe .
Finally , to Cyprus .
The time appears to have come for serious negotiation of a political solution .
We must support these negotiations .
We must hope they turn out well .
However , one thing must be made clear , clearer perhaps than what we have heard here .
No solution can be advocated or accepted which permanently deviates from the acquis communautaire .
Transitional arrangements are one thing , and every country has experienced them at some point during enlargement , but they apply for a specific period of time and they have an expiry date .
So if we want to move forward , we have to make that clear to all the interested parties .
Otherwise , I think we shall undermine an endeavour which augurs very well for the future .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , although the start of the peaceful reunification of Europe was symbolised by the fall of the Berlin Wall , we now know from yesterday 's Foreign Affairs Council meeting that it is on 1 May 2004 that the EU will enlarge towards the first ten candidate countries .
We also know , however , that the transition , or rather the process of transforming the economies of the countries concerned , will take much longer .
I shall simply point out that the official unemployment rate in a country such as Poland stands at 17 % and that , in the year 2000 , Poland 's per capita GDP was equivalent to just 39 % of the Community average .
Therefore , with regard to the transition process , I am hearing many of my fellow Members stress - and they are certainly right to do so - all the conditions that the candidate countries must still fulfil .
For my part , Mr President-in-Office , I would like to ask you a very direct and very specific question about what the Council will do in response to the requests made last Friday in Warsaw by the governments of the ten candidate countries .
I admit that I am no expert in this area , but I believe that their demands are perfectly legitimate : a financial package to generate macro-economic stability , a net financial situation which must be improved not just for 2004 , but for 2004 to 2006 as well and , lastly , the full use of the Berlin budgetary facility .
In my view , these demands are quite legitimate .
Fearing , therefore , that I did indeed hear the Danish Prime Minister say this morning that he was not intending to renege on the positions adopted at the Brussels European Council , I would like to know exactly if , in response to the legitimate demands of the ten candidate country governments , you are going to make a better offer than the one made in Brussels , or if you are going to stick with what was decided at that European Council .
I believe that , in addition to the general points that you mention , there are specific demands that must be taken on board and which I feel have been articulated - I repeat - quite legitimately by the governments of the candidate countries .
Mr President , I welcome the opportunity to participate in this historic debate and I look forward to the day , which is now just around the corner , when the representatives of each of the candidate countries will exercise their full rights as Members of this House and in each of the institutions of the European Union .
I welcome in particular the confirmation by the Council of Foreign Affairs Ministers yesterday in Brussels of the full participation of the new Member States in shaping the Treaty that will follow the Convention .
One of the key negotiating chapters remaining open relates to agriculture .
The conclusions of the recent Brussels European Council clearly rule out any negotiation on the Berlin Agreement and Agenda 2000 .
This is the framework in which we must move forward to conclude the agricultural negotiations with the candidate countries .
It is in the interests of all those countries which support a strong agricultural policy , be they existing or future Member States , to see the fastest possible integration into the common agricultural policy .
Mr President , I would like to address my first comment to you personally .
I have a formal complaint to make , and I could just as easily do that in the form of a point of order .
This point of order relates to Rule 117 , which provides for the equal treatment of the Union 's languages .
Where equal treatment is not possible , on the display screens for example , a long-established consistent approach is used whereby we would at least use the language of the country in which we are sitting , so here in Strasbourg , we would use French .
Since yesterday afternoon , however , everyone can see that , on every additional display screen installed in the Chamber for the benefit of the new arrivals , the future members , only one language is used , that is , English .
Many of us are upset about this , not just the French Members , I would add , but also MEPs of all nationalities , who do not want English to become the sole language of Europe .
I also noted down , only last night , ladies and gentlemen , a comment made by a fellow Member from Spain which was that the new members will think that they are joining not the European Union , but the Federation of the United States of America .
I would ask you to forward this complaint to Parliament 's Presidency .
It is also this fear that I wanted to express to you , on behalf of nine French members of my group , but also on behalf of many fellow Members .
Are we sure that , by joining the European Union , in the form that it is , increasingly , assuming with each passing day , the candidate countries are entering Europe ?
Are we sure that they are not , in actual fact , relinquishing part of their European soul , through which they have often created the most fertile cultures ?
Are we sure that they are not victims of an intricate illusion and that , ultimately , they are not about to leave Europe to join an Atlantic universe , where differences , cultures , languages and , ultimately , the European heritage - with which they , like us , have been endowed - will be wiped out ?
The fact is that they belong to Europe ; there is no need for this to be acknowledged because they have belonged , naturally belonged , to Europe for centuries .
It must be clearly understood that they are European countries even if they do not join the European Union : we could even say that , if they do not join , they will without doubt be even more European than if they do .
In actual fact , the question is not the enlargement of Europe , which was carried out long ago ; it is the enlargement of the European Union , in other words an organisation which is something entirely different and can even sometimes be the exact opposite .
It is out of friendship for these people that I am saying this to them , on behalf of many French people - I even think it is the majority of French people - who are opposed to this dreadful and virtually totalitarian idea of so-called European integration .
My dear friends of the East , you are giving up your souls , your heritage , your cultures , your freedoms and , ultimately , your very interests and nothing is more telling , at the end of the day , ladies and gentlemen , than the linguistic aspect that I mentioned at the beginning of my speech .
I shall also take this opportunity to complain to the Commission , represented here by Mr Verheugen , that , last February , it asked the candidate countries to communicate in English during the negotiation process .
This linguistic problem is a sign .
The omnipresence of English points clearly to the trap : it is so very , very unfortunate , my friends from the countries of the East , that you are leaving one empire only to join another .
Thank you Mr Coûteaux .
As far as your comments are concerned , may I assure you that everything you said has been noted in accordance with the relevant rule of procedure and will be examined by Parliament 's services .
Mr President , on behalf of my colleagues from the MPF delegation , I would like to extend a warm welcome to the representatives of the States that will soon be joining the Union , and in doing so , rejoining their natural family , the great European family from which they were separated by Communism .
It is in this spirit that we shall adopt the Brok report .
I would like to take this opportunity to express one regret and voice one hope .
First of all , I regret that it has taken so long to re-integrate Europe since the fall of the Berlin Wall , even though European integration is so clearly part of the values of our civilisation , of the Christian heritage that we share .
Today , two other countries , Romania and Bulgaria , are not able to join Europe for some years .
So , why not send them a signal now , why not allow them to join without waiting for the Treaty on European Union in the strict sense , which would not pose a problem since it is a flexible intergovernmental treaty rather than a treaty on the Community ?
Secondly , we are also voicing a great hope .
We shall construct the new Europe together .
If things continue in the same way as at present , we could soon have a super-State that seeks to make everything centralised and uniform , which disregards national democracies .
It is a real danger .
Furthermore , this morning again , we heard from those who believe that , after enlargement , we will need a tighter central locking system in order to respond to the greater diversity .
Like us , many of the soon-to-be new member states condemn this tendency .
We would rather invent a new , diverse , more flexible Europe where there is more freedom and that is based on a respect for the national democracies .
This morning , we heard a representative from Lithuania express concern about what would happen to Lithuania 's decision-making freedom when it would be represented by eight MEPs in a European Parliament with 732 members .
This is a legitimate question that many countries , even the largest , should ask themselves .
The only way to prevent democracy being diluted in the future , to avoid the impression of no longer controlling anything , is to increase the involvement of the national parliaments in the European decision-making process by giving them a genuine right to say ' yes ' or ' no ' to their countries taking part in this or that decision .
In order to achieve this more free and more democratic Europe , Mr President , those who value the freedom of their countries , those who value their national democracy , and therefore those who value the true Europe should unite to defend their values .
Mr President , this is the eve of another remarkable event : the birth of the new Europe .
The institutional reforms that it is the task of the Convention and the IGC to achieve , not least in order to reduce the risks and increase the opportunities for the citizens , are only the final , essential step before the reunification of our continent .
Ladies and gentlemen , we citizens of the Union must not underestimate the historic importance of this event .
At last , after 70 years , the countries of Eastern Europe are being invited to become part of a major new leading force in international politics .
In actual fact , this is not enlargement .
Rather , we prefer to talk about unification , for the peoples of the Union are being reunited with the peoples of the former Soviet empire , who were isolated from the area of freedom , peace and progress by the Stalinist superstate .
I hope that , in the Europe of the future , they will be able to continue to speak their languages , just as we want to continue to speak ours .
They are just as European as we are . Prague , Warsaw and Budapest , and Sofia and Bucharest too are just as much European cities as Rome , Athens , Paris , Madrid or London .
I would point out , if I may , Mr President , as a citizen of Rome , that Europe has roots in Istanbul too , in the ancient city of Constantinople , the capital of the Roman empire in the East .
That brings us to the subject of Turkey .
I am firmly of the opinion that we must set a date before the end of 2003 for the start of Turkey 's accession process .
If we were to close the doors to this country , which did a great deal to protect Europe during the Cold War , that would be an error that would ultimately encourage the growth of Islamic fundamentalism .
Turkish democracy has made a great deal of progress - with the abolition of the death penalty , for instance - although a great deal certainly still remains to be done .
We Europeans have a duty to help this country . We have a duty to facilitate this journey towards the new Europe of the future .
Let us hope that Copenhagen sends out a positive signal to this effect .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the enlargement of Europe brings us face to face with the historic question : we talk of enlarging Europe , but what exactly do we mean by Europe ?
I think that to interpret the Union as a reinstatement of a geographical entity would be excessively mechanistic .
The European Union is , I think , a reinstatement of an historical reality which goes back three thousand years and which needs a new basis if it is to continue working .
And all those who played a part during those three thousand years will , where they still exist , naturally have a place in modern-day Europe .
I say this because questions have been raised recently as to whether Turkey qualifies as a European country on the basis of geographical criteria .
But of course the criteria cannot be geographical .
Turkey is , without question , part of our history .
May I remind you that when the crisis in the Ottoman Empire reached its peak in the nineteenth century , the European powers referred to the Sultan as ' the sick man of Europe ' , not the sick man of the Middle East or the sick man of Asia Minor .
What stands in Turkey 's way is not its lack of European credentials , but its lack of democratic credentials and its expansionist foreign policy .
Today there is cause for hope on both these fronts .
The recent elections were another example of the Turkish Republic showing willing and demonstrated that a real , fundamental change of government is possible .
All that remains to be seen is if permanent changes will be introduced which will consolidate democracy in Turkey and help satisfy the Copenhagen criteria .
And , provided that the Copenhagen criteria are met , there will be no further obstacle to Turkey 's becoming a member of the European Union .
As for the second issue , its aggressive , militaristic foreign policy , here too there is a criterion and that criterion is , of course , a resolution to the Cyprus problem , the occupation of northern Cyprus by the Turkish army .
If , as it has been asked to do in European Parliament resolutions , Turkey really wants to help resolve the Cyprus problem on the basis of the UN Secretary-General 's most recent plan , then it will start backing off in its foreign policy as well .
This will bring about a peaceful revolution in this area , which will be especially valuable to Turkey , which has more need than anyone to carve out a democratic future for itself at last .
Mr President , the main question that came to the fore during today 's debate was to what extent the candidate countries are ready for accession .
We regret that the question as to whether the European Union is ready for it has not been addressed , or , if at all , only in passing .
In the euphoria of the moment , we should not be blind to the various problem areas .
I think that the main problem remains the funding of enlargement and , inherently linked to this , the reform of agricultural policy .
I still regret that the necessary reform has been postponed to 2007 .
I also regret that it will be only in 2013 that farmers in the new Member States will receive the same treatment as do those in the present European Union .
Current European agricultural policy , linking subsidy to production , is indefensible and unacceptable .
It creates surpluses , keeps food prices high , damages the environment and is also detrimental to farmers in the developing world .
I think that we as Parliament should therefore continue to support Commissioner Fischler in his endeavours to achieve swift and thorough reforms in agricultural policy , with the subsidies being redirected to rural development and to the new Member States .
We must avoid a two-speed Europe at all costs , with one speed for the rich countries of the current EU , which cling onto their privileges like grim death , and another for the poor countries among the new Member States which have the same duties but not , unfortunately , the same rights .
Mr President , the extraordinary debate has made it even more apparent how diverse are both the viewpoints on the process of enlarging the European Union and also the problems of its future form .
Some things are seen as the report depicts them , but many get more critical treatment than they do in the report .
Certain things were said which cannot go without criticism ; when Europe 's borders are at issue , anyone who simply casts doubt on everything done at Yalta and Potsdam , should know what he is doing .
It is perhaps no disaster for an announcement to be made about the deferral of the deadline for accession , but elections to the European Parliament are to be held a few weeks after that , and it will be the Fifteen alone who will decide on the results of the Convention .
Above all , there are reasons of form and content for deferring the deadline .
The problems still to be resolved are trickier than had been assumed .
So it is that Poland and other states expect support for agriculture to be reconsidered and that they will not achieve parity before 2013 .
Fears that a first- and second-class EU could come into being have not been dispelled .
Such fears are the natural reaction to great concessions being demanded of the candidates whilst there has been little or no negotiation of the transitional periods that are required .
Commissioner Verheugen has understandable complexes if he expects MEPs to digest 6 000 pages of text in order to confirm accession .
We should , however , be asking ourselves what we expect of the citizens of the future EU if they have to deal with the same amount .
It is incumbent on parliaments - the national parliaments and our own - to put our finger on what is wrong and demand an approach that will secure stability and equality and prevent us ending up going round in endless circles .
Mr President , this morning , I think that we indeed witnessed an historic moment , as all my fellow Members have said , when we welcomed our counterparts from the candidate States .
I should like to raise a minor point , namely that of the interpreting .
Instead of 11 official languages , we now have 20 .
This is a considerable step forward .
We must congratulate the interpreting services , which have provided interpretation despite the testing technical conditions .
As a native Catalan , it is my hope that , in the future , my language , which is spoken by 10 million European citizens , may also be recognised in this Chamber .
I wanted to make this comment whilst we are examining the Brok report .
With regard to the aforementioned report , one of the Copenhagen criteria stipulates that the Member States must respect minorities and national minorities in particular , and highlights some of the progress which has been made by the candidate states .
This must be welcomed .
The report neglects to tackle some of the difficult points , however .
For example , I know that in some of the candidate States , administrative cuts have been implemented in such a way as to dilute the national minorities , whereas in other candidate countries , conditions are being imposed with regard to the formation of political parties in such a way that minorities cannot form one .
And , lastly , there is the problem of the Bene ? decrees which unjustly exploited these minorities in 1945 , a crying injustice , which is still an issue today and which must one day be rectified .
It is true , Mr President , it is true that , before we start giving lectures , we should take a look at ourselves .
When I say ' we ' , I mean the Member States .
For example , could a State which today refuses to ratify the European Charter of Linguistic Rights join Europe ?
This is a question that we could ask , like many others , and that is why I believe that we must assess the Copenhagen criteria with a degree of indulgence and throw the doors of our Europe wide open .
Thank you .
Your comments have been noted .
Mr President , we have not been sparing in our criticism of enlargement and we have often expressed concern , including in the Chamber of the European Parliament , at the problems it poses for the labour market - with the risk that it could upset the balance of the system of small and medium-sized businesses in Padania with very dangerous consequences - and at the fears , which we see properly addressed in the Brok report , that the inadequate legislation and the political traditions of some of these countries may mean that the necessary facilities are not in place or there are insufficient facilities to provide effective protection against the expansion of financial and Mafia crime .
We do , however , want to take this opportunity to welcome and extend a brotherly hand to the free peoples who succeeded in preserving their cultural identity even through the terrible years of Communist oppression , who are joining Europe , just as we did ourselves , certainly not in order to accept , after so many years of dictatorship , the diktats of the standardisation imposed by globalisation or of political correctness , or to be subjected to centralism once again .
We are counting on them to help us in these battles , to help us preserve the Christian nature of the Europe of the peoples and regions which we are trying to create .
As regards the extremely sensitive subject of Turkey - which has been emerging at intervals throughout this debate , never far from the surface - we want to emphasise strongly the courage of the chairman , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , who has caused a ripple in the waters of the often over-cautious debate on European politics , stating the plain facts as they are , as we all know them to be , as is clear from all the history books studied by all the students of all European countries , namely that Turkey is not part of Europe historically , geographically or politically and that it does not satisfy the political accession criteria laid down at Copenhagen on human rights , fundamental freedoms or even freedom of religion .
This is a country , a regime which has yet to resolve the historical issue of the annihilation , the holocaust of the Armenian people and which has made still less progress in terms of recognising the rights of the Kurdish minority , it is a country which it is legitimate to define , with all possible respect and all necessary diplomacy , as a kind of Mediterranean Columbia : it is home to one of the most dangerous Mafia groups which organises drug trafficking at international level .
In other words , we feel that political union with Turkey is out of the question , not least in that , if Turkey were to become part of Europe , the European Union would then have direct borders with Iraq , Iran and Syria .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council - I should also have been pleased to greet the Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should just like to concentrate on a topic that has already been mentioned , but I should like to address it in a markedly different way .
I think that we , as the European Parliament , must seriously ask ourselves how we intend to deal with such an important country as Turkey in the long term .
I think we have to give very serious answers to a few questions here .
The first question is , do we really want to hold up a mirror to Turkey 's progress reports year after year and say to it : sorry , you 're not ready yet ?
Do we want to permanently tolerate a situation where the European Union 's common foreign and security policy is handicapped by being unable to make use of NATO resources because the Turks could potentially use that to blackmail us ?
Before Turkey becomes a member or whether or not full membership of the European Union becomes a possibility , should we not rather be looking for answers to the question of how we can even today help the European Union to build special relations with Turkey , thus enabling us to seriously address all the questions that we need to answer jointly , quite specifically in the field of foreign and security policy ?
I therefore call on my fellow Members to give very serious thought to this issue and then perhaps after all to accept the PPE-DE motion on this very subject and vote in favour of it .
I am referring to Amendment No 7 , which says that we must start building a special relationship with Turkey now so that we can solve all our common problems together .
We should not wait until Turkey 's situation in regard to human rights , democracy , and so on , is such that it can seriously be regarded as a candidate country .
I should be pleased if this House would support this urgent matter so that we can achieve good cooperation with this important part of Europe .
Mr President , although we meet together this afternoon as representatives of the Member States , our concern is obviously for our friends , the candidate countries .
This morning 's meeting was a wonderful and very positive symbol .
However , the job is not finished .
Like everyone , I hope that the negotiations will finish in the next few weeks and that they will have a positive outcome .
In this respect , I regret the importance given over to financial concerns .
Far from advocating a wasteful attitude - I am certainly not supporting the idea of reckless spending - our governments and ourselves must show some generosity and vision .
' Realpolitik ' is not necessarily synonymous with greed .
There is a risk that inadequate budgets will hamper reforms in Central Europe and we may pay a high price for this in the future .
The accession of our friends to the EU will not spell an end to the difficulties .
My main concern is for public opinion and the state of mind of others .
Thus , in our countries , there is still a great deal to do so that our citizens understand the profound meaning of the EU enlargement .
For now , they are more or less blinded by complicated calculations and , ultimately , cannot see the wood for the trees .
I fear that there is a degree of confusion in the candidate countries over what the European Union really is , over its fundamental objectives and what it means to have a will to live together whilst consenting to sovereignty being genuinely delegated .
For countries that are fervently attached to their independence and their freedom , becoming a member of the European Union is a very beneficial - and I am not a Eurosceptic - but very considerable step .
I regret that the negotiations , based on the Copenhagen criteria , have somewhat neglected this aspect of things , the greatest part being devoted to the technical , and particularly , the economic aspects of the dossier .
Following accession , however , we must continue our work to enlighten and convince people throughout the enlarged EU .
As the Commissioner himself said earlier , this subject is not simply about technical issues , it is also about our soul .
Mr President , with the enlargement of the European Union the border we share with Russia will lengthen and we will have several new neighbours .
Our new neighbours are also likely to apply for membership and enlargement will continue .
It is very important for us all that our external border is both open and secure .
No new barriers must be put up in Europe that would be a hindrance to relations and cooperation with other countries .
We also have to level out the economic and social differences that exist between the Member States and our neighbouring countries .
This is especially important for Member States situated on external borders .
As enlargement proceeds we have to establish a new policy for a larger Europe , one that incorporates both bilateral relations with our present and future neighbours and developments in multilateral cooperation , for example , within the context of the Council of Europe and the EEC .
This morning some Members of the European Parliament were trying to lecture Members of Parliament of the new Member States , saying they must be prepared to give up their own country 's right of self-determination and accept that the Union will develop into a supranational federation .
I do not agree with such points of view .
An enlarging Union must be a democratic confederation of independent states led by a Council of Ministers that represents the Member States .
Mr President , these are without doubt important times .
This is an important session , a report with many positive points by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and a very important time for one of the candidate countries , Cyprus .
I think that , although there may be good prospects , there are also question marks .
I have two questions .
The first is addressed to the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Haarder .
Mr President-in-Office , there are two parallel procedures here , the integration procedure and the negotiation procedure based on the plan put forward by the UN Secretary-General , who is using the Copenhagen Summit as a cut-off point and one of whose conditions is that both sides sign up to the original version of his plan .
Yesterday was the deadline for a verbal reply ; the Republic of Cyprus has said yes but there has been no reply from the Turkish-Cypriot side , perhaps because Mr Denktash is ill .
My question is this : if this state of affairs continues , by which I mean if there is no reply from the Turkish-Cypriot side and this uncertainty persists , can the presidency of the Council assure us that the first decision taken at the Copenhagen Summit will be the decision to integrate the Republic of Cyprus on the basis of the Helsinki resolutions ?
My second question is addressed to Mr Verheugen , who is absent , which is somewhat unusual .
He is generally punctilious in attending our sessions .
I trust that his colleague will pass my question on to him .
The Annan plan , which contains a number of interesting points , places quantitative restrictions on the right of establishment , on property rights and on the right to elect and be elected of the citizens of both sides , who may apply them for ever , not just for a transitional period . For ever !
That is a violation of the acquis communautaire .
A Finnish national , for example , will have more rights in the Greek-Cypriot state than a Turkish Cypriot and a Portuguese national will have more rights in the Turkish-Cypriot state than a Greek Cypriot .
This is clearly at odds with the acquis communautaire .
Does the Commission intend - and I should like a reply to this question from Mr Verheugen when he arrives - to intervene in a positive and constructive manner in order to ensure that the Annan plan is in line rather than at odds with the acquis communautaire ?
Mr President , I have had the privilege of working for the past three years on the EU-Lithuania Joint Parliamentary Committee , where we have had to deal with several difficult issues which have already been mentioned , so I will not repeat them .
The determination of the candidate countries to overcome these problems and work positively has resulted in incredible progress .
For a small country like Wales , which I represent , it is also significant that many other small countries will be represented here in the European Parliament in their own right .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance wants a Europe in which these small nations and regions play a significant role and where , at a future date , countries like Wales will have the same rights as our friends from the ten candidate countries .
They must ensure that there is respect for minorities and that further steps are taken towards regionalisation .
Europe is becoming more diverse , not just economically and socially but also linguistically , culturally and politically , and we welcome this .
We must work towards a real Europe of the peoples , with equal rights and equal respect for everyone .
Mr President , paragraph 46 of the report calls on the Council 's Working Party on Nuclear Safety to report to Parliament on the implementation of safety measures for Temelin before accession negotiations are concluded .
This requirement is proper and important because the operators are currently not even satisfying key minimum safety requirements such as renovation of the much discussed 28.8 m level .
The much criticised quality of unsafe valves has not been improved either .
The pipes still do not have a second protective coating as European standards require .
The first protective coating is inadequate in any case .
The Temelin nuclear power station does not therefore at all satisfy the conditions laid down by the Council working party as agreed in the Melk Process .
If this is disregarded , the Commission 's attempt , early this month , to create new safety standards for nuclear power stations can be considered a failure from the outset .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Members of this Parliament and colleagues from the candidate countries , may I extend a particularly warm welcome to our Latvian colleagues who were elected to their country 's new parliament early in October this year .
I welcome them so warmly because I have felt very involved in their efforts and in their work for many years .
On days like today I ask myself - and I am sure I am not the only one to do so - what has particularly impressed me about the enlargement process in the last few years .
Of the very many remarkable achievements , one is very seldom acknowledged .
Many reports by the Commission or Parliament contain a short sentence that is pregnant with meaning - a sentence that rarely receives comment and where the attention paid to it bears no relation to its significance .
That sentence reads quite simply - and it applies to all ten candidate countries : ' The political conditions for accession are satisfied . '
That means the first and for me the most important accession criterion formulated in Copenhagen is not an obstacle .
I do not take this fundamental assessment for granted .
We ought to express our appreciation to all our colleagues in the parliaments and governments of the candidate countries for having stuck fast to democratic principles even in difficult situations .
The cultivation of democratic relations cannot be taken for granted in times of upheaval and reorientation , in times of enormous economic problems and radical changes in circumstances .
After decades of dictatorship , the people have shown what the political priority must be : democracy and freedom take precedence ; they must be cherished and safeguarded .
Mr President , we have arrived at a crucial milestone in the history of Europe .
I think that all of us experienced a pleasant buzz during this morning 's meeting .
From 1 May 2004 , the Community will include no fewer than 25 countries .
Almost the whole of Europe will now be united as a community .
Ten candidate countries have essentially completed their preparations for membership .
It has been a demanding and often painful process for these countries .
They have still to develop the administrative and judicial capacity needed for implementing and complying with EU legislation in purely practical terms , for example in the areas of agriculture , food and the environment .
That also applies at regional and local levels .
One of the things I believe is that it is important for there , in actual practice , to be compliance in all the sectors with the requirements for the integration of environmental and health protection .
That especially applies within agriculture and within infrastructure development .
It is a requirement that applies not only up until the accession of the new Member States but also , and most significantly of all of course , after that date .
Within the framework established as recently as at the Brussels Summit in October , the conditions of accession are now finally to be agreed for each individual new Member State .
What is fundamentally required in the negotiations is a high degree of flexibility , as well as of solidarity both with the candidate countries and , reciprocally , between the Member States .
We must see to it that the new Member States are guaranteed fair conditions of competition so that their accession to the EU can make a positive contribution to the development of the countries ' prosperity .
Moreover , I say this partly because only a positive and convincing endorsement by people at the forthcoming referendums will put this important enlargement in the proper perspective .
I am convinced that the Danish Presidency and Commissioner Verheugen have the flexibility and the attitude of solidarity that will make it possible in Copenhagen to take the final decision on accession for each individual country , and if not on 12 December , then on 13 December .
Mr President , the youngest generation can hardly imagine a continent rent asunder and the permanent threat of war between East and West .
The people of Central Europe cut down the barbed wire themselves and , since then , the candidate countries have made significant progress .
Despite this , we should not underestimate the amount of work that still needs to be done in the areas of good governance , corruption , human trafficking and minorities .
Today 's celebration marks the beginning of the home stretch , but the finish is not in sight for another two years .
It is disappointing that some parties , such as the People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) in the Netherlands , should seize upon enlargement as a means of regaining voters by exploiting public fears .
These people are being badly informed .
Responsible politicians point out not only the problems of enlargement , but also its great benefits .
Populism is the new epidemic , which must be fought with liberal means and should not be encouraged .
The European Union is itself incapable of preparing effectively for enlargement .
The very narrow-minded French national self-interest makes the implementation of agricultural reforms impossible .
Moreover , a division on the subject of Turkey 's accession is once again looming in Europe and in this Parliament .
The invites have been sent ; neither Giscard nor the Pope can retrieve these now from the post boxes , but it is too early to set a date for the start of the negotiations .
We refuse to join forces with a country that still condones torture .
For the coming generations , the greatest threats are outside our continent ; here , peace appears to be guaranteed .
Mr President , I have often , in this Assembly , had the opportunity to quote from the excellent Norwegian handbook for mountaineers .
The eminently simple message is that , in the event of discrepancies between the map and the terrain , it is the terrain which should be followed .
There are many examples , both in this House and in the European Union as a whole , of this fundamental rule 's not being taken note of .
Life goes on behind a veil of illusion , and the most striking example I have experienced is probably , in fact , this debate .
None of the fundamental problems of what is termed eastward enlargement has been solved .
On the one hand , there is no doubt that the economic realities will entail our maintaining the tradition , going back many years , of Western European exploitation of our Eastern European neighbours , involving differences in wages , differences in capital and so on .
On the other hand , the adjustment taking place is an expression of the demand for an infrastructure , which was referred to by my fellow countryman Torben Lund and which is a long way from being in place .
What is required is simply unfeasible .
Let me just add that our excellent Minister for Europe is a terrific songwriter but that songwriting ability is not enough in this context .
Mr President , Commissioner , this is an exceptional day for the nations of Europe , for we are undertaking - during peacetime - a process of enlargement , nay , of reunification which could not have been contemplated during the last century .
It is a unique moment and an opportunity for everyone , members and future members of the Union alike , as Europe 's history and diversity enshrine some fundamental values .
Europe is at a crossroads .
It has a larger population , it is more powerful and has more solidarity - it can still change world order .
This Europe is capable , as long as it has the strength and the courage to do so , to put the individual back at the heart of the planet , to integrate the social and environmental dimension in all its decisions .
The plan for sustainable development based on solidarity must be affirmed as the Union 's objective .
Together we will succeed .
Europe will be what we make of it : either an average power , entrenched in its egoisms - the egoisms of nations that have provided the countries involved in enlargement with only EUR 25 million whereas the Marshall Plan granted them EUR 97 million , or a Union promoting its political , social and environmental values .
For my part , ladies and gentlemen , I believe in the future that we are shaping , particularly with regard to the considerable efforts on the part of the candidate countries .
It is our turn to put our words into action .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to deal only with the subject of internal security , because this security is very valuable to us , to the citizens of the European Union just as much as to the European Union as an economic location .
One of our objectives with enlargement must be to gain more security by having a common strategy , a common policy in fighting against corruption , international crime , illegal immigration , and the like .
All the candidate countries have made tremendous efforts in the preparation process to bring internal security up to a high standard .
The European Union has been actively helping them in this with various programmes .
The Commission makes an annual review of the progress made .
Some have made a great deal of progress , while others sadly still have ground to make up .
Without naming any countries , I should like to draw attention to some of these shortcomings .
At one point in this report we read that increased efforts are needed to fight corruption and economic crime , which continue to give cause for serious concern .
Or that there are still deficits in the approximation of laws in the area of money laundering or the protection of financial interests .
Further on it says that particular attention needs to be paid to combating drugs and smuggling , fraud , corruption and organised crime , or that efforts to combat organised crime must be stepped up .
These are quite specific points that show where individual candidate countries still have to make enormous efforts .
As the candidate countries are represented here today , I call on you all to do everything to remedy the shortcomings that still exist and to ensure that the enlarged Union remains a union of security .
I am sure that , with all the support you are receiving , you really will be able to work off these deficits and reach the objectives .
That would be in the interests of us all .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , together with Mr Oostlander I have for many years now had the privilege of following the accession process from the point of view of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
The written report says what still now remains to be done .
Unlike Mr Pirker , I should like to emphasise the tremendous progress that all the candidate countries have made in this area that is as broad as it is difficult - and in which they have also been supported by the Commission and our Member States : the abolition of the death penalty , which still existed at least in the laws of a few candidate countries , discrimination against various minorities , Russian minorities for example , the improved integration of Roma minorities , the construction of a democratic police and democratic criminal prosecution authorities and other important authorities in the justice and administration sector and much more besides has been achieved by really unparalleled efforts .
This has been the case in all the candidate countries , to a greater or lesser extent to be sure , but it is particularly true of the Czech Republic , which is particularly close to my heart .
I therefore find it all the more regrettable that the present Austrian Government is showing no recognition of the positive things that have been achieved and that at least one of our ruling parties is trying to win votes for itself with anti-Czech slogans in the current election campaign .
They are of course focusing on the past again .
I hope that after Sunday 's elections we will have a government in Austria that makes the common future of the Czech Republic and Austria central and stands in the way neither of the enlargement nor of the deepening of the European Union .
Mr President , this is a period when we confirm the end to historic divisions .
Firstly I would like to say a word about Cyprus and urge a positive response from the Turkish Cypriot authorities to the Annan plan .
I realise that Mr Denktash is sadly still very unwell , but it must be possible to signal agreement on this plan as the basis for negotiation .
I know the majority of Turkish Cypriots want that positive response .
Secondly , I urge support for Amendment No 24 to the report , tabled by the ELDR Group .
This calls for the transformation of the accession monitoring process into a system of mutual peer review applicable to all Member States , old and new .
This would ensure respect for democratic accountability , integrity of public administration , non-discrimination , civil liberties and the rule of law .
We need to invest money , time and effort in our systems of democracy and justice throughout the European Union .
The existing 15 Member States are certainly not perfect and we need to invest at least as much as we do in our agriculture .
We spend a lot of time talking about agriculture and structural funds .
We need to spend at least as much time talking about the underpinnings of democracy and justice in all our Member States , through mutually constructive evaluation .
Mr President , I am in favour of the enlargement of the European Union to include the whole of geographical Europe and beyond , but if the major powers that dominate the European Union enlarge it , it is not out of generosity .
Their industrial and financial groups have already got a grip on the economy of Eastern European countries and enlargement is the ideal means whereby this grip may be tightened .
Accession to the European Union will not protect the workers of these countries against unemployment that is already high , the low wages or the reduction of social protection schemes and will not prevent peasant farmers from being driven from their land .
These countries will not be integrated into the European Union as equals , but as subordinates subject to the decisions of the major powers and the domination of large employers in France , Germany or England .
The workers will have to work for Western companies , earning noticeably less than the already inadequate salaries of their Western counterparts .
Furthermore , it is indeed scandalous to note that , for several years , the citizens of these countries will not be able to enjoy the same rights to movement and settlement enjoyed by current EU citizens .
That is why when these countries join the European Union , I shall welcome the workers and the working classes and express the hope that in future struggles to change our lot , we shall be fighting side by side .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in general I welcome Mr Brok 's report .
I also want to say thank you for all the work that has been done by the Commission , the European Parliament and , especially , the candidate countries in order to make enlargement possible .
Today , I nonetheless want to draw attention to the sustainable development strategy adopted by the Gothenburg Summit and also to the UN 's environmental management programme adopted in Johannesburg .
The EU has promised to take the lead in implementing this management programme .
The trend towards ecologically sustainable development must now show itself in all the EU 's policy areas and in all the plans and programmes aimed at meeting the need both for a change of direction in the EU and for environmental investment in the candidate countries .
There must therefore be a considerable increase in the proportion of resources from the structural funds and from the common agricultural policy that are to be set aside for the environment .
Up until 2006 , approximately 10 % of the structural funds are to be set aside for the purposes of environmental infrastructure , for example the cleansing of waste water .
It is also necessary for environmental impact assessments to be made of the agricultural and structural policies , something that is also pointed out by the European Parliament .
That comes into force in the Member States in 2003 and is absolutely necessary if we are to bring about sustainable development throughout the enlarged EU .
Mr President , I warmly endorse this report and I would like in particular to speak on the issue of Turkey , given the recent unfortunate remarks by Mr Giscard d 'Estaing .
I consider these comments from the chairman of the Convention unacceptable and inappropriate .
I take particular exception to his comment that people who backed Turkey 's accession are ' the adversaries of the European Union ' .
I support Turkey 's membership of the EU , but only on the basis that they fulfil the Copenhagen criteria .
I do not subscribe to the narrow view that the Union is a ' Christian ' club , I prefer to see it as a pluralist entity which reflects the diverse nature of the EU as it exists today , even before further expansion .
I have always believed that Turkey 's accession would provide an important bridgehead between the West and the Islamic world .
Since 11 September this has become even more important .
Eventual Turkish membership would demonstrate the ability of western democracy and culture to co-exist and fully cooperate with the Islamic world .
The recent change in government in Turkey in no way alters my view .
The people have spoken and we have to accept their verdict .
I welcome the strong commitment given by AKP deputy leader Mr Abdullah Gul during his recent visit to Brussels to continue with the reform programme .
However , before a date can be set for the commencement of negotiations for entry , further proof must be forthcoming that this reform programme is being implemented .
Releasing political prisoners , ending torture , subjecting the security forces to the rule of law , respecting the rights of the Kurdish minority and other measures relating to the Copenhagen criteria are sure steps to securing the date for accession negotiations .
Progress on this lies in the hands of the incoming administration in Turkey , not the EU .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , as chair of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities of the European Parliament , I should like to say that I am delighted that , as far as enlargement of the Union and laying the foundations for a real united Europe based on our common values is concerned , we have at last turned into the home straight .
As we do so , I feel that the women of Europe have a very serious role to play and that it is high time , in the run up to the new constitutional Treaty of the European Union , that we placed respect for women 's human rights and the practical application of the recognised principle of gender equality in all sectors of economic , social and political life in Europe at the top of the political agenda .
Unfortunately , we are still a long way from this vision , as was perfectly clear during this morning 's debate in the Chamber , when the list of speakers looked more like the membership list of a gentlemen 's club to which women guests are occasionally invited .
I am acutely concerned about the position of women in many of the candidate countries ; their situation has not improved with the changeover to a free economy .
Unemployment has risen and wage differentials have increased .
Infrastructures for caring for children and the elderly are deteriorating , while trafficking in human beings , trading in women and children by international organised crime gangs , has taken on explosive proportions .
We in the Committee on Women 's Rights have repeatedly emphasised that efficiently applied measures to combat the sexual exploitation of and violence against women must be at the heart of the enlargement process .
We would again point out that parties and governments need to promote the equal participation of men and women in decision-making procedures .
There is no such thing as a credible policy which does not promote gender equality in decision-making procedures and future planning .
Parties and governments should field the same number of men and women candidates in the 2004 European elections .
Enlargement gives us the opportunity to sink the foundations of democracy even deeper .
I am also convinced that gender equality is not a superfluous luxury ; it is a basic necessity if we are to improve the quality of our decisions , improve our understanding of contemporary problems and make our democracy function more efficiently .
Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity , also on behalf of the Dutch Liberals , to express our support for the enlargement by the twelve countries with which negotiations are now under way .
This is for historical reasons , which were repeated over and over again this morning , but also for political , economic and cultural reasons .
We are in favour of enlargement , but I think that we should not further cover up the issue , which is made all the more pressing by the additional problems that the Big Bang will bring with it .
Being a Member of the European Union is more difficult than becoming one .
Most candidates seem to be making sufficient progress , but some of them have serious problems , particularly in the field of corruption , implementation of the acquis , administrative capacity and independent financial control .
Whilst the Commission 's progress reports are excellent , we are not yet convinced that the accession of all ten will be able to take place in 2004 .
We will evaluate this at the end of the negotiations .
The Commission 's regime of progress monitoring and safeguard clauses can sometimes provide the answer , but this fine instrument can only be deployed to a limited extent .
In countries where the rule of law does not prevail , the safeguard clauses will not be of any help .
What is the Commission 's view on this ?
After all , what does the EU stand for if essential principles such as the rule of law are not in place ?
We take the view , moreover , that these conditions should apply not only to acceding countries , but also to the current Fifteen .
A positive example is the report by Mr Jan Mulder in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
This brings me to the final problem , that being that the EU 's internal decision-making process is far from structured .
We would like the forthcoming IGC to have an outcome that contributes to solving all kinds of bottlenecks , such as codecision of Parliament and the Council , public access to the Council 's legislative meetings , repeal of the right of veto in the Council and the election of the President of the European Commission by the European Parliament or by the electorate .
If , as in Nice , the IGC does not solve institutional bottlenecks , is there a plan B we can fall back on ?
This is a question for the Council .
At any rate , we should , above all , vote in favour of a fair-minded enlargement in April 2003 .
Mr President , talking of democracy and enlargement , I have just received a message that a journalist and members of Rifondazione have been expelled from Prague , where they had gone to take part in a demonstration against the enlargement of ? ? ? ? .
I condemn this move .
The European Union is neither a charitable institution nor the champion of prosperity and freedom for the people .
It is a depressing mechanism for defending the interests of big business , it is the European outpost of the global imperialist system , which is hitting out at workers ' rights and building up an army and repressive mechanisms to silence any opposition .
The objective of enlargement is to fill the vacuum left when the socialist system was overturned in Europe , witness the cries of revenge heard in the Chamber today .
The objective is also to strengthen the new bourgeoisie , fretting about its sovereignty as people become more and more aware of what they lost along with socialism .
At the same time , NATO is being extended eastwards and taking on a more aggressive role with the full support of the United States .
The nature of the European Union and the experience of the people in my country during 22 years of membership is such that we cannot conceal the truth from other people ; we are compelled to warn them of the consequences of their incarceration .
Despite expectations of prosperity cultivated by propaganda , the consequences of integration will be catastrophic for the economy of these countries , where production is still far lower than it was during the last years of socialism .
The European Union already has a balance of trade surplus of EUR 30 billion a year , in other words instead of financing it is being financed .
As far as Cyprus is concerned , it is common knowledge that the Annan plan , which has the full backing of the United States and the European Union , is a far cry from the framework of the UN resolutions and the cross-community agreements reached so far , which have been dumped in the bin .
It is a disguised form of confederation , which will result in institutional recognition of partition and acceptance of the fait accompli of Turkish invasion and occupation .
This fact has wider implications because it is tantamount to acceptance on the part of the UN itself of the use of military violence to achieve political aims and move borders .
This development is the direct consequence of the procedure to integrate Cyprus into the European Union , the G8 resolution and the Helsinki resolution and our party warned of their consequences a very long time ago .
It may well be the first time in the 84-year history of the Communist Party of Greece that we are unable to express satisfaction at the fact that our predictions have come true .
Mr President , as a Pan-European it has been my privilege to work towards this great day since the 1970s .
Otto von Habsburg was here today , he has been mentioned several times and I was able to accompany him all along the way .
I celebrate this day , which is a great day for me .
As the son of a Bohemian family , I am also glad that a member has spoken Czech here for the first time today , my friend Daniel Kroupa .
He is in the tradition of that great social democrat Jiri Pelikan , who was here as a Czech in exile following the first direct elections of Members of the European Parliament .
There have also , however , always been members of Bohemia 's second ethnic group here , the Sudeten Germans .
I am thinking of Volkmar Gabert and Egon Klepsch .
I , too , am part of that tradition ; we have always seen ourselves as Bohemia 's ambassadors here .
The Pan-European idea originated in Bohemia 80 years ago ; Bohemia is the heart of Europe .
That is why I regret the fact that , at the start of this year , there was suddenly talk in Prague of defending the post-war order .
We do not need a post-war order in Europe .
We do not need a wartime or pre-war order either ; what we want to build at the start of the twenty-first century is a new , equitable order of nations , built on reconciliation , on healing of the wounds we have inflicted on one another , on justice , on mutual respect and mutual recognition .
I therefore call on the Czech authorities to cast unjust decrees like the Bene ? decrees on the scrap heap of history where they belong .
Let us join together in building a new Europe where the peoples live together as equals , where ethnic groups and minorities are protected , where the European cultural diversity that was expressed so impressively in the speeches here this morning is respected .
Mr President , I want to thank the rapporteur for a typically sound report .
This is an historic day in Parliament .
Enlargement is the largest issue we have to work on within the European Union .
Europe will in that way become more secure for future generations , and democracy will be stronger in our part of the world .
In certain quarters , a number of people are , however , sceptical about this cooperation , which has been accused of being only for the richer countries in our part of the world .
Now , we are opening up that cooperation to all the countries in our part of the world and showing that it is an option for the whole of Europe .
I share the view expressed by quite a few other speakers that we can all become winners in this situation .
Clearly , enlargement will entail short-term costs , but I am completely convinced that we shall see financial gains .
I myself come from the Baltic region .
I can envisage the economy growing in our part of Europe , thanks to enlargement .
In the area of environmental policy , the major gains will be made through our taking measures in those countries that are now becoming members of the EU .
It will be of benefit to them , and it will be of benefit to ourselves .
The same applies in the area of the labour market where there is a risk of jobs ' moving as a result of poorer conditions .
That situation will be improved through our all obtaining common minimum conditions .
The other day , I was at a seminar on the subject of cross-border crime .
Through close cooperation , we shall resolve this issue too .
We all of us have the opportunities to become winners , both the existing EU countries and the candidate countries .
It depends upon ourselves , however , and upon how we deal with the challenge now facing us .
What we are concerned with here is a more diverse Europe that is richer economically , socially and culturally .
Mr President , last week , I gave secondary school children in my province a few lessons on Europe and the imminent enlargement .
My audience was , and this is striking in this day and age , attentive , interested , and also unperturbed .
My political statement that it is not our political , or our personal , merit that we were born on the sunny side of the Iron Curtain and that it is through no fault of their own that the acceding countries had to live in our shadow for so long , was taken on board with due respect .
However , whether my argument was sufficiently convincing was evident from the questions afterwards .
How does it serve us , what are the precise benefits to us ?
This morning 's debate also shows the other side of the coin .
Alongside the firm conviction that it is important to have this one indivisible Europe to guarantee that people can live together in peace , there were also other notions .
How welcome are we ?
Are we not turning into second-class citizens and what are you giving us in terms of extra funding to help us convince the citizens on our side ?
We have managed to convincingly set in motion an enlargement scenario that should succeed .
However , we should take to heart the fact that we have been less successful totally convincing our citizens of the importance of , and need for , the political ideal that this enlargement is for us all .
We have communicated too little , and this means that uncertainty , or latent gut feelings , have a chance of surfacing , and enlargement degenerates into a political game with short-term gain .
I am also taking part in this debate in my capacity as enlargement rapporteur for the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and I therefore follow the issue closely .
Something else that we should take to heart is the fact that people worry .
These worries revolve around food safety , free movement , environmental issues and the cross-border approach to them .
These also involve the nuclear power plants , shut down on the one hand and shrouded in doubt on the other .
I think that now , after Copenhagen , we should tackle this issue firmly with both hands and far more effectively .
Mr President , on my way here to Strasbourg I was reading Antony Beevor 's excellent and quite shocking account of the Red Army 's advance on Berlin .
It was splendidly fitting travel reading for this historic part-session .
The most important task of enlargement the Union has to face is to ensure that never again do European nations submit to the aspirations of power-hungry dictators or are driven to hatred for one another .
It is just as crucial to strengthen our common democratic structures at the same time as enlargement takes place .
I am glad that the representatives of the applicant countries are able to participate in the work of the delegation discussing the future of Europe .
Until now we have spoken all too little about how the EU itself will benefit from enlargement .
We are not actually just the party that is giving something .
The candidate countries ' magnificent cultural tradition and capacity for creativity will provide new opportunities for competitiveness built on information and skills as well as an improved quality of life for our citizens .
Cultural and linguistic diversity is a great source of wealth and offers enormous potential .
It is also gratifying to see that the applicant countries are also already involved in the Culture 2000 programme , among others .
Criteria for membership , however , must be kept in mind right up until the negotiations have ended .
We must remember that viable labour relations are an essential part of the Union 's activity .
As vice-chairman of the Estonian delegation , I am concerned about information received that social dialogue in Estonia has broken down .
That is not acceptable nor is it wise .
I hope that my neighbouring country , which has been very successful in the financial and technology sectors , can sort this problem out too .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner Verheugen , I would like to start by thanking Mr Brok and all the rapporteurs for this report .
We are coming to the end of the first stage of European reunification , and this morning has given us a timely , encouraging glimpse of the future .
Reunification will continue until we have welcomed into the embrace of the Union or into another , essentially just as effective body , all the countries which share the European culture and its basic values .
It is imperative that we continue with this process if we want to help to establish the values of democracy , freedom and equality throughout the world , to make every day a day of greater peace , peace which is increasingly understanding of others and increasingly shared with others .
I understand the issue of Europe 's borders , but the borders of our society will be defined by the heritage we can offer the world : the more we share our culture , the wider our borders will be and the more citizens there will be who opt to share our ideas for the institutional , political and social organisation of the Community .
Together with the other accession States , Slovenia is important because it represents the gateway through which the Balkan States who will share our multicultural , multiethnic and multifaith society will have to enter in future .
I believe that the political goal we have achieved must be matched by progress in upholding human rights , the achievement of economic and social standards and the combating of corruption and crimes whose levels are still very high .
It is genuinely important to discard the individualistic mindset and realise that we are part of a larger body , which we must essentially complement and never stubbornly disregard , where everyone has a part to play in the endeavours to achieve common goals .
I hope that the Convention will be able to draw up a proposal which makes the instruments of democracy operational , which will help other areas of the world too and bring peace , prosperity and progress to mankind .
Mr President , the EU-Lithuania Joint Parliamentary Committee met in Brussels last week and the discussions confirmed the progress made towards accession which is spelt out in paragraphs 78 to 84 of the report .
Two chapters remain to be closed .
Firstly in agriculture , where some flexibility on the issue of quotas would be welcome and secondly , in the financial chapter , where the contribution to the financing of the closure of the Ignalina nuclear power plant and the provision of alternative electricity generation are outstanding matters .
This requires agreement on the decommissioning procedures and the timescale .
The JPC noted the need to closely monitor progress with the SAPARD , Phare and Ispra programmes and to ensure that Lithuania is fully prepared to exploit the structural and rural funding possibilities after accession .
The early approval of the single programming document is essential in this respect .
Regarding the recent agreement made over the Russian enclave of Kaliningrad , I want to stress that Lithuanian sovereignty must be respected and Schengen membership not compromised .
We are , however , concerned that the practical problems may delay the implementation .
I have made a study of the nuclear aspects of accession .
The closures of the nuclear power plants at Ignalina and Kozloduy both require an energy strategy which takes neighbouring countries into account .
For example the completion of Unit 2 at Cernovoda is fully justified by the Phare study of August 2001 .
The closure of units 3 and 4 at Kozloduy should be reassessed in the light of the International Atomic Energy Agency 's conclusion , in its report , issued in June that these units have reached a level of operational safety which corresponds to those of the same age in other parts of the world .
I hope that the Council will agree to such a revaluation .
Mr President , the enlargement of the European Union from 2004 constitutes an historic milestone in the construction of Europe , something that we all sincerely welcome , for several reasons .
First , because it symbolises the reconciliation of two parts of the same continent that were divided for more than half a century , until little more than a decade ago .
Second , because this is the greatest enlargement in the history of the European Union , with the number of Member States almost doubling and a one-third increase in its population and territory .
Third , because it encompasses countries that until recently lived under a state-run economy , which are now experiencing the painful but necessary phase of re-structuring their economies and which have a relatively low average per capita income .
Fourthly , because most of the new countries still have a very large agricultural sector in comparison to the current European Union .
It is in this context that I should like to emphasise two aspects :
firstly , aid must be dedicated to these countries ; Community aid , financial aid and technical aid , in order to enable them to speed up their process of economic recovery and development .
We must also bear in mind , however , that some regions of the current European Union of 15 are also very poor , and hence the European Union cannot at the same time abandon the policy of economic and social cohesion that it has been pursuing for these countries for some years ;
secondly , it must be noted that doubling the number of farmers , with the accession of Romania and Bulgaria , will require the common agricultural policy to be vastly simplified , and will also require a reduction in aid for all farmers , both future and present , following the new funding limits for the CAP laid down by the Brussels European Council of 25 October .
The European Union must , therefore , take the proposal to reform the CAP recently put forward by its Commissioner for Agriculture seriously , in order to lay down a better future for farmers , both in the current Union and in the Union of the future .
Mr President , and you , Commissioner Verheugen and Mr Haarder , Minister for European Affairs of the country to hold the presidency , who have both worked so hard today , may I say that you must have had a long day .
I would , however , like to raise a matter that President Prodi mentioned today .
He spoke in favour of a future European Union developing for itself a strong good-neighbour policy .
Enlargement of the European Union in all its stages meant it acquired new neighbours .
On the previous occasion the European Union acquired the Northern Dimension in addition to the western and southern dimensions that already existed .
As a result of the forthcoming round of enlargement we shall have a very special eastern dimension .
The good-neighbour policy should not , however , remain just words on paper : the European Union should also develop a proper practical policy with goals and action .
The northern and eastern dimensions meet in the Baltic Sea area .
After enlargement the Baltic Sea will virtually be an internal sea of the EU , except , however , in one corner where it meets Russia and what is almost that country 's most populous region , St. Petersburg and the area around it .
It is in this region that we must strengthen even further the cooperation that has already commenced , with the aim of achieving stability and social and ecological balance there .
Furthermore , future regional and structural policy must make transboundary cooperation and cooperation on both the old and the new borders possible .
Mr President , much has already been said about Turkey today .
That is not at all surprising since this Parliament is a reflection of the population of the European Union and this topic is very much on the minds of our citizens at home .
There are growing signs that in Copenhagen in December it is intended to give Turkey a date for the start of accession negotiations .
Were the Council representative 's words today not very clear ?
But we are not under any pressure to move .
The Copenhagen criteria have not been met and they are not negotiable .
In this connection I would like to thank Mr Verheugen for speaking so clearly on the subject of Turkey .
Important as Turkey is for us , there can be no political discounts for the Cyprus question or for Turkey 's geostrategic role .
Turkey has always wanted to set its own rules for accession under the slogan ' We are not like other candidates ' .
Turkey has always tried to put pressure on us , but that is not the way forward .
It would , after all , be an affront to the representatives of the candidate countries present here today .
Nevertheless , people like the German Federal Chancellor , for example , never tire of saying they will support Turkey 's demand for a date to be set .
That is not just a sign of severe incompetence in European policy .
This chancellor , who has lied to and deceived his own people , is trying to make good the mistakes of his election campaign .
Now relations between Germany and America are to be improved again at the expense of the European Union as a whole .
Is that not pure opportunism ?
Is it not beyond belief ?
It is intolerably dishonest .
It is particularly dishonest to the Turkish people .
Is it not more honest to say to Turkey that there are still problems there and that we must address those problems in their own interest , because otherwise they cannot be solved ?
The honest thing is to say that rapprochement between Turkey and the European Union can only come about in small , steady steps , if at all .
The road is still not an easy one .
We hope that Turkey , this great and proud nation , will pursue its road steadfastly in its own real interest and that it will at some point consider whether it really wants to cede so many sovereign rights to the European Union in accession or whether it would not rather cooperate with us on another level .
We are making this offer even now .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I do not understand what all the fuss is about .
We have been arguing about Turkey since yesterday .
Whilst I have a very high regard for Mrs Sommer , it is she in particular who makes it impossible for me to understand at all why , when we are talking about enlargement , we are suddenly arguing about a question of principle , namely whether Turkey belongs in the European Union or not .
We will very soon have an opportunity to deal with this question objectively when we talk about the Oostlander report .
It is now a member of your group who is the rapporteur ; he is a well-known politician and at any rate not a supporter of Turkey .
His report will give us an opportunity to dispute or discuss this subject objectively .
When I read Mr Ferber 's motion , Amendment No 7 , I increasingly suspect that it is not really about Turkey and the European Union at all .
It appears to be about Germany , about German domestic politics .
It appears to be about the fact that there will shortly be two important regional elections in Germany , in Hesse and in Lower Saxony .
We supposedly have to argue about Turkey in the European Parliament now , but that is the real reason why we are taking the opportunity to do so .
That is the main problem .
I will be perfectly honest with you .
At the moment I have more problems with Turkey than Mrs Sommer does , because I do not think much of Islamists , and I believe they are Islamists , even if nowadays they call themselves something else .
I am very curious to know how they intend bringing about everything they have promised .
I have tremendous problems with the latest development in particular .
All the same , I do not see why we are now misusing this debate for something else .
By suddenly producing such artificial debates , we are not actually being honest with the people of the European Union either .
If you want , let us do that when we are discussing the Oostlander report , and then people will see that we are capable of discussing openly and honestly .
Mr President , for 28 years , Berlin and Germany were divided .
That is now history .
For 28 years , Nicosia and Cyprus have been divided .
Let that be history , and let it be so as soon as possible .
Turkey must respect the UN resolutions and give its full support to efforts to reach a political solution regarding Cyprus .
If the discussions fail , Cyprus must nonetheless be given the green light for membership in 2004 at the Copenhagen European Council this coming December .
It is important to make it clear to the new Islamophile Turkish Government that it must ignore the Turkish Cypriot threat of a permanent division of Cyprus if the southern part is brought into the EU before the discussions between Turkey and Greece are concluded .
I assume it is perfectly clear to the Turks that their country can never embark upon membership negotiations if the occupying troops are not withdrawn from a future EU Member State , namely Cyprus .
We are concerned here with the credibility of the EU and with the EU as a peace project .
Initiatives on the part of the new Turkish Government and the UN on the Cyprus issue must be based upon this obvious insight .
In the text produced by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , I have put forward the view that Turkey 's democratic development , especially when it comes to the protection of ethnic and religious minorities , must be a prerequisite of increased financial pre-accession aid from the EU .
In 1900 , a quarter of Turkey 's population was Christian .
A hundred years later , a thousandth of the population is Christian .
That is a tragic expression of extensive assaults upon religious freedom and religious tolerance , particularly affecting Christian Syrians and Armenians .
I have also helped tighten up the appeals made by the European Parliament to the candidate countries when it comes , for example , to combating corruption , and I have also added an economic perspective .
I should like to welcome the candidate countries to the EU .
Mr President , I speak as a Member of the EU-Bulgaria Joint Parliamentary Committee and also as shadow rapporteur on Romania .
I will try to be brief .
On the issue of Bulgaria and Romania we need a target date , a focus .
Therefore I fully support the proposed target date .
Also , during a recent visit to Malta I saw the wonderful work being done in connection with sexual orientation .
We must not leave that out of the equation when we look at the rights of minorities .
It was clear to me from the work of the Malta gay rights movement that the employment industrial relations act is not compliant with the employment framework directive , especially in relation to sexual orientation .
I welcome the positive statements on Turkey .
As regards the negative statements on Turkey , I am afraid that , sadly , we have seen racism and xenophobia rear their ugly heads .
We must apply the same terms , conditions and principles . We cannot be selective in the application of principles .
The same principles must apply to all the candidate countries and also to the countries such as Turkey which have indicated that they wish to join the European Union .
If we turn Turkey away , I believe that will be an action that we will live to regret .
Mr President , I would like to ask the Commissioner , who is here today , and the President-in-Office of the Council to explain how they are going to apply the principle of equality within this enlargement process .
In my view , following the Franco-German agreement , it is necessary to stipulate that the financial impact of enlargement must not fall to the poorest areas , who are beneath the Community average and who require sustained progress .
Equally , the bill for enlargement must not fall to the richest .
We must protect the whole of the enlarged Europe from any risk of impoverishment of any part of it .
We must extend paragraph 24 of the Brok report to all areas and regions of the European Union , since enlargement must not have negative repercussions for any Community territory .
I would like to say to the candidate countries that they must bear in mind that the defence of human beings , without exceptions , without discrimination , is today the backbone of the European Union .
The exclusion of women , the exclusion of Romany minorities , are today the focus of our attention .
There is no room in Europe for exclusion , for expulsion , for marginalisation , whether collective or individual .
Europe , as from today , is entering into a new dynamic , which , since it is stronger and more powerful , must be more sensitive to its most distant and distinct elements .
Mr President , I would like to make three comments .
As far as enlargement with Turkey is concerned , it is the usual practice to have a debate .
We cannot express regret that European citizens lack an interest in Europe whilst also rejecting the debate on enlargement , enlargement which would be the furthest removed from the European Union 's original plan .
At the same time , the enlargement process that is currently being undertaken includes the greatest number of countries .
We must remember that we have never enlarged by more than three countries at once .
The current enlargement process is not yet completed .
We all hope that it will be a success .
Let us complete it successfully before launching a debate on possible future enlargements .
With respect to the European Union 's major neighbours , one of which - but not the only one - is Turkey , we must be capable of proposing another solution to the dilemma with which we are trying to grapple , that of accession or exclusion .
Yet , as the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is proposing , there is another solution , one better adapted to the problem raised .
This solution is to define a specific framework of relations including a substantial economic section and which enables us to finance a specific number of projects and infrastructures .
This is how the continent of North America is organised , and no one there is proposing that Mexico or Canada should be members of the United States of America .
The Group of the European People 's Party is proposing another option , which is much better adapted to the real problem .
I am sure that Parliament will be open to the feelings of the population and will ask to move forward in this direction and lay down a new framework between the European Union and its neighbouring countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the enlargement of the European Union this time round is truly impressive .
Ten new countries are about to join .
I should like , if I may , to turn my attention in this interesting and highly promising development to Cyprus , rather than to what are indisputably more densely populated countries far closer to home .
Cyprus , that tiny country with its long history and tragic vicissitudes over recent years , covers the far side of the Mediterranean dimension of the European Union and , by virtue of its position , can contribute a great deal to the Union 's Mediterranean policy .
We all know that the political importance of Cyprus far outweighs its economic importance to the future development of the European Union .
At the same time , however , by integrating Cyprus , the European Union itself is demonstrating that it is an international entity with international credentials and this will help enormously in resolving the Cyprus problem .
The implementation of the acquis communautaire in Cyprus is the key to reconciliation and cooperation and will enable Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots to live side by side in a single , federal , twin community , free , independent state which respects human rights and the ethnic origins and religious persuasions of its people .
It is the basis on which a fair , viable , workable solution can be found ; the sort of solution that the UN Secretary-General 's plan should bring about once it has been negotiated by the interested parties .
More importantly , the integration of Cyprus into the European Union is a test and a challenge to Turkey in its efforts to speed up the process of meeting the Community criteria , the process which will enable it too to join the European Union at a later date .
May everything go according to plan !
Mr President , after today 's debate , I understand why Turkey is calling upon the forthcoming December Council to set a date for the start of the negotiations .
I support Turkey 's request , for what is happening here is a farce , started by Mr Giscard d 'Estaing and continuing today in this Chamber .
Here , we are not discussing whether Turkey is fulfilling the conditions it needs to fulfil in order to become a member of the Union in the near future - and we can be rigorous in demanding that it does fulfil them - we are opening a debate on whether or not Turkey is to be allowed to join the Union in the future and wondering whether a different sort of association might be appropriate .
We are going back on decisions already made and reopening the debate on the opening of a line of credit for a major country - a country which is essential to Europe and the West - which has applied to become a full member of the Union .
Personally , I support the line taken by Mr Brok in his report and his resolution , where he calls for greater pre-accession cooperation from the Commission and for the Council to adopt a position which is more in line with that expressed on occasions by Parliament , but I do not support the Ferber amendment - which I will vote against tomorrow - in that if it were to be adopted , the whole approach of the Brok report and resolution would be turned upside down and they would make no sense .
There are good reasons for what I am saying : we have a duty to be unambiguous towards a major country which practises moderate Islam , is pro the West , which could have great cultural significance on our borders and could give substance to a Union foreign and security policy .
I hope that , tomorrow , we will reject the Ferber amendment - as a member of the European People 's Party I will do so - and we will thus be able to take a step in that direction .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as we draw near to the close of the debate it is not easy to introduce another new aspect .
Since there is broad agreement here that we welcome this process and we are taking for granted that ten new states will soon be sending their representatives here officially , I should , however , like to raise one aspect again , that is the necessity of canvassing in all future 25 countries for this also to find acceptance with public opinion , with the citizens .
I think that is a great task that lies ahead of us and cannot only begin when the accession process is almost completed and the treaties signed .
I come from a region that in 1990 entered this European Union overnight , as it were .
I know that many citizens experienced the necessary restructuring process as a personal defeat , a downgrading that marked them out as losers .
I think we need to make clear to people in the candidate countries , too , that membership of the European Union also results in resources and means being made available to cushion the citizens and help them through the difficult process .
That will be a big task for us because after all we need majorities in the population .
If we in this Parliament are agreed , that is to be welcomed , but we must take the citizens with us in this process , which will certainly not be as easy as it sounds .
Let us work together to make it possible .
As a member of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , I should like to see the advisory committees more fairly and intensively involved in the next concrete discussions of the outcome of negotiations .
I know that is a great political achievement , a great political report , but the individual specialist committees must surely have something important to say about the process .
Mr President , we are heading for the unification of Europe .
This is a natural consequence of the winds of freedom having swept away the closed borders of Europe and the insurmountable antagonisms , as well as the suspicion , the Soviet system and the Communist dictatorships .
I am convinced that 2004 will go down in history as 1989 has already done .
The work of enlargement must proceed further , however .
The new Member States must be treated with respect .
The principle of subsidiarity must serve more clearly as a guide to cooperation as the EU grows .
National self-determination must be the same in the new Member States as in the old .
What we do not want the EU to interfere in where our own countries are concerned , the EU must not interfere in where the new Member States are concerned , either .
The enlargement process must not cease after 2004 and 2007 .
We already know that new applications for EU membership are on the way .
At the Helsinki European Council in 1999 , Turkey was recognised as a candidate country for EU membership .
Three years later , the European Parliament cannot now , as some amendments demand , try to change this .
Nothing has happened to justify such a measure , so the basic conditions governing an international , confidence-building project cannot suddenly be changed .
It would be unworthy of a generous and responsible European Parliament in this way to change the basic conditions set for Turkey .
Turkey has made great progress in order to be able to embark upon the negotiations with a view to EU membership .
There are things that remain to be done , and it is for Turkey to decide whether it wishes to continue .
I am nonetheless convinced that , in the future , a democratic Turkish society governed by the rule of law may be crucially important to a better understanding between the West and the Muslim world .
Such friends are valuable at this time .
Mr President , I absolutely agree with what Mr Arvidsson has just said with regard to Turkey .
Turkey has improved its human rights situation and its legal praxis in a way that is worthy of our respect .
I think it is very unfortunate , however , that it has been suggested that there should be a change of policy .
Our message to Ankara should remain the same as it has been the whole time , which is that EU membership is open to all European countries provided that the criteria for accession are satisfied .
With enlargement , the Internal Market , which is the EU 's core mechanism , will grow larger , which will improve the EU 's chances of success in the global markets .
In the pauses between the celebratory speeches , however , we have to remember that achieving a viable Internal Market required and will require , in the future too , great effort on the part of all concerned .
For that very reason , the Copenhagen criteria also include the requirement that there is competitiveness within the Internal Market .
I agree with the rapporteur , Mr Brok , that there is still a lot of work ahead of us .
Making political decisions is easier than bringing about changes in the economic structure .
The timetable for 2004 is a tight one .
It is difficult to implement economic structural reforms at times but we have to keep to the commitments that have been made .
We have to ensure in particular that the future Member States have the administrative and legal capacity for operating as part of the Internal Market .
Our job as politicians is to guarantee that the Internal Market will function successfully after enlargement .
This means that the work cannot stop with Copenhagen .
Even after accession the new Member States will have to continue with their policies of reform .
The internal reforms the applicant countries implement will nevertheless increase the prosperity and stability of their societies in the long term .
The European Parliament will also have to monitor the situation and ensure that the present Member States , the Commission and the future Member States each play their part in completing the enlargement process .
Mr President , one evening , after winning a battle , Winston Churchill declared ' it is not the end , it is not even the beginning of the end , but one can say that it is the end of the beginning ' .
I think that this sums up our situation perfectly .
Our friends who are joining us feel , no doubt , that they have arrived at the end of the road .
In fact , they are only at the end of the first stage along the road and tomorrow we must all set about building Europe .
They are not arriving in a ready-made world .
We must establish a political Union and both the foreign policy and defence policy must be drafted .
The institutions are due to be radically reformed within the framework of the Convention and already , those who are due to join us are taking part in the work of the Convention .
This is a Europe that we are therefore going to build together .
Do not have any preconceptions or the feeling that you are arriving in a world made by others and for others : you are arriving along with others in a world that we shall all be building together .
And I would simply like to give you what I feel is the secret of influence in Europe .
Some believe that one must be hard and strict , that one must constantly complain and protest in favour of one 's national interests .
This is far from being the case .
Europe gives itself to those who support it .
This is the fundamental rule of the European Union : support it and it will serve you well !

I should like to thank Mr Bourlanges for his concluding remark which gives me a welcome opportunity now to present my few concluding observations .
First of all , I should like to thank the rapporteurs for the serious work that has gone into the reports .
They contain sound overviews , wise deliberations and a number of conclusions .
In this way , a serious basis has been laid for the massive support for enlargement that Parliament has confirmed today .
It can safely be said that there is huge support .
That has now become apparent in this Assembly in the last eight hours .
I should like to thank you for your commitment and support .
I should also like to answer a couple of the central questions put to me .
Up until the negotiations in Copenhagen - that is to say over the next three weeks - we face a huge task in concluding the negotiations with each of the 10 candidate countries .
The Presidency will conduct the negotiations in cooperation with the Commission and with complete respect for the EU rules on expenditure ceilings set in Berlin and for the conclusions adopted in Brussels .
That was what the General Affairs Council recommended to the Presidency at the meeting yesterday .
The Presidency will make active efforts on this basis and do its utmost to find compromises that are acceptable to both the new and the existing Member States .
A great willingness to compromise is required , however , together with great understanding of the other party 's needs and points of view .
On the subject of the negotiating situation , it can be said that of course negotiations can take place and of course flexibility can be shown , but I think that everyone in this Chamber agrees that EU law must be respected .
The expenditure ceilings set in Berlin must be respected and the decisions taken in Brussels concerning , for example , agricultural expenditure must be respected .
Nonetheless , there is a certain room for manoeuvre , as Commissioner Verheugen too has pointed out .


To Mr Bonde , Mr Modrow and quite a few others , I should like to emphasise what Mr Rasmussen also said just before lunch , to the effect that there is no question of the fifteen Member States now going on to write a new treaty to which the 10 new countries then agree , without having had any influence on it .
Yesterday 's meeting of ministers again confirmed what is stated in paragraph 23 of the Treaty of Nice , to the effect that the new countries will participate in the forthcoming intergovernmental conference with fully equal rights and with speaking and voting rights that are on a fully equal footing with those of the existing Member States .
That is the way things are . Anything else would also , of course , be objectionable , unacceptable and impossible for the politicians in the new Member States to hold referendums on .
I believe it was Mrs Myller who raised the issue of the new neighbours .
Following enlargement , we shall of course have new neighbours to the east and , yesterday , at its meeting in Brussels , the General Affairs Council adopted a longer term strategy for dealing with our new neighbours .
The Council expressed the desire to formulate an ambitious , long-term and integrated strategy in relation to each of these new neighbouring countries with a view to promoting democracy and economic reforms , sustainable development and trade and for promoting stability , prosperity etc on the other side of the new EU border .
It was emphasised that account should be taken of each country 's special political and economic circumstances and that the issue as a whole should be seen in the context of the current deepening of cooperation with Russia .
There was also talk of cross-border cooperation , organised crime , illegal immigration and regional cooperation between the new neighbouring countries .
I can therefore give an assurance that thought has been given to all of this .
It was decided in conclusion that the Commission and Mr Solana should be called upon to prepare more detailed proposals as soon as possible , and the decision was rounded off with words to the effect that the candidate countries would be consulted on this work .
To Mr Alavanos and others who talked about Cyprus , I would state that , as is well known , the UN Secretary-General submitted , on 11 November , a general proposal for solving the Cyprus conflict .
This is a complex and extensive proposal covering 150 pages .
The plan submitted is designed as an overall political solution to ensure that a united Cyprus is able to join the EU .
Where accession is concerned , it is the Helsinki conclusions that continue to form the basis of the EU 's position .
The EU would ideally like to see the accession of a reunited island , but a solution in those terms is not a necessary prerequisite for accession .
The Council will take a decision on Cyprus 's accession , taking account of all the relevant factors .
The EU also supports the UN Secretary-General 's efforts and will be able to endorse an overall solution to the conflict in accordance with the principles on which the European Union is based , that is to say with a view to Cyprus 's being able , as a Member State , to speak with a single voice and to guarantee the correct application of EU law .
With regard to relations with Turkey , these will be based on the European Council 's decision , also taken in Helsinki .
Turkey is a candidate country that will be treated in exactly the same way as the other candidate countries .
The Commission 's report stated that fulfilment of the political criterion , which is a prerequisite for embarking upon negotiations , has still not taken place . Major progress has been made , however .
The economic criteria must be fulfilled no later than upon accession to the EU .
At the Copenhagen European Council , a decision will be made concerning the next phase of Turkey 's relations with the EU , and Turkey will in that way receive exactly the same treatment as all the other candidate countries have received .

Last of all , I want to say to Mr Maaten and Mr Arvidsson that we all recognise that enlargement from 15 to 25 , and subsequently to 27 or perhaps 28 , Member States requires a new treaty .
Otherwise , we shall have problems . That is , of course , why the Convention is sitting and why we must have an intergovernmental conference .
It goes without saying that we are obliged to take decisions at that intergovernmental conference .
From everything I have heard , however - yesterday , too , from the Member States and the new Member States - there is an awareness of the fact that decisions must be taken so as to prevent the bottlenecks Mr Maaten talked about or , in other words , problems involving the inability to take decisions .
Mr Arvidsson is , of course , quite right that a Union with so many Member States must also concentrate on the essential issues and not spread itself too thin , for the system could become very complicated if the proximity principle and the principle of subsidiarity were not borne in mind .
With these words , Mr President , I want to express my sincere thanks for this debate of eight and a half hours which signals massive support for the great project we have under way .
We have reason to be proud of this support , and I take the liberty of saying ' we ' for I was involved in starting up the project when I was still an MEP .
Thank you very much , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
You are right to stress the fact that it is one of the longest debates that we have ever had in Parliament .
This reflects the scale of the task which lies before us .
To wind up this debate , I shall give the floor to Mr Verheugen , who will speak on behalf of the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since the Council Presidency has answered all your questions so precisely , I can allow myself to be very brief .
I think this debate has been very helpful .
It has contributed to the dynamism we need in order , with the wind behind us , to reach our objective in Copenhagen .
It has also given clear pointers as to what still requires attention in the negotiations that lie ahead , and we shall endeavour to bring the pointers that have emerged from this debate into the talks .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 7.20 p.m. )
Commission annual legislative and work programme for 2003
The next item is the Commission statement on the annual legislative and work programme for 2003 .
I should like to thank Minister Haarder for being here .
This is the first time that the Council has actually been present for the presentation of the legislative programme .
Mr President of Parliament , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , you told us , Mr Prodi , that we would inaugurate a new method which would allow the three institutions , in drawing up the Commission legislative and work programme for 2003 , to work more closely together .
We would like to emphasise the importance of this new method .
For the first time , Parliament , the Council and the Commission have engaged in a constructive dialogue to establish a legislative programme .
We are particularly in favour of this cooperation and especially of increasing initial discussions between Parliament and the Commission .
Although this dialogue did indeed take place last spring , however , it was difficult to differentiate between this specific legislative planning exercise and what are known as regular meetings which take place throughout the year between parliamentary committees and commissioners in their respective fields of competence .
In future we will probably need greater preparation and a better structure for this dialogue and , in particular , each Commissioner will probably have to present initial guidelines for each specific legislative field .
The single document ' Annual Policy Strategy for 2003 ' presented by the Commission in February proved insufficient , and this situation could -appear harmful , as 2003 is a particularly important year due to enlargement .
I did note , however , Mr President , that you would like the Commission to present monthly reports to Parliament .
Having said this , we welcome the three political priorities set by the Commission and we would like to make the following comments :
On the first point , entitled ' An enlarged Europe ' , our primary concern is to ensure that the Community acquis is properly applied throughout the enlarged Union .
It is therefore crucial for a codified version of Community law to be available in all the languages of the new Member States .
Successful enlargement means including the environmental aspect and the objective of public health and consumer protection in all the other policies , as well as taking account - as you said yourself - of human resources , and it also means being innovative .
Lastly , it means monitoring the application of Community legislation , and we will need to help the future Member States to establish suitable structures as swiftly as possible .
With regard to the second point , entitled ' Stability and security ' , the terrorist threat hangs over the Union .
We therefore welcome the measures proposed in order to combat this scourge .
Combating terrorism is one factor in a broader objective , that of ensuring that the Union is safe and secure .
We also welcome the Commission 's commitment to move forward in creating an area of freedom , security and justice , within which the rights of the individual will be protected , whether in terms of civil protection , food and industrial safety , transport , energy or land use planning , in order to take into consideration all the factors affecting public health and the environment .
With regard , more particularly , to establishing a European Public Prosecutor , we believe it is appropriate to await the Convention 's conclusions on the subject before taking any initiatives .
Ensuring stability and security within the Union also means defining and setting up an integrated border-control system and taking coordinated practical action to combat illegal immigration .
We would also ask the Commission to present proposals in the near future on asylum and immigration policy that clearly distinguish between asylum seekers , those requesting international protection and migrant workers .
On this subject , our group is still concerned about what we perceive as a lack of resolve within the Council .
It is also important to monitor the actions of the European Union and the Member States regularly with regard to the International Criminal Court .
On the third point , entitled ' Sustainable and inclusive economy ' , if we want to prevent the deterioration in the economic environment from having a negative impact on employment , it would be desirable for the Commission to be able to inform us of proposals for a more flexible working market , which is essential for increasing employment opportunities .
We appreciate the Commission 's firm stance over the Stability and Growth Pact , but , on the other hand , we consider it lacking in other areas .
It is regrettable that the Commission programme makes no mention of the fiscal package and that no progress has been made in the field of VAT with regard to the principle of country of origin .
In particular , we would invite the Commission to go further in considering the harmonisation of the basis for taxation , wherever this is necessary for the proper functioning of the single market , while not proposing a measure aimed solely at harmonising rates .
The European Union 's fiscal policy must , in all cases , be aimed at reducing general taxation and lowering administrative costs .
Economic development is also achieved through strengthening infrastructures , in particular in the field of transport .
We would also , following the ruling of the Court of Justice of 5 November 2002 , which found eight Member States guilty of concluding ' open sky ' agreements with the United States , call for the European Commission to present a communication on drawing up future bilateral agreements in the field of air transport as swiftly as possible .
With regard to the Union 's foreign policy , we would ask the Commission to publish a Green Paper on the new borders of the enlarged European Union , supplemented by ideas on relations with the new neighbouring States and the various partners .
It is regrettable that the Commission legislative programme makes no reference to either the creation of a Euromed free trade area , or the creation of a Euromed parliamentary assembly .
Within the context of post-Doha discussions , we would ask the Commission how it hopes to be able to integrate the commitment of Europe , no longer of fifteen , but of twenty-five States .
Lastly , trans-Atlantic dialogue must be strengthened in a spirit of sustainable and inclusive development and must of course make good the Kyoto commitments .
We are pleased that the proposal puts forward seven strategies as indicated in the Sixth Environment Action Programme , as well as proposals concerning integrated product policy and a new chemicals strategy .
In conclusion , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe it is important to begin to reform employee status , make OLAF more independent and publish declarations of the financial interests of commissioners and directors-general on the Internet .
I am sure , Mr President , that in this way we will be able to avoid an exponential increase in measures , duplicated criteria as well as- and I shall end here - excessive transposition work , in order to ensure the best possible future for the enlargement of the Union .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , we are getting increasingly close to what we asked for at the beginning of the legislature , that is , an annual political programme presented to Parliament with the participation of the Council - and I hope that Minister Haarder 's presence here is not superfluous and that he can also participate by responding to our comments , in line with visibility , transparency and democratic control .
In this context , Mr President , please allow me to refer to a phrase that is in the programme - and which I believe is an error by the ' hack ' who wrote it - which states that the programme provides the Commission 's input to the Council 's annual working programme .
Could the President of the Commission clarify for us what this sentence means ?
Because what we believe is that Parliament is not taken into account and the Commission is reduced to the role of secretariat of the Council , and we disagree entirely with this kind of approach .
I am going to focus on the three great priorities mentioned by the President and I will leave it to other Members to deal with specific aspects .
With regard to enlargement , we spoke about this yesterday .
Within the Community acquis , we attach great importance to the strengthening of the social dimension in the candidate countries , except in relation to the areas in which we believe the Commission should make more effort .
And , apart from holding discussions - the final phase of the negotiations is yet to take place - there are certain issues which we should remember .
For example , we are struck by the fact that in the report of the Court of Auditors this year it says that in the SAPAR pre-accession programme , only one million euros has been spent , which is 0.1 % .
We are always discussing quantities , but we must look at how they are spent and invested .
We must debate this issue not only with the Commission , but also with our friends and , I hope very soon , neighbours , in the candidate countries .
Secondly , with regard to the economic issue , which is absolutely central , we can see that the spirit of Lisbon and Gothenburg are still alive within the Commission .
However , we must recognise that recent events have demonstrated that we are not playing a central role in terms of economic growth and , above all , there is a concern that economic governance is not being strengthened - and we will have to see what is happening in the Convention 's working group .
In the long term , a monetary union which is not consolidated by an economic union and a political union is not viable ; history has taught us this and we must take it very much into account in order to move forward .
A final point on the economic and social priorities .
As well as sustainable development , you , in relation to the framework directive on services of general interest , which was agreed in Barcelona , are proposing a Green Paper .
We prefer a framework directive .
With regard to stability and security , apart from the priority of terrorism , which is absolutely universal , the Swedish Presidency proposed a consideration of the demographic future of Europe .
This should be linked to the issue of immigration .
We welcome the fact - and in particular I am referring to the Members on the Right of the House - that you defend the role of legal immigration in relation to our welfare societies and our demographic future , but , in any event - and I am addressing the Council - I believe it would be very positive if there were a more active approach .
With regard to the debate on the borders of Europe , you have spoken of the spirit and soul - I believe in lay terms - for all Europeans .
Our former colleague , Mrs Palacio , Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs , said that Europe is not a Christian club .
I welcome this comment , which I believe is absolutely correct .
In any event - also in relation to the Convention - it is important that we find formulae for qualified association .
Please allow me to comment on the elements missing from the programme .
The status of political parties is not included as a priority .
Now that the Treaty of Nice has been approved , it is essential to make rapid progress in this regard in order to consolidate a fundamental element of European democracy .
The Commission had already made a transitional proposal , even beforehand .
Secondly , we are going to vote on a resolution - I believe with a large majority in this House - relating to freedom of expression and media concentration .
In this regard , we would welcome a more dynamic attitude on the part of the Commission .
Finally , and I will end here , Mr President , there is an issue which worries us very much : the agreements of the General Affairs Council last Monday .
We have noted , from what we have been told and from leaks , that the President of the Commission is concerned to find a final date for the mandate of this Commission .
I always thought that you would be a Commission that would be operational from the day of the elections .
In any event , this is a constitutional issue .
We are opposed to the General Affairs Council , without having debated the issue with Parliament and without you having presented it , taking a unilateral decision containing many elements which clearly clash with the Treaties .
We therefore ask - and I address this to you , Mr President , so that it may be communicated to the President of Parliament - that the proposal for an interinstitutional agreement on this important issue be raised by the President in Copenhagen and I would like to hear an explanation today by both the President of the Commission and the Council .
Mr President , the ELDR Group has always been quite critical in the past of the somewhat incoherent and arbitrary nature of previous annual programmes .
We have always looked for two things in this programme : firstly , a clear idea of the political direction reflected in the strategic choices taken by the European Commission , and secondly , a political debate between the institutions themselves .
There has certainly been some progress on those two counts this year , compared to previous years .
We wish to thank the Commission for keeping to the format and timetable of the new arrangements and certainly thank the college for being present in such great numbers here today .
However , as President Prodi himself said , there is still some room for improvement .
The ELDR Group would like to highlight three areas where we feel there should be further improvement .
The European Commission aspires to be an EU government of sorts .
Good governments make strategic choices .
They set political priorities .
That importantly means they explain what they are not going to do as well as what they are going to do .
The concern we have is that , even in this improved document , the three priorities are so broad and open-ended that they do not really represent any meaningful political choice .
This is reflected in the annexes .
The annex covering the actions undertaken under the three priorities run to around 40 pages .
More worryingly , the annex covering the issues which fall outside the priorities runs to 50 pages .
In other words , we are faced with the prospect that the majority of the initiatives undertaken on the basis of this annual programme next year will actually fall outside the political orientation set in the annual programme altogether .
That is simply not the way to proceed .
Once again this resorts to a sort of laundry list approach to legislative initiative and we as a group would like to see a much greater display of choice and political orientation as regards what the European Commission proposes to do from one year to the next .
The second point is the level of detail provided for each proposed legislative action .
This has certainly improved compared with previous years but that was not difficult .
It is still not sufficient and I would like to draw the Commission 's attention to the fact that in the Convention there are proposals being floated to involve national parliaments in this debate in future .
This annex is almost incomprehensible to MEPs so it would be utterly incomprehensible to MPs in national parliaments .
It needs to be explained in clear , cogent , simple prose so that it is comprehensible to people living in the world that exists outside the institutions .
Finally , the third point is our strong support for the Commission 's stated intention of applying impact assessments to a number of pilot initiatives .
We feel impact assessments are absolutely indispensable to improve the quality of European legislation but we would like to take it a step further in two important respects .
Firstly , we do not feel that in the long run the Commission can be judge and jury on its own impact assessments - assessing its own draft proposals .
We feel this should be done independently .
Secondly , there is little point in the Commission conducting its impact assessments if parliamentary and Council amendments then escape impact assessments altogether .
Therefore we would like to see an interinstitutional approach which applies impact assessments at all points of the legislative cycle .
Mr President , President Prodi has described three fundamental points of the programme and , in general , I support the overall line taken .
As representative of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I do , however , feel that we should be basing our assessment of this legislative programme on the agenda for sustainable development , outside as well as within the European Union . I am afraid to say , President Prodi , that your programme is rather vague on this point , not to say slightly rhetorical .
We hope that , this time , the Commission 's report on sustainable development , due to be presented at the Spring Summit , will not arrive at the last minute .
Equally , we hope that , as part of the follow up to Johannesburg , it might be possible to publish the annual report on the partnership initiatives on water and energy which , as you are aware , are part of what are known as the type two agreements concluded at Johannesburg , in due time .
The legislative programme mentions the importance of the success of the Cancún meeting . However , we feel that the European Parliament must be involved in the debate on what the Commission is going to do and say in Cancún .
We really do not want a repeat of the absolutely disgraceful situation at Johannesburg , where we were faced with a fait accompli , an agreement already concluded between the Commission - or perhaps the Commissioner responsible , for that mystery has yet to be cleared up - and the United States , that WTO rules should take precedence over international agreements in environmental matters .
This venture was partly foiled at Johannesburg , but we genuinely fear that something similar might happen at Cancún , without any public debate and going completely against the endeavours the Commission itself is making in the area of the environment .
As regards the external dimension of sustainable development , I would also point out that , although it is true that impact and sustainability assessments are now necessary for all international agreements - and this is a positive innovation which we very much welcome and with which we are very satisfied - it is also true that it is difficult to realise this undertaking , not least because of a certain lack of resources , as is shown by the work carried out on the agreement with Chile , work which was , I regret to say , inaccurate and rushed .
We are looking forward with great interest , Mr President , to the Commission 's Green Paper on services of general interest , and it is our genuine hope that it will be possible to discuss it here in Parliament too , Chairman Barón Crespo .
Moreover , we hope that it will be possible to produce a directive on the matter as well , not least in that we fear that there might be some inconsistency - as I said just now - between what the Commission says and does in the Union and what it then proceeds to negotiate at international level , particularly within the WTO , which is now extremely powerful .
In addition , in this International Year of Mountains , President Prodi , knowing your passion for mountains , we would like to know what measures the Commission intends to adopt for the practical implementation of the Alps Convention , particularly the protocol on transport .
Another environmental issue which we feel needs attention but which I am afraid is no longer part of the programme is PVC , a material which is recognised to be highly dangerous by at least five Commission ongoing studies .
We were expecting a communication before the end of the summer but it appears that , after Commissioner Liikanen announced his position , all the work was stopped .
I am citing this example , although it may seem a minor issue , because , although it is true that we are working constructively to improve the legislative programme , it is also true that our discussions do not serve much purpose if we then lose sight of major legislative proposals , firmly supported by Parliament , which appear as part of the programme for years and then suddenly disappear .
I will end , Mr President , by expressing our deep concern at the influence of industrial lobbies on the Commission 's choice of legislative instrument , which may even not be a proper legislative instrument , and I would also point out that this issue is a very specific part of the interinstitutional agreement which , together with other Members of Parliament , we are trying to conclude before the Copenhagen European Council .
Mr President , President of the Commission , I would like to start by apologising to President Prodi for the improvised nature of this speech , which will be a series of brief reflections on what I have read or heard .
Clearly , over and above the indications given in the work programme for 2003 , we cannot expect the Commission to do everything immediately and , ideally , properly , in the space of just one year , but it is right that guidelines should be laid down , as has been done . I feel that , at least in general terms , these guidelines are sufficiently acceptable .
I listened to your speech , President Prodi , and I very much appreciated some of the points which you stressed with your usual enthusiasm , particularly the social considerations , which are very relevant at a time when we are discussing security , solidarity and measures which could even include a new direction for the world of work .
Therefore , if I may , I would like to call upon the Commission and the Community institutions in general to reflect either formally or informally on a number of policies which I believe are of vital importance for the future of Europe , particularly for the future of an enlarged Europe which is genuinely united as regards its fundamental principles .
Well then , yesterday , we held lengthy formal and informal discussions with many members of parliaments whose countries are aspiring , if I may use that expression , to become a full members of Europe , and , together , we discussed our desire to work towards achieving a Europe which is genuinely , essentially and , ideally , politically united .
However , in order to be politically united and cohesive , Europe needs to address issues of momentous historical importance transparently .
Mr President , I believe we need to reflect very deeply on the issue of immigration .
There can never be enough discussion of the subject of legal immigration , just as there can never be enough discussion on the integration of immigrants .
I often reflect - and I still do not know the answer - on the problem of integrating immigrants into society , and I sometimes wonder whether integration is not another , new form of oppression of cultures which are different from ours and should therefore be fully respected .
One of the speakers mentioned the subject of an interesting debate just now , which took place both in Florence and in my own town , Lecce , a town where we have to have no fear of dialogue or the presence of people who do not think in the same way as we do .
Here , too , we must listen to what is being said about globalisation , about new forms of poverty which genuinely exist , on north and south , east and west .
We must reflect still more - I reiterate - on the way we may , to some extent , be oppressing immigrant or emigrant peoples which , I imagine , would like to return to their homelands and regain their identities and their cultural roots , but which certainly do not want to go back to economic poverty .
Therefore , if we have to take economic measures , it is essential that we ensure that these do not lead to the oppression of cultures .
With regard to this , therefore , I would like to draw the attention of the Commission to the issues of immigration and employment , in order to avoid employment , rather than being a uniting factor , becoming grounds for fresh dispute between the immigrants in our States and those who need to convert their business activities .
Consider the industrial crisis in our country , President Prodi , and the resulting need to retrain the work force through substantial , genuinely incisive , large-scale training measures .
Training is also something which depends on culture , and it must be promoted if it is true that Europe wants to continue to grow , as you maintain .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the Dutch delegation in the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities .
The European Commission 's three main priorities are a logical choice for its work programme for 2003 .
Preparation for enlargement is a top priority that is rightly seen by the European Commission as an exercise in managing the diversity of cultures , administrative traditions and economic structures .
Likewise stability and security as a second priority receive my unqualified support .
Fighting terrorism , management of the new external borders and control of illegal immigration are very important for both the current and the enlarged Union .
Now however I should like to take a closer look at the third priority : sustainable development .
While I am of course pleased that sustainable development remains a priority for the European Commission , there is more to it than that .
It is solemnly promised that special attention will be paid to the impact of new legislation on the environment .
In Annex 2 however I see that the main focus of attention is on completion of the internal market .
I am of course curious about the announcement of the inclusion of the environment in EU legislation .
I am also concerned about the status of this document .
There is a great danger that it will again end up as a discussion document , resulting in fine words and intentions but not meaning anything concrete in terms of legislation .
There is certainly plenty of scope for improvement in the energy and transport fields .
I do not in fact see many initiatives in the area of environmental legislation .
Perhaps this is not injudicious in the light of the problems with the implementation and enforcement of existing environmental legislation .
It may also well be that over the next few years we shall no longer be able to develop more far-reaching legislation in a Union of 25 members .
I have often pressed for a proposal to review the Batteries Directive .
I know that work on this review has been going on for years , but reaching agreement internally is impossible .
It is high time that the proposed amendment was sent to Parliament and the Council .
I should like to hold you to the promise of March 2003 .
Mr President , the Commission work programme for 2003 is better presented than in the past .
It is clearly based around important priorities and that is a point in its favour .
The form , however , is still highly ambiguous .
We are told that this programme will contribute to the Council 's annual operational programme for 2003 , which the Council is due to subsequently adopt in December .
But what is the exact status of the Commission 's contribution ?
Should the Council accept it as it is or does it have the right to amend it to introduce new priorities ?
Only the latter hypothesis is coherent with the hierarchy of the institutions .
Naturally , we have no doubt that , in practice , dialogue within the institutional triangle will make it possible to iron out this problem .
It nonetheless raises an important matter of principle .
The first priority of the Commission programme is essentially to prepare for enlargement .
We cannot fail to be impressed , when reading the actions to be taken in this regard , by their sheer number , which shows the scale of the Community acquis to be implemented by the candidate countries .
Having listened to the representatives of these countries yesterday , having heard their reactions , we can clearly see that these countries are keen to enter the Union .
They want to become part of the European family and are ready to make a great deal of effort to accomplish that .
We must not , however , exhaust them with excess legislation and authority .
We must have the wisdom to let them work at their own pace and accept variable geometry to a greater extent .
The programme 's second priority is entitled ' Stability and security ' and this presents in particular measures relating to immigration .
Having read the list of key initiatives several times , I must say that I did find the initiative concerning integration of legal immigrants , but I am still looking for the initiative that was supposed to cover repatriation of illegal immigrants .
If it is there , it is well hidden .
This quite simply shows that the Commission still has a long way to go before realising the scale of the problem we are facing today .
On the other hand , in conclusion , we would like to convey our compliments on the paragraph entitled ' Relations with the enlarged EU 's neighbours ' , which Mr Prodi emphasised earlier .
These relations must indeed be redefined and in this respect the Euro-Mediterranean partnership could lead to the creation of a new community , which , it must be said , would be separate from the current one .
It would be more natural for Turkey to be a part of that community rather than be part of the European Union itself .
Mr Prodi has to leave early to return to Brussels because of the weather .
Therefore we shall take Mr Prodi 's response to the contributions now .
I understand Mrs Palacio is going to field the questions during the catch-the-eye session .
Mr President , it is not so much a question of time , rather that I have an appointment with Mr Erdogan in Brussels , which , as things stand , seems appropriate , given that the winner of the Turkish elections is visiting Brussels .
I am going to meet him this afternoon , and I feel this is important precisely because I believe that we need powerful , direct dialogue on these matters .
Indeed , the issues on the table are the most far-reaching , most fundamental matters , and I therefore feel it is appropriate to analyse them in some depth , as I am going to do in Brussels this afternoon , as I said .
Now , however , I want to respond to the first criticisms . I will then leave my colleagues from the Commission the task of developing the themes and exploring them in more detail .
Indeed , there are a number of issues which are absolutely essential for our future action .
Mrs Grossetête mentioned our plans for the Mediterranean .
I fully agree with her .
I myself have on many occasions found myself in an awkward situation because of the way all the leaders of the Mediterranean countries criticise the Commission directly , accusing us of favouring Eastern Europe over them .
My response has been simple : the demands of history have led us to take that road , but it is our intention , firstly , to strengthen the Barcelona policy , with whose development we are still encountering major problems , and secondly , to define the new policy which I have outlined - the ring of friends sharing everything except institutions with the Union - which , this is the point , I hope the Greek and Italian Presidencies will help to boost next year , given that we are going to have two consecutive Mediterranean presidencies in the same year .
I have already discussed these matters and the Commission 's desire to fulfil its responsibilities in this area with the Greeks , and I will discuss them with the Italians subsequently too , for I feel that this is an extremely important issue .
Moreover , I call upon Parliament as of now to strengthen our joint action in the field of the Mediterranean .
To return to the subject of our working methods , this is the age-old question of interinstitutional cooperation .
It is a wide-ranging issue with major political implications , on which , however , there are a whole series of operational decisions to be taken , for we cannot limit ourselves to making declarations of principle .
The Mediterranean policy will require us to take decisions affecting the budget and our whole way of working .
I therefore feel that , as far as this matter is concerned , it is imperative that we focus primarily on interinstitutional programming .
Once again , Mrs Grossetête mentioned the need for each Commissioner to present a preliminary report to the Parliamentary committee concerned .
I have no objection to this . Indeed , it could be useful , precisely because this is a new process which we need to improve .
We will assess this proposal and I am sure we will take on board the sense of it .
The only thing I want to avoid is the danger of fragmentation .
There are a number of points at which , despite the need for in-depth analysis , we need to focus on the overall picture , specifically at the stage of the preliminary proposal at the beginning of the process and again when the final decision is taken at the end of the process .
I would like these two stages to remain plenary debates .
Clearly , there will be times during the debate when technical , specific points need to be discussed - we have no objection to that - but the beginning and end of the debate are a matter for all of us , not just some of us .
Mr Barón Crespo , first of all , the proposal on the Commission 's programme is usually determined by the relationship between the Commission and Parliament , which is extremely delicate .
I would point out that the Commission 's programme for 2003 focuses on new initiatives whereas the Council 's programme , with very few exceptions , deals with initiatives which have already been presented by the Commission but which have not been adopted .
In this sense , it is on our relationship with the Council that we need to focus , for we now have a backlog of issues which Parliament has already dealt with .
Of course , the Commission fully supports the European Parliament - we have been consistent in our support - ensuring that the Council involves Parliament on all the points of its programme .
Moreover , the Commission defines the political priorities for the Council , and it has already presented them to the General Affairs Council of 18 November .
In this regard , we should have a close relationship with the Greek Presidency too .
As regards the point raised by Mr Barón Crespo concerning the political parties ' statute , we will present the new proposal as soon as it enters into force .
We are in full agreement with you as regards its importance , but we are just waiting for the right moment to present the proposal , which must be discussed by everybody together .
As regards the interinstitutional resolutions for 2004 , I feel that what Mr Barón Crespo said is extremely important , and I fully agree with him .
The Commission has constantly drawn the presidency 's attention to the need to find solutions which will not upset the smooth functioning of the institutions .
An agreement with Parliament is clearly necessary .
When it became clear that there was a sort of legislative traffic jam , the Commission immediately made it clear that there needs to be coordination between Parliament 's rhythm of work and the rhythm of work of the Commission .
We immediately stressed that the new Parliament must work in tandem with the new Commission right from the start .
As I see it , these decisions are highly necessary , but we are short of time because solutions have to be found before Copenhagen .
I think we could discuss this proposal at the interinstitutional summit at the end of November / beginning of December with a view precisely to achieving an agreement before Copenhagen .
I must stress the vital importance of this matter because what we have to avoid is a scenario in which we have the new Parliament , a Commission that will only be in office for three months and then a new Commission , with all the organs changing and , as a result , a complete breakdown in some areas of the system .
We are extremely concerned about this .
I fully share Mrs Frassoni 's concerns regarding sustainable development , about which Commissioner Wallström is going to speak later on . Commissioner Nielson is going to talk about Johannesburg and Vice-President de Palacio is going to talk about transport .
I would point out that our position at Johannesburg was very strong but also very uncomfortable .
I am not ashamed to say that the countries of the Developing World , the African countries particularly in this case - indeed , Africa is the real major problem - are tending to make less and less of a distinction between Europe , the United States and other countries .
This is something which should concern us all .
Despite the fact that , in recent years , we have been acting in a genuinely responsible manner - consider Kyoto , the Everything but Arms initiative , incisive decisions opening up our markets unilaterally , incisive decisions regarding the Kyoto Protocol , incisive decisions on many aspects of development aid , for example in Monterrey , where it was we who obtained the minimum that could be obtained as regards foreign aid , even though it really was an absolute minimum - we must not be surprised if the developing world reacts by lumping us all together without distinction .
This is a matter of great concern which requires very thorough analysis on our part .
This is the way we must approach the issue .
A further concern , expressed by Mrs Boudjenah , relates to the interpretation of peace and development issues overall , as a matter for general concern .
I agree - as I said before - with this too .
As regards matters such as the pluralism of the world and multilateralism , it is even more important that we adopt a role of absolute leadership because there is no one else who can keep these debates open , and we know how valuable they are at this time .
It must also be said , quite frankly , that these are debates which can be kept open in a credible manner if there is a financial commitment , and that is very difficult to fulfil at this time .
I therefore believe that we genuinely ought to open an in-depth political debate on this because , clearly , if we do not engage sufficient resources , we will be merely moralising to these countries rather than capable of changing the situation in the world .
I would stress : we have done a great deal and we have played an exemplary role .
We must continue to do so but we must improve both the quality and quantity of our efforts .
This brings me to the last part of Mrs Poli Bortone 's speech , which concerned immigration .
It is true that we need to focus on legal as well as illegal immigration , it is true that the issue of integrating immigrants is something that needs to be discussed , but , first and foremost , there is the major issue to be resolved of whether or not integration is taking place .
I have to say , however , that , for the most part , the immigrants who come to Europe are increasingly stable , increasingly willing to become integrated into the societies of our European countries , wherever they come from , and they become integrated more easily and to a greater degree in some cases than in others .
I do , in any case , believe that , for the sake of the future cohesion of our societies , we must make a huge effort to facilitate integration as a priority .
I would stress that it is an issue whose facets and characteristics vary greatly according to the country of origin and reception , but the risk of our societies becoming fragmented is a risk we cannot take .
It has been a very powerful personal experience for me to visit different communities of Italian immigrants in Germany and Belgium over the years .
Wherever I have seen that total integration has taken place , I have realised that this was the only way for them to live happy , serene lives on an equal footing with their fellow citizens .
Total integration is , in my opinion , a major objective for an open society , and it must take place in full respect for all cultures , in full respect for diversities , with a view to achieving societies which are not afflicted by conflict or tensions .
Clearly , this means that we need an immigration policy which is much more complex and much more cohesive than that we have been working on hitherto .
We now move on to the catch-the-eye procedure .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioners , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , which I have the honour of chairing , welcomes the Commission 's initiative to introduce a more compact and integrated political planning procedure .
The Committee on Women 's Rights had an opportunity for constructive dialogue with two Commissioners , Mrs Anna Diamantopoulou and Mr Antonio Vitorino .
We had a most productive discussion , during which our opinions and positions converged on numerous points .
In the light of that positive experience , I was surprised - and I wondered why - I was unable to find a single word on gender equality in the Commission programme for 2003 .
Mrs Diamantopoulou assured us at a meeting with our committee at the beginning of October that gender equality policy was a Commission priority and we have heard nothing to make us think otherwise .
As you know , the Committee on Women 's Rights has the exclusive privilege of being invited once a year to a one-day meeting with the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , and ten Commissioners , in order to discuss the specific issue of gender equality .
2003 is an important year for the Committee on Women 's Rights .
The top priority is the Convention on the future of Europe and we have invested a great deal of time and effort in order to ensure that the new Treaty promotes gender equality .
Secondly , we need the acquis communautaire on women to be applied , not just adopted by the candidate countries . ? hirdly , there is the question of gender mainstreaming and , of course , we still have a great deal to do to put our own house in order here .
In all events , I welcome the initiative to put the Commission 's annual progress report on sexual equality on the agenda for the spring summit under the Greek presidency .
Another important priority is to ensure there is a balanced representation of the sexes at the 2004 European Parliament elections .
The European Parliament and the Commission should set a standard for the other institutions .
Finally , I am worried and concerned about the fact that the proposal for a new directive on combating sexual discrimination on the basis of Article 13 of the Treaty keeps being postponed .
Have we any news on this ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , equal opportunities for women is a constant and permanent priority within Community action .
I do not know whether the chairman of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities believes that they are not sufficiently covered in the texts .
It is possible , but I would like to say that they are present as a matter of course , because it is our obligation and that is what we all want .
With regard to some of your ideas on the question of mathematical equality in women 's representation in the different bodies , I would like to say clearly that this does not appear in our programme .
In this respect , I would remind the chairman - who furthermore is Greek - of the famous myth of Procrustes .
Mr President , I would first like to thank Commissioner Bolkestein for creating the right framework for the future of Basle II .
However , at the same time I would like to ask Commissioners Liikanen and Busquin what they are doing under their portfolios to ensure that Basle II is implemented without damaging the economy .
Basle II is about the creditworthiness of companies , of small and medium-sized enterprises , and about the guarantees and transparency this requires .
I believe that if we do not take precautions in good time here , we will end up with a huge problem involving ever more bankruptcies and enormous unemployment .
I would like to address my second question to Commissioner Lamy . Mr Prodi mentioned that we want to drive forward the political democratisation of the WTO .
To what extent has provision been made in the Commission 's work programme for making progress with the parliamentary assembly ?
As there are a lot of requests for the floor , in order to speed things up we will hear from the Commission at the very end rather than after every contribution .
Mr President , Commission , Council , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs I intend sounding a somewhat negative note about the Commission 's work programme and legislative proposals .
We have to establish that against the background of the Lisbon process , against the background of a growing demand for labour participation , against the background of requests for flexibility in the labour market and against the background of labour mobility in Europe , the Commission 's programme , and in particular its legislative programme , is lacking in ambition as far as we are concerned , and that we think is a pity .
2003 threatens to be a lost year in this regard , certainly if we look at the legislation .
There are only three proposals that go in the right direction .
They are concerned with equal treatment , which has already been mentioned , the normal guidelines for employment and social security 140871 .
They are not new legislative proposals , though ; they are amendments .
We also note that delays are occurring in a number of areas or there is even the odd omission , as is the case with the European works council , which is not on the agenda for next year or perhaps only at the end of it .
There is also a lack of initiative in the fields of parental leave , the protection of women workers , the disabled and atypical work , and I could go on .
As a committee we have to note that on the legislative side the programme is not really satisfactory when it comes to the demands that are made by society and that are also socially based .
We have already spent some time discussing this in our committee and with our Commissioner .
We also believe that the problem does not lie with the Commissioner alone , but also and in particular with the Commission as such and with the Council .
We therefore ask the Council in particular to take steps on the occasion of the forthcoming mid-term review of the social agenda .
We must prepare this with the Commission and I hope that we can then make progress .
At the moment there is really no chance of this happening and we are disappointed to a certain extent .
But we live in hope and that is why we are asking that these steps be taken .
I wish you long life and good health , Vice-President Martin , long life and good health to all the Commissioners , long life and good health to all the Members of the European Parliament and long life and good health to the Council representative too , although I know that the Council - the 15 Heads of Government - is very concerned to learn that the European citizens are living longer .
I read in a wide range of newspapers this morning that a pill has been discovered that may well enable us to live to the age of 150 .
While I was on my way to Parliament , I remembered what it was I had to ask the Commission .
While I have always been aware that Europe is now beginning to concern itself with pensions - and I have to say that last year 's Commission rightly addressed the issue with particular enthusiasm , with , I believe , the support of the Commissioner responsible , Mrs Anna Diamantopoulou - even though the area is still the responsibility of the Member States , I have noticed that many governments , including , not least , the government governing me , Carlo Fatuzzo , too , are making statements which will lead the European citizens to believe that it is Europe which is going to cut their pensions , that it is Europe that is going to reduce their pension income , that it is Europe that is going to force them to tighten their belts .
However , it is they , the national governments , which have to take these decisions , and if they are going to be forced to cut pension payments , then they must make that clear openly , frankly and honestly to their citizens .
I would therefore ask you , Commission Vice-President , what the Commission intends to do to make the European citizens aware that Commissioner Diamantopoulou is not a fairy or a sorceress who is able to grant wealth to all the citizens but an evil ogre who is doing what the national governments tell her to .
Mr President , Vice-President of the Commission , I would like to focus essentially on section 1 of the Commission communication .
The Commission has now achieved the major objectives established at the beginning of its term of office - enlargement and the reforms - but I feel that , in the final stage of its term of office , it must do more than just manage and implement what has already been achieved .
I feel that the paragraphs entitled ' Defining the future of Europe ' and ' Relations with the enlarged EU 's neighbours ' are the key to the realisation that we need to start laying the foundations for the Union 's future political outlook as of now .
After the accession we hope for of Bulgaria and Romania in 2007 , we must turn our gaze resolutely in three directions : towards Eastern Europe , the Western Balkans and the Mediterranean .
I welcome the openness displayed in the sentence ' ? the Stabilisation and Association process opens perspectives for membership ' .
I therefore agree with what President Prodi said : we must develop a ring of friends stretching from Russia to Morocco , without excluding the possibility of them acceding to the Union under the same conditions as the other countries which have already become part of it .
This opens horizons for the future which will extend our project even beyond the geographical confines of our continent .
While we are preparing to launch the widest and , perhaps , most important enlargement of the Union , we need to be aware of these possibilities .
In any case , when Russia accedes to the Union - however far in the future - we will not be able to stipulate that only the part on this side of the Urals can do so , and that will bring great changes , particularly in the way the Union defines itself .
We must therefore see the Union as a ring of concentric circles which are interconnected .
This is the way for Europe to continue to keep its soul alive .
The day when Europe ceases to concern itself with the countries beyond its borders will be the day when it loses part of its basic raison d 'être .
Mr President , I have a few specific questions about development policy for the Commission .
You have said that we want faster spending because far too much remains unspent at the moment .
In practice however this is still not happening .
My specific question to you is : what new steps will you be taking to achieve this in your work programme for 2003 ?
You have also said that we must spend better , we want to move towards basic social spending such as education .
You have accepted a figure of 35 % , you have reached an average of 28 % .
What specific steps will you be taking to achieve this in your programme for 2003 ?
Thirdly , in Doha you took on the obligation to table proposals for the reduction of the agricultural subsidies and their conversion into rural subsidies before March 2003 .
When can we expect these concrete proposals in the area of agriculture , as a supplement to the Fischler package ?
Fourthly , you promised to bring forward a supplement to the regulation of the gap between structural aid and emergency aid .
This gap , the famous grey zone , is sometimes giving rise to one or two years ' delay .
When can we expect to see this specific regulation ?
Fifthly , and in conclusion , in the context of migration policy - and Mr Prodi also made reference to this - you said that there is a need to conclude new partnership agreements with developing countries .
The specific question is : what initiatives will you be presenting in this area in addition to the Cotonou Treaty that will actually do something about a regulated migration policy which - and let us start with North Africa and a number of the suppliers from the different regions - actually involves the relationship with the developing countries ?
Mr President , we have the Mediterranean and Eastern Europe , but I should like to remind Mr Prodi , the Commission , and the other ladies and gentlemen here , that we also have Northern Europe and the Northern Dimension , and I would ask them to take this into consideration also .
At present we seem to have all our attention on enlargement , but we must fight tooth and nail to hold on to the Lisbon objectives .
Enlargement will place burdens on the EU economy , and that underlines the importance of having a competitive strategy to address that problem .
For this reason , we must also be able to implement some difficult reforms at the same time as enlargement .
We have to focus our attention on the applicant countries ' ability to implement the Lisbon objectives .
In the old Member States too it is necessary to give attention to the implementation of EU legislation .
When enlargement takes place we shall particularly have to avoid distortions of competition due to the uneven implementation of directives , for example , in environmental and competition policy .
The liberalisation process must be speeded up substantially in the electricity , gas , telecommunications and transport sectors .
The situation at present is that consumers cannot count on economic growth .
Investment is being put off and the markets are still constrained .
Labour costs are high while at the same time there is considerable unemployment in Europe .
Faith in the Stability and Growth Pact is being shaken .
I would ask the Commission how it intends to integrate this ambitious timetable for enlargement with improved economic competitiveness in Europe .
Mr President , the fight against terrorism has been , and must continue to be , one of our priorities , if not our main priority .
There has been much progress in this field and in the field of cooperation in criminal matters and we have demonstrated that when we have political will we can be effective .
I would like to ask whether you believe that now is the time , following this success in relation to cooperation in the criminal field , to carry out the necessary improvement in judicial standards in the European Union and the defence of individual rights .
And I am referring to the current Union and the enlarged Union .
I also believe - and I would like to hear the Commission 's opinion on this - that there should be some coordination initiative in the police field which would put an end to these areas of confusion , which are so difficult to explain to the citizens .
I am referring to Europol and others .
I am less optimistic about immigration policy , however .
There is a phrase in the work programme which I find truly extraordinary : to consolidate the immigration and asylum policy .
I do not believe it is the fault of the European Commission , I am more than sure of that ; but , to be frank , I think it would be very positive if we were to begin the immigration and asylum policy .
Mrs Grossetête asked the Commission for more initiatives .
I would ask the Commission for fewer initiatives .
It has presented all the initiatives it should have presented .
We have a package of proposals which make up a coherent and reasonable immigration policy .
What we need to do is to begin to take decisions in this area .
I believe that we should not increase the range of proposals so that the Council can just select little bits of them , but we must demonstrate political will in order to make progress in global terms .
And finally I would like to welcome the proposal for integration policies and , above all , the idea of coordinating these polices with social policy .
If we believe that immigrants must enter Europe for employment purposes , we must be effective in both areas , we need an immigration policy which works , but also a labour market which works , a social policy which incorporates immigrants in order to respond to the local problems which immigration creates .
Mr President , maritime safety is one of the challenges included in the Commission 's working programme for 2003 .
Unfortunately , we are currently facing the terrible accident involving the Prestige off the coast of Galicia , which makes this working principle all the more evident .
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Commission , by means of its Vice-President , on its rapid reaction and its cooperation with the Spanish and Galician authorities in relation to this dramatic event .
I would also like to acknowledge the Commissioner for Transport and the European Parliament 's Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , who have approved the Erika I and Erika II packages , which , had they already been applied , could perhaps have helped us to prevent an accident of this nature .
In this respect , I would like to point out that the Directive on the monitoring of traffic - yet to be transposed - in Article 20 , lays down the definition of areas of refuge , which , although they are vague , would allow vessels with problems to reach them to try to resolve them .
We have examples such as the Erika , which was not authorised by the French authorities to enter the port of Saint Nazaire , or now the Prestige , not authorised to enter Galician ports , clearly due to the high ecological value of that coast .
There should be further proposals for the creation of areas of refuge out to sea , sufficiently close so that vessels with problems can reach them and sufficiently far from coasts to prevent serious ecological problems , but which allow for immediate naval rescue actions with technical resources , both aerial and marine .
And the measure , Madam Vice-President , if included in the Commission 's programme , could be applied urgently without the need to wait for transposition of the directive .
Mr President , the closure of Strasbourg Airport on Monday evening , which of course held us all up for quite some time , has prompted me to put a question to the Commission on the following subject .
It would be a good idea to have an overview of all the aircraft within European airspace , coordinated centrally : within Eurocontrol , for example .
Obviously it is the countries themselves that are responsible for national air traffic control systems , but would it not be appropriate to have a central overview of all the current and planned flights , whether they be civil or military , in order to improve utilisation of the airspace , reduce the number of delays and lessen the impact on the environment ?
Mr President , while welcoming the programme presented to us today I must express some alarm that on page 12 , under ' Key initiatives - sustainable and inclusive economy ' , the mountain has laboured and made a promise to produce a green paper on public services or services of economic interest .
I find this extraordinary .
This Parliament has repeatedly pointed out to the Commission and the Council over many years that there is an urgent need for a directive on a framework for services of general economic interest .
My understanding is that the spring summit instructed the Commission to come forward with a proposal for a framework for services of a general interest by the end of this year .
Yet what we have in this work programme for next year is the promise of a green paper to discuss the principles on which services of general economic interest might - might - be constructed .
At the same time , we have a promise on page 12 that measures to complete the internal market , by eliminating barriers to the provision and take-up of services by business and consumers , will proceed next year .
I do not find this acceptable .
This House and the spring summit have been ignored .
All the calls this House has made for universal services of general interest to the citizens of Europe to be guaranteed as a matter of urgency have been ignored , although this is a key part of European citizenship and of the social model we are so proud of in Europe .
I would like a clear answer from the Commission as to why it is failing to do what this Parliament has asked it to do and what it was instructed to do by the Council at the spring summit , because this is not acceptable .
Mr President , I have two questions .
The first is about securing our external borders .
I very much welcome the programme and proposals with regard to enlargement , and particularly the fact that you want to have uniform responsibilities .
The question is this : when do you think the new Schengen manual will be available ?
We will have common training programmes .
When do you think this common training system will be operational ?
What I would also like to request is that we should consider the compatibility of the technology being used and that we should also get Europol to carry out the proposed risk assessment as soon as possible .
When do you think the system will be operating ?
My second question is about migration .
Our objective - and on this we agree - must be to create viable legal immigration mechanisms and prevent illegal immigration .
However , the problem that arises here relates in particular to the area of asylum , where , although the Commission has made proposals , final decisions remain to be made in all areas .
But we need decisions to be made quickly so that genuine refugees - who make up about 10 % of applicants - can be helped swiftly and so that repatriation can be arranged for the remaining 90 % that have to be rejected .
Commissioner Vitorino , how do you intend to ensure that a system of this kind can finally be made operational and that we can secure Council approval ?
Mr President , I would like to thank those of the Commissioners who , out of respect for Parliament and the debate on the work programme , have been able to spend a couple of hours with us - once a year .
I admire Mrs de Palacio for answering questions across all areas of policy , including those of her colleagues who have other priorities .
What I have said amounts to praise for those of her colleagues who are actually here .
Mrs de Palacio , Commissioners , I have read the work programme very carefully .
It is better than what you have usually come up with .
In my areas of interest at least , it is more helpful .
You have integrated the concept of sustainability throughout , as we have always requested .
I really get the impression that you have done your homework , that you have understood the issues and that the external presentation at least has been very well done .
' External presentation ' and ' internal behaviour ' are , however , two very different things .
My queries relate in particular to internal behaviour .
Let us consider the leftovers , that is to say the things you are carrying forward from 2002 . In my field , which is environmental policy , there are some areas that Mrs Schörling and Mrs Frassoni and others have touched upon , such as policy on chemical products , PVC , the batteries directive , and various others .
If I consider why that is , I see that one of the main problem areas is that you cannot achieve any internal agreement .
You have conflicts between environmental , industrial and trade policy , and there is also often conflict between consumer protection and trade policy .
If you cannot resolve these internal conflicts , if you cannot manage to demonstrate leadership and say ' OK , the Commissioner responsible has power over the inter-service procedure ' , then we will always find ourselves with ' leftovers ' .
That is why I am asking you , Mrs de Palacio , how you intend to resolve conflicts within the Commission in future , and whether you are willing to air these conflicts in a more open and transparent way .
We can only ever guess the reasons why no proposals are presented to us .
We learn them already from the grapevine and the rumour mill .
We mostly seek answers in Commissioner Liikanen 's areas of responsibility , sometimes , often enough in fact , we seek them in Commissioner Lamy 's areas , and sometimes in Commissioner Bolkestein 's areas too .
I regard them as being the naughty boys .
I am not referring to poor Commissioner Wallström and Commissioner Byrne , who always do their best but are sometimes pushed to one side .
I expect your internal behaviour to reflect the way you present things externally .
That means that you will also present the proposals that you have presented to us very quickly in future .
Mr President , I was hoping to address my questions to Mr Solbes , but I do not see him in the House , and so Mrs de Palacio or Mrs Diamantopoulou may answer instead .
I should first like to make a request : please do not abuse the adjective ' sustainable ' .
It is rather like those awful restaurants where they put cream or parsley on everything and in the end ruin every dish .
' Sustainable economy ' , Mrs de Palacio and Mrs Diamantopoulou , means absolutely nothing .
It is just a nod towards the environmentalism of the Greens , towards the left with ' solidarity ' and towards the right with ' economics ' .
In short , a little semantic correctness would not go amiss .
Let us now deal with some rather more serious matters that I have noticed .
President Prodi has spoken of a single cycle of economic policy coordination - I am referring to point 2.3 , b4 ) - and , indeed , only a single cycle is needed because the objectives laid down in the Stability Pact and the broad economic policy guidelines must coincide with those of the real economy , in other words the labour market and , above all , welfare .
You realise that the labour market and welfare are two sides of the same coin .
Well , while the labour market already has an implicit coordination process - the Luxembourg process - which has been making positive headway for six or seven years now , the same is not true for the more recent ( as one might say ) Laeken process for coordinating welfare action , which has yet to be put into practice .
The two systems are unbalanced : much has been done in the area of close coordination on the labour market , while everything still remains to be done as regards welfare .
My request is therefore that the two coordination processes be synchronised as fully as possible so that they then make it possible to fulfil not only Lisbon but the Stability Pact too .
Mr President , in relation to the Commission 's work programme on enlargement we have , as we would expect , a very thorough and indeed a very formidable programme to achieve in the next 12 months , in which the Commission has to address a large number of areas including , in particular , monitoring the progress of the candidate countries .
Can we be assured that even when the treaties are signed there will be no winding down of DG Enlargement ?
That will ensure that we have the staff to carry out the monitoring process , which is still important right up to accession .
Secondly , the focus will inevitably move on to the stability of our borders , as the Commission says in its programme , but it does not say what new steps we are actually going to take .
We talk about relations with Moldova , for example .
Moldova is very close to being defined as a failed state .
How are we actually going to deal with it and with Ukraine , with which we have still tried to have relations ?
In relation to Bosnia and Kosovo , are we simply going to carry on as before , or are we going to look at enhancing our work there in order to better secure our borders ?
Finally , we put emphasis on the CFSP in preparing the Commission 's role in that area .
However , defence procurement and securing the future of European defence industries are important .
To that end we have previously had action plans from the Commission on how it can use its instruments to support that process .
Commissioner Liikanen keeps promising me that he will put forward a further action plan , but I see no reference to that in the annual programme .
Are we going to see an action plan on future defence industries and on defence procurement , and are we going to see the Commission using the instruments it has available ?
That concludes the catch-the-eye procedure .
Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the presentation of the Commission 's legislative and work programme for the year 2003 constitutes an important stage in working relations between our two institutions .
In fact , the presentation of this programme today marks the end of an interinstitutional schedule of financial payments agreed between our two institutions in January 2002 .
As this is the first exercise of its kind , it will clearly be possible to improve a number of points next time and I shall take the liberty of coming back to this matter at the end of my speech .
In February 2002 , the Commission presented to Parliament the annual political strategy for the year 2003 .
On the basis of this document , a true interinstitutional dialogue took place , from April to July , between the parliamentary committees and Commissioners concerned , on the scope and implementation of political priorities in each specific field of competence .
In July , within the Conference of Committee chairmen , jointly with the Vice-President of the Commission , Mrs de Palacio , we carried out an assessment of this year 's programme .
Then , in September , the Conference of Committee chairmen , also in the presence of Mrs de Palacio , drew up an inventory of the various legislative proposals that the Commission intended to introduce in its legislative and work programme for next year .
The document that Mr Prodi has just presented is therefore , to a great extent , the outcome of the dialogue which has taken place throughout the year .
Now , in order to conclude this process , Parliament is due to decide on a motion for a resolution on 5 December .
In this regard , I would inform you that the parliamentary committees decided , at the meeting which took place the day before yesterday , to prepare , each in their own field of competence , a contribution which can be included in this motion for a resolution .
Mr President , allow me to inform the European Commission , as well as Parliament , of my positive assessment of the interinstitutional schedule of financial payments which has been established for the first time .
More or less one year ago , the Commission position , as you will all recall , was practically the opposite .
The establishment of this schedule of financial payments required a great deal of effort , in particular by Parliament .
In this regard , I would like to highlight the remarkable work of our colleague Mrs Malmström , during negotiations with the Commission .
In fact , it was possible to establish the schedule of financial payments due to the mutual trust that has been created between our two institutions with regard to legislative programming .
Naturally , on the basis of this year 's experience , the various stages will be better understood and can be implemented next year .
A true culture of planning and interinstitutional programming is currently developing between the European institutions , which is surely moving in the direction expected by our citizens .
In this regard , allow me to conclude my speech by recalling that at the time of the Seville Summit of 21 and 22 July this year , the European Council decided that the Council would establish a work programme .
I therefore hope that the resolution upon which Parliament is to vote on 5 December will also address the Council with a view to establishing its programme for the year .
I would like to end by emphasising the importance of dialogue with the Council .
I would like to thank Mr Haarder in particular , who has always been there when we needed him .
I believe it is worth emphasising , Mr Haarder , because it is good to hear congratulations , too , from time to time .
Efficient legislative programming effectively means two things .
First of all , transparency in terms of knowledge and citizens ' access to the legislative work that the European Union intends to undertake in the year ahead . Secondly , greater efficiency in carrying out legislative work , not forgetting that , thanks to better programming , Parliament , the Council and the Commission can inform the national parliaments and the citizens on legislative work and take full responsibility for it .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioners , Madam Vice-President , I would first like to make a few observations about the key points .
The first of these is the enlargement of Europe .
We have already heard several times that the signals indicating the direction the Commission would like to go in here are too weak .
Let us take a look at the Balkans , for example .
This region in particular now feels as if it has been rather abandoned - the finance available to it has been reduced .
That may be justified , but that is all the more reason to give stronger political signals offering these countries two alternatives : either the route to membership at a later stage , or some other option .
The Zagreb Summit is coming up .
I do not know what the Council has in mind , but I would like to know , Madam Vice-President , what the Commission intends to propose at the Zagreb Summit , at Zagreb II that is , about what should happen in the Balkan region .
Is it being specifically identified as an enlargement region once the first round of enlargement has been completed ? Yes or no ?
Secondly , there is the issue of stability and security .
The point I am about to make has already been made , but I think it could be made more forcefully . Our security is very closely linked to our viewing other , neighbouring regions , ranging from the Balkans to the Caucasus , as partner regions with which we have appropriate treaties and where we intend to extend cooperation against cross-border crime and illegal mass migration .
On a more positive note , let us look at energy .
I think we can agree on this , Commissioner .
You have brought forward a raft of energy policy proposals , including proposals on energy policy in relation to nuclear safety .
We are now in a position to discuss the details and I am sure that we will not always agree .
I believe , however , that it is high time we regarded a coherent energy policy strategy as being part of our external policy .
What regions do we want to link more closely with Europe , especially as regards energy security policy ?
Let us consider the Caucasian region - or are we leaving it up to the Americans to act there ?
The Balkans are also involved in terms of the various pipelines that need to be developed and secured there .
This combination of external policy strategy with security policy strategy and even including energy security needs to be made far stronger .
Thirdly , there is the issue of a sustainable and inclusive economy . Here I think that what is lacking is a statement about economic policy cooperation , particularly with the European Central Bank .
The way this cooperation has been implemented in practice so far is by no means satisfactory .
I do recognise , however , that Mr Prodi 's observations about increased flexibility in relation to the stability pact are not reflected in the work programme , not directly at least .
In which case I do not know why he highlighted that point , but so be it .
However , the issue of how we can cooperate with the Central Bank to assume greater responsibility in terms of economic policy , and therefore also employment policy , needs to be given greater emphasis .
On page 14 there is a paragraph about services of general interest .
I am amazed that the Commission should be saying again that we need to initiate a debate on this .
A much-needed debate is already taking place , although unfortunately not one in which the Commission has played any really significant role .
Mr Prodi 's comments on this need to be taken really seriously if we are to make progress in this area , because services of general interest are an important issue not just in France but also in many of our Member States , and we need to have a clear line on this .
Lastly , I would like to make some general points about the legislative proposals .
Madam Vice-President , you know that you are our partner in the debate on alternative forms of regulation .
We in this House have a very great interest in seeing laws adopted more quickly and in applying the legislative process in a more flexible way , but to do that we need the cooperation of the Commission and the Council .
I will say something about that in a moment .
The Commission is willing to help on a great many issues .
It is perhaps a little too fearful that we want to take away its right of initiative .
We do not want to do that , nor are we able to .
Even if we did want to , we could not take it away from you .
But that does not mean you are entering into a more productive dialogue with us .
And it does not mean , above all in areas where we have delegated our legislative competence , that we have a right of call-back , because we are after all surrendering some of our competence and so we want something in return .
There is one thing that I find totally incomprehensible .
I am sorry to say that and have only praise for you , Mr Haarder , for sitting here for hours and listening ; I really admire that . I have in mind the very disappointing opinion adopted by the Council , by Coreper , on the issue of other forms of legislation .
It is not often you see something so restrictive and backward looking .
You really cannot expect Parliament to surrender legislative competence as long as you are not willing to budge an inch yourselves !
You talked about comitology as if it were the holy of holies , as if it were our primary objective !
That really is not acceptable .
We need to have a situation in which Parliament and the Council are to some extent treated as equals .
We do not want to impinge on your rights , but please respect ours !
Mr President , this has undoubtedly been a good debate between the institutions and 2003 will be an important year against the backdrop of enlargement .
We must ensure the good functioning of the Union for our citizens present and future .
That applies very much to the process of how we legislate , how we implement legislation and how we enforce legislation .
The debate has been very wide-ranging debate as regards how we legislate in this process .
However , I could not help thinking while listening to the many detailed questions that we have heard that perhaps more of what I and my colleagues have been dealing with could have been dealt with at an earlier stage in the Committees , to give us a more strategic debate here today .
On behalf of my group , I welcome the emphasis on impact assessments and the emphasis on involvement of our citizens and transparency .
That has to be the right way forward .
I would raise some concerns about the Commission 's powers of enforcement in terms of infringement proceedings as we move towards enlargement .
We must make sure that sufficient resources and measures are available in this respect .
The same goes for the Court .
The Court has to be fully resourced in order to carry out its tasks in the difficult times that lie ahead .
We have had a good debate , a good exchange , but I still am left wondering whether it has truly been the strategic debate that should have engaged all of this House and our citizens outside .
We have done well but we could still do a lot better .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Caudron has just given us his shopping list of good intentions and I have no intention of repeating it .
I would just like to say that although I am happy with it , I would have preferred a more strategic debate .
I , like Mrs Wallis , think that we have to set priorities and that Europe has to decide on its place and its role in the world and in the future of the world .
This is really the main priority for me and for us .
We must start by adapting our own institutions and asking ourselves whether our own house is in order .
I would again ask for attention to be given to the place of the regions , this is becoming an important issue .
So many small states will be joining the European Union , with all that entails , including their own language , their own place in the Council , in Parliament and in the Commission .
The constitutional regions , the other regions too , the regions with their own language , their own culture , even with legislative and their own implementing authorities , will continue to be deprived of all this and be left behind empty-handed .
I would ask whether they will then have to become a state to gain a respectable place in the European Union ?
That is an incitement to separatism .
Secondly , we want the full integration of the countries that are going to become the European Union with us .
Should we then , however , not do more so that the populations of these countries actually become involved ?
I hear the complaint for example that very many people are unable to find European Union documents available in their own language .
However , I want to focus more attention , because that was yesterday 's debate , on the circles of partner countries that we have to develop .
I think that this debate about the expansion of this second circle is of fundamental importance if we wish to conduct the debate about the boundaries of the Union in a positive manner .
Personally I do not believe that Europe should extend to the borders of Iraq , Iran and Syria , but we do have to be able to offer Turkey an attractive partnership .
At the moment this is something we are really talking too little about .
Then there is our role in the world .
Peace and development currently involve more than simply the follow-up to Johannesburg .
As long as Europe is more part of the problem of poverty than part of the solution , then , Mr Nielsen , we have to place a big question mark by all the good things we undoubtedly do .
Because we know that as long as we engage in agriculture , as long as we engage in trade as we currently do , we are more part of the problem .
Mr President , if one reads the Commission 's programme of legislation carefully , one suddenly happens upon a European army : the Rapid Reaction Force .
This is to be established in accordance with what has been called the ' all-purpose article ' : the famous Article 235 , now Article 308 , which is unchanged in the Treaty of Nice .
This shows that there is no limit to the EU 's interference in the affairs of the Member States .
With so many new countries due to join the EU next year , it would be better for us all to focus on consolidation and simplification of the existing legislation rather than continuing to build the Brussels legislative pyramid higher and higher .
This could be done as follows : the Commission should only be permitted to put forward new proposals on condition that the corresponding old legislation is deleted in the process .
All new proposals should be presented in their legal context , so that it is possible to compare proposals for new legislation with the existing legislation .
No new proposals should be presented unless they are accompanied by proposals regarding the means of consolidation of the existing legislation in the field .
This approach would make it possible to reduce the acquis communautaire from more than 85 000 pages to perhaps 25 000 pages .
Having accomplished this , we should strive to simplify binding legislation , transforming it into non-binding recommendations ; regulations can be transformed into framework legislation , total harmonisation directives into minimum harmonisation directives , and uniform rules into voluntary rules .
Attempts to create a federal state with an ever increasing amount of legislation could be replaced with a decentralised confederation of states , which would allow the Member States a great deal more freedom .
This is our vision of the form the Commission 's legislative programme should take .
We want a Europe of democracies based on diversity , as we believe that people will be happier if they can determine their own affairs as far as possible without interference and free from detailed rules drawn up by bureaucrats and lobbyists in Brussels .
Mr President , I will speak very briefly to allow other colleagues to reply in relation to the areas specific to their responsibilities .
I would firstly like to say that we are pleased to be able to hold this debate , which has been preceded by work by all the Commissioners in the committees , and which , in the end , has led to a result which we can regard as positive .
In this respect , I would like to thank you , on behalf of all the Commissioners , for the input provided systematically in the debates and discussions which have taken place in the various committees in order to fine-tune our programme .
When we presented our first proposals , we received initial reactions from Parliament 's relevant committees .
I am therefore grateful for the work carried out .
This has been an initial test whose result has not been homogenous in all the committees .
I hope that next year it will work perfectly in all of them .
Secondly , in relation to enlargement , I believe that President Prodi has been very clear .
There is no question that 2003 is still the main priority .
We must pursue the negotiations with the countries which are going to enter in the second wave and ensure that all the changes and adaptations which the candidates entering in 2004 have committed themselves to are being implemented and carried out .
This clearly requires considerable effort on the part of the candidate countries , and also of the Commission , in terms of cooperating with them in order to facilitate this work and rigorously verify that it is carried out .
If it is not , mechanisms will have to be implemented in order to correct the situation .
After enlargement and with the perspectives we have , what will happen ?
The President has clearly pointed out that we will have to decide on issues relating to the countries of the former Yugoslavia and also that circle of countries with which we have special relations .
I believe that that will be the challenge we will have to discuss , develop and monitor .
But at the moment the priority - let us make this very clear - is what we have on the table : the 2004 countries and those countries , in principle , Bulgaria and Rumania , which should enter in 2007 .
With regard to Turkey , we are in a situation of stand-by , of waiting , simply because Turkey is yet to fulfil the political requirements for entry into the Union .
In the economic field , I will say that the Commission - this is the third priority , as the President has pointed out - will continue to implement the structural modifications necessary to promote the Lisbon project .
The European Union , as the most developed knowledge-based economy , which aims for full employment , will in 2010 be the most competitive society .
That is how we are going to continue to work , and , in this respect , I would point out that , with regard to the Stability Pact , we have the framework of the Treaties , which are very clear , including the Protocol , in which figures are clearly mentioned - such as the 3 % of deficit and 60 % of debt - and it is true that at the Barcelona Council we have been asked to work to create greater economic coordination - which was mentioned earlier , by Mr Barón for example .

The Commissioner responsible , Mr Solbes , has given us an initial presentation with regard to the approach and the timetable , and soon the relevant specific documents will be presented .
With regard to the other aspects , I will only make a couple of brief comments on issues falling within my own competence .
There has been mention of the problems of legislation and the problem of commitology , ladies and gentlemen .
We know that , at the moment , by means of the high-level group of interinstitutional cooperation , we are negotiating certain agreements with the Council .
On this particular problem we do not have a real agreement and we are trying to find some common ground .
I believe that , in any event , there has also been progress in this field and that the progress has been made during this last year .
We must continue along this road .
I believe that the possibilities for improvement are favourable .
In this regard , I would like to say that the Commission will continue to work with Parliament and also , of course , with the Council .
In this way we will manage to find a conclusion on this issue .
With regard to resources and ambitions , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that , despite everything , the results of the development and process of European Union construction clearly indicate that our ambitions are great , but that we are achieving them .
Of course , the Commission can always ask for more human resources and has done so , specifically in view of enlargement .
An agreement has been reached on the minimum necessary .
I can only say that we would have liked even more .
If anyone insists on this area , I believe we are working with minimum resources , but that we are achieving a good result .
I will end by commenting on the specific issues that fall within my competence .
There has been mention of the Single Sky and responsibility for Eurocontrol .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Single Sky does not mean that flight plans are going to be decided by the Commission .
Flight plans are still coordinated within Europe by Eurocontrol , not only for the Fifteen , but for all the members of Eurocontrol , of which there are now more than thirty .
They are different things ; the Single Sky involves another series of areas which mean the harmonisation of management rules within the European Union and compatibility of inter-operative systems , management systems , integrating them into a network .
Specific execution is still in the hands of the States and global coordination in the hands of Eurocontrol .
In the other area , in Mr Ripoll 's area , I would like to say that what this Prestige tragedy - which we all regret , especially the Commission - demonstrates is that we were right .
We were right to demand greater speed in the approval of measures and in the application of the measures proposed .
Unfortunately , the Council , Parliament and the final agreements did not achieve much ; there were more difficulties than we expected and they have been delayed .
And since they have been delayed , regrettably , the Prestige accident has taken place .
Let us hope that the early implementation of the ' Erika I ' package - I have asked the Ministers for it to enter into force before next June - and of the ' Erika II ' package , in February 2004 , will prevent any further accident such as that suffered by the Prestige or by the Erika three years ago .
With regard to areas of refuge , amongst the proposals in the ' Erika I ' and ' Erika II ' packages , there are some which call for the different countries to determine and stipulate appropriate ports for dealing with emergency situations .
Of course , Galicia is part of ' Natura 2002 ' .
When talking about certain things , we must bear in mind all the available information , not to mention the difficulties for some ports on that coast , which I know very well and better than certain others .

Mr President , I would ask that Mrs Diamantopoulou , Mr Nielson and Mr Vitorino may speak next , since many issues have been addressed to them .
Mr President , first of all , as there have been many references to the presence of the Commission in this very interesting debate , I would like in turn to thank those Members of Parliament who were patient enough to stay and give definitive answers to specific questions .
Mr President , in addition to the answers already given by President Prodi , I would like to call the attention of the House to the fact that as far as return policy is concerned , very intensive work is under way on the programme for return to Afghanistan , thanks to the commitment of the Danish Presidency .
In 2003 the Commission will present a directive on minimum rules on return policy , above all in order to guarantee the mutual recognition of return decisions taken by a Member State .
Such decisions should be automatically recognised and executed by the other Member States .
The Commission has recently presented a proposal for a European return programme .
That is already under discussion in the Council 's specialised working groups .
When it comes to integration policy , we have put forward a proposal to create some pilot projects between 2003 and 2005 in order to promote the exchange of best practices as far as integration policy is concerned .
However , it has to be recognised that there is no explicit legal basis in the Treaty for dealing with integration policy at European level .
Therefore we need to discuss the added value of addressing integration policy in European-wide terms .
Thirdly , as far as immigration and asylum is concerned , I can reiterate that the Commission has put forward all the proposals asked of it by the Tampere European Council and the Laeken Council .
The time has now come for the Council to decide .
The only two new elements of asylum policy that we are taking into consideration are two proposals that are included in our programme for 2003 .
The first one concerns resettlement policy and the second protection in the region - the possibility of asking for asylum outside the territory of the European Union .
These two proposals will follow very closely the consultations launched by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees .
Thirdly , concerning the Seville Conclusions , I would draw your attention to the fact that the Commission has already presented to the Council the proposal on mandates for new readmission agreements with the People 's Republic of China , Albania , Algeria and Turkey .
In June 2003 we are supposed to present , as set out in our programme , the report on burden sharing on external border control .
We are now preparing a report on the financial allocations for partnerships with third countries aimed at tackling illegal immigration .
The report aims to identify effective allocations of financial tools , possible shortcomings and the vulnerabilities that must be overcome in the future .
When it comes to external borders , I can confirm that the Commission intends to present a reform of the common manual on external borders in March 2003 .
All the other actions asked of us in Seville , such as joint training and joint operation in the control of external borders , are already being developed by the appropriate Council working group and will be financed by the Commission 's ARGO programme .
Finally , we recognise the fight against terrorism as a priority for 2003 .
As far as legislative action is concerned , priority should be given to the fight against sources of financing for terrorism , and several of the proposals included in our programme address this challenge .
As Mrs Terrón i Cusí said , we intend to bring forward proposals concerning common procedural guarantees in criminal procedures .
We have launched a consultation and intend to build upon the results of that consultation in a green paper .
We shall therefore be bringing forward a proposal on common minimum rules on criminal procedure guarantees in the 15 Member States by the end of next year .
Mr President , I should like to respond to the more specific questions raised by Mrs Frassoni and Mr van den Burg .
To Mrs Frassoni , who talked about the outcome of the Johannesburg Summit , I will start by saying that the Commission in many ways shares the worries about the softness of some of the decisions taken there but this has been duly commented on .
As regards the question of the relationship between international agreements on the environment and the WTO framework , in Johannesburg it was a non-event and nothing new happened : nothing was added to WTO , nothing was subtracted .
Johannesburg was an attempt for the two sides to see if that balance could be changed - and it was not changed .
For that reason not everyone was happy , but there is a limit to the unhappiness .
The second question from Mrs Frassoni concerned the category II initiatives which are too weak and unclear .
I agree that the risk is that these weak initiatives do not add up to anything substantial .
The hard core of follow-up actions for the European Union to Johannesburg will be our water and energy initiatives .
These are not going to be weak or unclear .
They are already on the agenda for the spring European Council and we are already engaged with the Member States in clarifying these initiatives , which we see as big and important .
I agree with Mr van den Burg that we need more rapid disbursement , especially regarding activities covered by the EDF .
Things are moving forward and are somewhat better than they used to be , but we still have unsolved problems concerning staff and structure .
This is an ongoing battle .
We are preparing to do bigger things in the HIPIC global health fund , education for all .
All this depends on starting up the 9th EDF and I would urge Mr van den Burg when he returns to the Netherlands to make sure that the last remaining country in the convoy takes the necessary action , so that we are ready to access 9th EDF money .
As regards the agricultural profile of Europe in these global negotiations , this is back on track .
We managed in Johannesburg and we are still managing to keep alive the formulations embedded in the Doha language on this front .
We still see the external actions there as part of the necessary process of adaptation , which we in Europe have to take seriously .
This language is continually being confirmed at all the meetings .
Yesterday in the General Affairs and External Relations Council this was again the case .
We are on track .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Titley for his interest and consistency in following developments on the European defence industries .
The Commission has invested a lot in this issue .
We had a meeting of the enlarged external relations Commissioners in July at which some of the options for the Commission communication were discussed .
Since then Mr Patten 's service and mine have continued to work on this .
We shall be having a further Relex Commissioners ' meeting in December with the aim of defining a Commission vision of an optimum armaments policy for the European Union , ensuring that its defence-related industry is competitive and in a position to underpin the capabilities required for the ESDP .
I hope that the next time this issue comes up for discussion we shall be able to present specific documents .
The final speaker is the President-in-Office of the Council .
I am pleased that he has been present in person throughout the part-session , which demonstrates respect towards Parliament .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr Haarder , a former Member of this House , will now close the debate , and I would ask you to pay careful attention to what he has to say .
Silence please !
- ( DA ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , it has been a great pleasure to take part in this dialogue , which is the first of its kind .
I know this because I was sitting over there as a Member of Parliament last year when the Commission presented its legislative programme , and at that time the way of working was completely different .
Moreover , there was criticism from Parliament that we have heard nothing of today .
This is a testament to the great progress that has been made in the dialogue between the Council and Parliament , and I am happy to be present on this occasion , too , and to contribute to the dialogue for a couple of minutes , without delaying the start of the voting at 12 noon sharp .
The Presidency is very pleased with the Commission 's proposals .
We have noted the priorities set by the legislative and work programme , and I can say on behalf of the Council that we support the Commission 's intention to apply impact assessments to the chief legislative initiatives .
This is something that Mr Clegg mentioned , and I believe Mrs Frassoni also talked about .
In this connection , I wish to say to both Mrs Frassoni and Mr Swoboda that I too should have liked more progress to be made on the interinstitutional agreement on better lawmaking .
We had an excellent meeting in Brussels on 1 October , which I believe both Mrs Frassoni and Mr Swoboda attended , and I sensed that we were very close to reaching tangible agreement on a number of points .
Now , of course , time is running out , and so if we are to achieve a result by the end of the year , I would suggest that we now set ourselves some realistic goals , that we set out the points we can agree on and that we also show a degree of flexibility .
The Council can make concessions on some points , for example these alternative or weak forms of regulation that Mrs Frassoni spoke about .
I believe that we can reach agreement on that .
Then there are other matters which are more difficult , for example comitology , where it is well known that different countries have different traditions ; but let us now reach agreement on as much as possible .
I am prepared to continue the dialogue , which has unfortunately been extended and interrupted .
Let us resume this dialogue , and let us ask our government officials to give us a basis for discussion in the near future .
It is now up to the Greek and Italian Presidencies , therefore , to draw up a joint work programme for the Council for the coming year .
The new work programme will be presented to the Council in December : probably on 9-10 December .
I understand that the vote on the Commission 's programme here in Parliament is taking place as early as 5 December .
I am convinced that the upcoming Presidencies will pay due regard not only to the Commission work programme but also to the views on the work programme that Parliament has expressed and is going to express in the days ahead .
I also wish to thank Mr Vitorino for his words on asylum and immigration .
As I happen to be President of the Council which deals with such matters , I should like to confirm everything Mr Vitorino said .
We aim to complete new sets of rules on the reception of asylum seekers , the definition of a refugee and also the question as to which state is responsible for examining an asylum application .
I would say to Mr Titley , who called for a policy towards our new neighbours after enlargement , that , the day before yesterday , the General Affairs Council in Brussels worked out a more long-term strategy , to be implemented in cooperation with the candidate countries ; a strategy that shall ensure that these new borders towards the east are cooperative borders rather than another Iron Curtain .
Finally , I wish to address Mr Barón Crespo , who raised the question as to what the situation will be as regards the Commission , which will include Commissioners from the new Member States , and how the transition will take place .
As I announced yesterday , the General Affairs Council recommended the day before yesterday at its meeting in Brussels that accession take place on 1 May , and that the brand new Commission , including Commissioners from the new Member States , take office on 1 November , so that the new Parliament has enough time to approve the new Commissioners . In this way , in the intervening period , from 1 May to 1 November , there will be Commissioners from the new Member States who do not have a portfolio , and who therefore do not need to be approved by Parliament .
But this is all just a recommendation .
I mentioned it yesterday because it is of course only possible with the cooperation of Parliament , and it is in the spirit of this good working relationship that I mentioned the Council 's thoughts .
We are completely open to Parliament 's thoughts on the subject .
Thank you very much , Mr Haarder .
The motions for resolutions on these items will be voted on in Brussels on 5 December 2002 .
Mr President , what I have said to the Council and to Minister Haarder is that they have decided unilaterally on a constitutional issue for the Union without consulting Parliament and without holding discussions .
President Prodi has agreed with me and has told me that he is in favour of dealing with the issue at the Interinstitutional Summit at the end of the month .
I have written to the President of Parliament and I would like to know whether the Presidency-in-Office of the Council is prepared to speak to Parliament about a unilateral decision which - as he has acknowledged - leads to absurd consequences .
Mr Haarder is nodding in agreement .
The debate is closed .
Mr President , yesterday morning we had the part-session with our colleagues from the candidate countries . Although it was not an official meeting , it was one of the most interesting meetings ever held in this House .
I therefore think that it is a matter for regret that although there is a verbatim report of proceedings for yesterday afternoon , there is no verbatim report of the historic proceedings yesterday morning , and I simply wanted to ask if that would be rectified .
I shall pass that question on to the administration , Mr Posselt .
Colleagues , yesterday morning here in this Chamber I remarked that the coming year , in terms of the European enlargement process , will be a year of parliaments and parliamentarians .
I refer to the work we need to do , and the work that needs to be done in the parliaments of the Member States and candidate countries .
While making a success of enlargement is a key priority , we should not forget our parliamentary relations with the rest of the world .
On the contrary , we need to continue and develop relations with elected representatives from other states and not least with the US Congress .
Today , therefore , I am very happy to greet four Congressmen who are in our Distinguished Visitors ' Gallery : Mr Capuano , Mr Dooley , Mr Kind and Mr Moran , we warmly welcome you to Strasbourg and wish you a successful visit .




I should also like to point out that some of the Members of Parliament from the delegations from the Accession States are in the gallery today for our important vote .
The next item is the vote .
Report ( A5-0371 / 2002 ) by Elmar Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on enlargement : progress report ( COM ( 2002 ) 700 - C5-0474 / 2002 - 2002 / 2160 ( INI ) )
Before the vote :
Mr President , I would simply like to say that a series of significant errors have appeared in the Spanish version and I would be grateful if , before the vote on paragraphs 9 , 30 and 146 , you could allow me to take the floor to clear up these deficiencies .
I can assure you that we will make a systematic check of all the language versions after the vote , to make sure we render the texts compatible , but if you need to be called at a given point , please indicate .
Before the vote on paragraph 3 :
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on Monday the Council agreed to set the date of accession at 1 May at the latest .
As I see it , we should not be arguing about one month or another , and I suggest that we should make the necessary adjustments here and accept the date of 1 May .
However , to make sure that this does not put Parliament at a disadvantage when it comes to nominating the new Commission later on , we should stipulate an arrangement which will benefit Parliament now and add the following words after the date : ' ? and calls on the Council not to jointly nominate and confirm the new Commission with Parliament until after the European elections and to find a provisional interim solution for the accession countries ' .
I believe that we should avoid Parliament having its rights encroached upon by having nominations made before the elections .
Mr President , I just want to inform you that the coordinators of all the political groups in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs have adopted the decision , which will be endorsed by the committee itself , to table an oral question during the next part-session regarding the decisions that the General Affairs Council adopted on matters of sensitive institutional importance without consulting the European Parliament .
I take note of your comments .
Mr President , could you explain procedurally what happened to paragraph 3 ?
The original text will be part of the vote on paragraph 3 .
Mr President , I believe that , with the rapporteur 's agreement , we should at least change the date , because it still says 1 March here , and the additional wording needs to be discussed in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
However , the date ought to be changed .
Mr President , I think Mr Swoboda 's proposal is a very wise one .
Let me return to paragraph 3 with what is now a new oral amendment .
The President established that there was no objection to the oral amendment .
Before the vote on paragraph 9 :
Mr President , paragraph 9 of the text in the Spanish version reads ' apliquen este problema [ apply this problem ] ' referring to the transposition of the Community acquis .
I believe that it intended to say that this problem should be resolved as soon as possible .
It is clearly a linguistic error and I would like it to be noted , as well as the other two , which are more important .
As I assured you , we will check the linguistic versions .
Before the vote on Amendment No 51 :
Mr President , as long as the mover agrees , I would like to make a suggestion to you , namely that the word ' welcomes ' should be replaced by the word ' notes ' .
There is a simple reason for this : the Lithuanian authorities and the Lithuanian Parliament have not yet given this their approval .
However , I believe that it is important for the European Parliament that the Lithuanians should give their approval to this agreement , which is why we should use the word ' notes ' .
I hope that the mover can accept this .
I would also like to suggest that we should take the first sentence from Amendment No 52 from the Group of the Party of European Socialists , which was originally withdrawn , and add it to paragraph 18 .
That way we will have overcome the technical problems and incorporated the essential message .
I would be pleased if the members of the Group of the Party of European Socialists could agree to this .
Mr President , the Spanish version of paragraph 30 says that ' no se debe contar de antemano con la aprobación de la opinión pública en los Países candidates [ the approval of public opinion in the candidate countries cannot be counted upon on in advance ] ' .
This is clearly absurd , in view of what our colleagues said to us yesterday , and therefore what it should say is that ' no se debe dar por descontada la aprobación de la opinión pública de antemano [ the approval of public opinion cannot be taken for granted in advance ] ' .
I believe this is an important point and it is worth correcting it .
Again , as I assured you earlier , we will correct all of the linguistic versions after the vote .
Before the vote on Amendment No 42 :
Exceptionally , I will permit one brief comment , but there will be no debate on this .
Mr President , I can assure Mr Poos that we understand perfectly what he is proposing and it is the inclusion of the second part of Amendment No 9 that we specifically object to .
That is why we vote .
We have the chance to register our views .
Before the vote on Amendment No 10 :
Mr President , let me cut a long story short .
We were able to agree with the representatives of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats on a variety of compromises , including paragraph 1 on the Bene ? decrees .
Amendment No 6 now makes further changes .
In order to achieve as broad a basis as possible , we will be voting for Amendment No 6 .
We will above all also be voting for this amendment in recognition of Mr Schröder 's very successful efforts to steer a reasonable course as regards the Bene ? decrees .
Thank you for that early explanation of vote .
Before the vote on paragraph 71 :
Mr President , I am the rapporteur for this part .
I would like to point out that this was originally drafted in English , and that the German translation by no means does justice to the English text .
That is no doubt the reason why there is now an attempt to have a separate vote .
I would just like to say once again that the English version is the only correct one .
I note that the English is the authoritative version and , as I said earlier , we will ensure after the vote that all language versions are correct .
Before the vote on paragraph 102 :
Mr President , I would like to add a sentence which takes account of the more recent developments in the media sector , a sector which governments try to control and where they try to put pressure on the press .
The sentence would read : ' However , insists on the need to further monitor the situation in the media sector so that its independence and pluralism are fully preserved , enabling Poland to satisfy the criteria prevailing in Member States ' .
This time I am not speaking to raise an interpretation or translation issue , but simply to say that the text ' in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations Security Council ' has mysteriously disappeared from the Spanish version .
We must therefore include this reference in this version , since it is important .
Mr President , I will take this opportunity to say that , perhaps in the same mysterious way , my voting card disappeared at the beginning of the vote and I have not been able to participate in the first three nominal votes .
This is not going to alter the outcome of the vote , but since I was present in the Chamber , I will communicate this information to the services of the House .
Thank you for adding a touch of mystery to an otherwise interesting vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0372 / 2002 ) by Sir Neil MacCormick , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the request for waiver of the immunity of Mr Karl-Heinz Florenz ( 2002 / 2200 ( IMM ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0376 / 2002 ) by Luciano Caveri , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Regulation concerning Community financial contributions to the International Fund for Ireland ( 2003-2004 ) ( COM ( 2002 ) 472 - C5-0426 / 2002 - 2002 / 0210 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5.0376 / 2002 ) by Luciano Caveri , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the prohibition of organotin compounds on ships ( COM ( 2002 ) 396 - C5-0347 / 2002 - 2002 / 0149 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0377 / 2002 ) by Margie Sudre , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council decision amending Council Decision 89 / 688 / EEC of 22 December 1989 concerning the dock dues in the French overseas departments ( COM ( 2002 ) 473 - C5-0416 / 2002 - 2002 / 0209 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0382 / 2002 ) by Francesco Rutelli , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative of the Kingdom of Denmark with a view to the adoption of a Council framework decision on combating corruption in the private sector ( 10689 / 2002 - C5-0376 / 2002 - 2002 / 0817 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0374 / 2002 ) by José Ribeiro e Castro , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the Initiative of the Kingdom of Denmark with a view to adopting a Council Decision on the common use of liaison officers posted abroad by the law enforcement agencies of the Member States ( 10507 / 02 - C5-0357 / 2002 - 2002 / 0815 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0385 / 2002 ) by Mary Elizabeth Banotti , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council regulation concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and in matters of parental responsibility repealing Regulation ( EC ) No 1347 / 2000 and amending Regulation ( EC ) No 44 / 2001 in matters relating to maintenance ( COM ( 2002 ) 222 - C5-0234 / 2002 - 2002 / 0110 ( CNS ) )

( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0366 / 2002 ) by Christa Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive on amending Directive 77 / 388 / EEC to extend the facility allowing Member States to apply reduced rates of VAT to certain labour-intensive services ( COM ( 2002 ) 525 - C5-0470 / 2002 - 2002 / 0230 ( CNS ) )
Before the vote :
Mr President , I would just like to stress that the European Parliament supports the Commission proposal to make the most of this experiment in reducing rates of VAT for labour-intensive services .
Nevertheless , we are very disappointed that the nine Member States that have taken advantage of this did not see their way to submitting their reports on this experiment as agreed , so that the Commission does not have a basis for preparing its own legislative proposal .
I wish specifically to appeal to these Member States to submit their reports next year so that we can have a European legislative proposal on reducing rates of VAT for labour-intensive services by the end of this parliamentary term .
Mr President , I know that statistics are dry and boring , and some people even say that they are the most subtle form of lie .
Be that as it may , statistics are , it is to be hoped , an important way of decision-makers obtaining information and thus reaching the right decisions .
The recommendation for second reading before us is about the Community statistical programme for the next five years , 2003 to 2007 .
At first reading , the European Parliament called in particular for a significant increase in funding , which seems really essential given the work to be done because of enlargement .
The Commission and the Council accepted all our amendments except that one .
I can only lament this short-sightedness .
In a world that is becoming ever more complicated , and in view of the increasingly close-knit nature of the internal market , European statistics are gaining in importance , and the Commission and the Council in particular need to be aware of this .
Unless a decision is reached today , Eurostat will not have any money to start this programme on 1 January 2003 , and I therefore call on this House to adopt the common position .
I say this in the hope that the Council will this time show more insight and be more open to our wise counsel !
( Loud applause and heckling )
Thank you for that vital explanation .
I must remind the House that , under Rule 110a ( 4 ) , the rapporteur is fully within her rights to speak for two minutes .
She spoke for less than that so we must respect that right .
( Laughter and loud applause )
( The President declared the common position approved )
Mr President , on a point of order , that does not come under Rule 110a .
This is a second reading .
The procedure came under paragraph 4 , Mr Corbett .
You can consult the services to understand the Rule that you happily furnished us with several months ago .
Report ( A5-0344 / 2002 ) by Manuel Medina Ortega , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the approximation of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the advertising and sponsorship of tobacco products ( COM ( 2001 ) 283 - C5-0274 / 2001 - 2001 / 0119 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0357 / 2002 ) by Eryl Margaret McNally , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision on adopting a multiannual programme for action in the field of energy : ' Intelligent Energy for Europe ' Programme ( 2003-2006 ) ( COM ( 2002 ) 162 - C5-0179 / 2002 - 2002 / 0082 ( COD ) )
Before the vote on Amendment No 32 :
Mr President , I would like to add the words ' the financial reference amount has to be compatible with the ceilings of heading 3 of the financial perspective ' .
Mr President , I would like to add a fifth footnote , beneath the table , saying : ' The financial reference amount has to be compatible with the ceilings of heading 3 of the financial perspective ' .
Mr President , I must point out that a linguistic correction needs to be made to the Italian text .
As you know , this resolution was negotiated in English .
In item 5 , the expression ' notably a directive ' is translated in Italian as ' ad esempio una direttiva ' ( ' for instance a directive ' ) .
I do not consider this appropriate and I think it should be corrected .
We will make the linguistic corrections after the vote .
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution
Mr President , to clarify this matter I would like the words ' and their constitutional regions ' inserted after ' Member States ' .
This is a matter of real concern in many parts of Europe , including Scotland .
Mr President , again , in line with the previous oral amendment , could we withdraw the deletion of this particular amendment and for clarification add the words ' if legally possible ' ?
It is now brought into line with the decision we took on the earlier amendment .
Mr President , media concentration is an important issue not only at European and national level but also at sub-Member State level .
There is a significant problem in Scotland .
In the central belt of Scotland there are two serious broadsheet newspapers , The Herald and The Scotsman .
The Herald has recently been put up for sale by the Scottish Media Group .
Rumours have it that the current owners of The Scotsman - the Barclay Brothers - are trying to buy The Herald .
This would result in a monopoly of serious media coverage in the central belt of Scotland .
So when we examine media concentration we should look at its impact at every level .
I would hope that the UK authorities will listen to the advice of this Parliament and ensure that the Barclay Brothers are not allowed to acquire ownership of The Scotsman newspaper .
The situation , with regard to electronic media in particular , is steadily worsening .
Biased information , censorship or distortion of news and views unacceptable to the ruling interests , widespread dumbing down and total disrespect for workers ' rights are the order of the day in most modern media .
The main reason for this is because information and news are concentrated in the hands of a few major owners who are also powerful businesses .
Their aim is to control information and dictate an ideology , a way of life and consumer habits .
Big business has aggressively penetrated sectors which belong to the state , with the state 's blessing naturally .
All we can do is to suggest a few improvements such as :
prohibiting media owners ( even with just one share ) from owning shares in companies which tender for public works or public procurement ; insisting that shares in these companies be registered ; ensuring that no one owns more than one of the same type of medium ; and re-opening the debate on state-owned radio and television subject to constant and efficient public control .
The resolution under discussion turns a blind eye to the real dangers and keeps to a general stand on pluralism and freedom of expression and incomprehensible ( obviously compromise ) proposals on how and if the European Union should legislate in this area , which is why the MEPs of the Community Party of Greece voted against it .
The authors of these resolutions are starting from the idea that media concentration has accelerated substantially .
In the quest for the philosopher 's stone that would allow pluralism to be preserved , the European Commission is being inundated with requests .
Some believe we should organise a broad consultation of professional bodies .
Others think we should consider the political , economic and legal implications of a European regulatory framework or other regulatory options that would allow freedom of speech and the pluralism of the media to be safeguarded .
A third group believes we should draw up a directive that sets limits for media ownership , or propose restrictions on the appropriate use of advertising resources in order to guarantee free competition .
All these are ridiculous proposals whose only function is to imply that the European Parliament is a pillar of democracy .
Most newspapers and some television channels belong to press groups which , in turn , belong to proprietary trusts of companies in many other fields : the likes of Vivendi , Lagardère , Bouygues and a few dozen others play a decisive economic and social role and are more powerful than the State and far more influential than the electorate .

In the face of these powers , governments like the European authorities only bow down and respect the speculative stock market profits and board secrets .
. ( PT ) The best way of combating media concentration at European level is for no internal European market to be created .
The increased concentration of large media groups and their greater market share is also a result of public authorities , which have liberalised and privatised this area , recently divesting themselves of responsibility for the media . An example of this is the current situation in Portugal .
I deplore the fact that a specific defence of the role of public service and the need to ensure the survival of publicly funded television channels has not been included in the resolution , as the motion tabled by my group proposed .
The best way of ensuring democracy and pluralism is to promote a strong , diverse and modern public sector , in other words , public ownership of the media , with mechanisms and instruments that provide genuine democratic control , not to mention the fact that this sector is of strategic importance in guaranteeing a country 's sovereignty .
I proposed an oral amendment to this resolution .
I wanted to make it clear that within countries like Scotland and other so-called ' constitutional regions ' there must be protection against concentrations of media ownership that threaten fair and pluralistic public debate .
In Scotland today , there is a serious risk that the owners of The Scotsman newspaper may purchase its chief rival The Herald .
Other similar regions have similar concerns , for example Catalonia , the Basque Country and Wales .
The serried ranks of British conservatism , together with their EPP allies , blocked the oral amendment that would have given a high profile to this aspect of media freedom .
That lies upon their conscience .
Even without the oral amendment , the resolution makes a vital point about the relationship between free media and real democracy .
I therefore voted for it .
Mr President , as a member of the EU-Bulgaria Joint Parliamentary Committee , I am pleased that the Brok report has been adopted .
In particular , I should like to underline the importance of paragraphs 121 and 122 , which mention the Commission 's intention to propose an increase in financial assistance and pre-accession aid for the countries that will still be candidates after 2004 , which means Bulgaria and Romania .
I hope that such aid will be substantial , and that there will not be just a modest increase in these resources because , while it is true that both countries - Bulgaria and Romania - still lack the economic prosperity that has enabled the other countries to be admitted first , it is also true that , for that very reason , they have greater need of aid to turn around their economies , which were particularly badly damaged by the years spent under the Soviet regime .
Mr President , although the content of Amendment No 6 represents an improvement on the original Bene ? compromise , it does not take account of the requirement in respect of the amnesty law before the accession of the Czech Republic .
This law has no place in a European Community of values that calls for the protection of basic rights .
We have therefore rejected this amendment .
A newly reunited Europe cannot legitimise collective expulsion .
Recital O in the report gives an important signal here and therefore has our unqualified support .
Even if paragraphs 46 and 47 are basically welcome , what is missing from the report are specific demands in relation to the serious safety problems with the Temelin nuclear power station and the possible decommissioning of the station .
We were able to support all the amendments and points concerning the closure of nuclear power stations that cannot be retrofitted and we support the highest possible level of nuclear safety .
Whilst the report is deficient in more binding proposals as regards the Bene ? decrees and the Temelin nuclear power station , it comes out clearly in many places against fraud , corruption and discrimination .
We are very much in favour of specific demands for these problems to be overcome in advance of accession .
With regard to Turkey , my group is in favour of the recommendation in Amendment No 7 for the creation of a special partnership between the EU and Turkey .
We believe that it cannot be in the interest of Europe as a whole to allow Turkey to join the EU .
On the other hand , delaying tactics holding out the prospect of the start of membership negotiations should be fiercely opposed .
In conclusion I would like to say that we stand by the common European peace project and the historical need for future enlargement .
However , as the quality of the enlargement process is and will continue to be very important , my group abstained during the final vote .
I voted in favour of the Brok report on enlargement because I believe that plenary should send out a positive signal to the 10 countries applying for membership of the European Union .
Nonetheless , I have serious reservations about certain aspects of the resolution .
I think that the European Parliament should throw off its present financial straitjacket and call for a substantial increase in the Community budget , so that the cohesion countries can continue to receive structural aid and new members are not treated , financially speaking , as second-class citizens .
I also think that our main priority should be to support the large sections of society in European countries being swept aside by neo-liberal policies , the sell-off of public property and the dismantling of welfare systems .
In keeping with what I said yesterday , the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece had no choice but to vote against the Brok report . Especially as today 's vote was rejected by a conservative majority :
1 ) our amendments on Cyprus , including an addendum to the effect that the political solution must make provision for a two-zone , twin-community , federal state with one sovereignty , one international personality and one nationality , the amendment expressly calling for refugees to be allowed to return home and the proposal to replace the expression ' northern Cypriot leadership ' with the expression ' Turkish Cypriot leadership ' .
The European Parliament also put a stranglehold on the Cypriot people by adopting an amendment calling on both sides to sign a framework agreement before Copenhagen .
It is obvious , now that the Annan plan has been submitted , that the European Parliament is openly renouncing the framework of UN resolutions to the point at which it is denying refugees the right to return ;
2 ) our amendments calling for the ban on Communist parties in numerous candidate countries to be lifted and for full recognition of the political rights of the Russian minority in Latvia .
This result illustrates yet again that the pompous pronouncements of the European Parliament and of the European Union in general on respect for and the defence of human rights are pure hypocrisy and that enlargement is an anti-grass roots , anti-democratic exercise .
- ( DA ) The Brok report contains numerous directions for the future Member States , which on some points beg the question as to whether this is really something the EU should interfere in .
The report also supports NATO 's plans to admit new countries : a line of action with which we totally disagree .
The report contains some very positive elements .
First of all , it shows clear support for the whole project and stresses that Turkey , too , should be taken seriously as a candidate country .
Turkey must of course meet the requirements on human rights and democracy before there can be any talk of proper negotiations for its accession , but we oppose the reactionary line of thinking that wants to turn the EU into a white , Christian - it is tempting to use the word ' Aryan ' - club .
Even if the report is federalist on a number of points , therefore , we have to support its final adoption .
When the Iron Curtain came down 13 years ago everyone in the West thought that the great changes in the East would consist mainly of greater freedom of speech and greater freedom for the voters to appoint politicians of their own choice .
These changes have since been overshadowed by others .
We now see a growing divide between rich and poor , a substantial collapse in employment , dilution of public service , uncontrollable numbers of cars , growth projects that are at odds with environmental protection and growing dependence on expensive imports and foreign companies .
The people in these countries have been prepared to accept sacrifices , dilution and chaos in the hope that they would be rewarded with major inflows of money from the EU from the time of their accession .
In their view therefore 2004 is coming too late and the subsidies for agricultural and regional development are far too low .
Politicians in the west of Europe who are still unwilling to admit these newcomers or who want to economise on their accession are creating the impression that they are only interested in benefits for their own country and the companies established in them .
As an Eastern European I would perhaps reject accession to the EU , but as a Western European I feel obliged to show solidarity with those peoples if they themselves wish to accede .
. ( PT ) I have voted in favour of the Brok report , although I did vote against paragraph 31 for two reasons :
1 .
Portugal did not participate in the Second World War and it therefore makes no sense for my country to sign a common ' European Declaration ' .
We cannot admit to having committed crimes and atrocities against humanity when , fortunately , we did not commit or condone any such action ;
2 .
No mention is made of the crimes and atrocities committed in many of the candidate countries after the Second World War by Soviet communism , from which this round of enlargement is providing definitive deliverance .
History cannot use two different sets of balances for facts which should inspire in us equal ethical and moral repulsion .
. ( PT ) Despite some disagreement where the separate votes are concerned , I have voted in favour of the Brok report , in line with the support that the CDS / PP has always given to this process of the European Union 's enlargement .
As a matter of fact , as we have frequently said , our position is that in the dispute between enlargement and the so-called ' deepening ' of the EU , priority should - and must - always be given to enlargement .
We consequently felt that Maastricht in particular was an historic error of timing and that , at that time , in light of the fall of the Berlin Wall , which had taken place just a few months previously , Europe 's leaders should have had the political vision to give priority to enlargement instead of launching straight into political union and EMU .
Many of the additional problems that enlargement is , unfortunately , facing today stem from this error of timing .
On the same theme , I regret the fact that the Brok report does not affirm and recommend a serious basic compromise with regard to these new future Member States : the last revision of the Treaties before the accession of these countries was undertaken in Nice and no new revision of the Treaties will take place until at least the first set of new Member States is able to participate in it , with full rights and with sufficient time for debate and reflection .
. ( PT ) I wish to congratulate Mrs Sudre on her report , which concerns extending exemption arrangements for dock dues , authorising partial or total exemption from this tax for local production in the French overseas departments .
As I have argued both in interventions in plenary and in explanations of vote , there cannot and must not be doubts about the appropriateness of maintaining support instruments for the outermost regions under the recent Article 299 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty .
I therefore fully support the proposal to extend the validity of this scheme to 31 December 2003 . Such an extension is justified by the persistent disadvantages of these territories and by the consequent need to adopt measures that compensate for these conditions .
. ( PT ) There are various factors that contribute to corruption as a transnational problem .
What is crucial is an integrated and flexible common strategy , which will enable us to achieve greater transparency , less bureaucracy , a greater simplification of rules and effective control mechanisms , in the aim of preventing conditions conducive to the proliferation of corruption from arising , and to increase opportunities for detecting and punishing such practices .
We must fight against corruption both in the public sector , where it undermines the operation of the democratic system and citizens ' confidence in the integrity of the democratic rule of law , and in the private sector , where corruption tends to distort the rules of competition and prevent healthy economic development .
I therefore regret the fact that this proposal for a framework decision is intended to regulate only the private and not the public sector , especially given that national legislations are still not harmonised - there are , for example four Member States that have still not ratified the EU Convention on corruption in the public sector - which could give rise to situations of objective legal uncertainty .
Furthermore , establishing a different regulatory approach to corruption in the private sector , which is the subject of this framework decision , and to corruption in the public sector , the subject of the 1997 EU Convention , could also create problems in implementing the framework decision on the European arrest warrant .
I therefore call on the Commission to present a proposal to regulate these two types of crime .
This report was voted on under Rule 110a of the Rules of Procedure , which allows for no debate and no amendments to the report .
The British Delegation of the PPE-DE Group has previously sought to amend reports which it did not support .
The new rule , however , leaves no option but to vote against certain reports .
Although Conservative MEPs wish to combat corruption , we believe that this matter should not be legislated on at a European level but should be dealt with internally by Member States .
We are willing to cooperate with other Member States ' authorities , but we will not go down the path of harmonised maximum penalties .
. ( PT ) On this matter , our vote was determined by the position , adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , which we felt was well founded .
Although we believe that there is a need for legislation that punishes the types of crime we are discussing - corruption in both the public and private sectors - the issue requires more extensive study in order to prevent the adoption of vague and indeterminate concepts , non-observance of the principle of subsidiarity , the risk of obstacles to fundamental freedoms or distortions of competition and even the use of different legal approaches to the two types of crime in question .
These , in brief , are the reasons for my vote against the report .
. ( PT ) Despite the fact that , on almost all points , I agree substantially with and subscribe to the rapporteur 's concerns , I have decided to vote against the report because I , like the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , feel that the proposed text breaches the principle of subsidiarity and that , particularly at a time when the Convention is discussing this matter in the context of the future of the European Union and is attempting to clarify the definitive distribution of competences between the Union and the Member States , all Community bodies - and Parliament in particular - have a responsibility to demonstrate scrupulous respect for this fundamental principle .
Furthermore , I also believe - as does the Committee on Legal Affairs - that legislation is needed to regulate these two types of crime , corruption in the public and private sectors , which will enable us to establish a more coherent and effective regulatory framework .
It should be added that the European Commission is getting ready to present an initiative in the form of a communication to this end .
I believe that this initiative will provide some positive approaches to consider , specifically with regard to the need for coordinated action by the European bodies responsible for encouraging cooperation between Member States in suppressing crimes of corruption , such as Eurojust , Europol , OLAF and the European judicial network , in both the public and private sectors .
Indeed , coordinated action between these bodies ought to strengthen action by national police forces and facilitate cross-border investigations on the ground , through the sharing of Member States ' information capabilities .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I am particularly happy that Parliament has today given a strong signal of cohesion on a matter as important as combating corruption .
Parliament has given a clear answer to the citizens , who are facing a serious lack of confidence in the transparency of the markets and many institutions .
The European reference framework on combating corruption is still fragmented , non-binding and in need of a bold step forward .
The Danish initiative on corruption in the private sector is an initial step in the right direction , but we need to go further , especially in view of enlargement .
Parliament has asked those Member States who have not yet done so to ratify the European Union Convention and the Council of Europe Convention on corruption in the public sector .
If this does not happen , Parliament has asked the Council to submit a new framework decision on corruption in the public sector .
This is the focus of the report .
Some States are anticipating the implementation of the European arrest warrant , like the United Kingdom , which was the first country to transpose the arrest warrant into national law with the Extradition Bill .
( Text abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) )
. ( PT ) Once again , we are considering a Member State initiative that errs on the side of being too cautious and unambitious and will not lead to the changes in legislation that are desirable and necessary in this field .
Changes introduced by the rapporteur , Mr Ribeiro e Castro , have improved on the initial proposal .
Effectively combating cross-border crime requires special attention to be paid to stepping up cooperation on posting liaison officers to third countries and to international organisations .
Although cooperation contributing to the prevention , identification and investigation of crimes is already in place , we must strengthen certain aspects of this cooperation between liaison officers in order to make the best use of Member State resources , thereby providing greater world coverage .
Combating international crime must be a joint action based on maximum cooperation and trust between Member States .
It is crucial that binding instruments are in place at Community level , establishing common rules on the competences of liaison officers and on data protection and to subject the legality of this exchange of information to judicial control .
The huge variety of laws in force creates enormous difficulties for the effective cooperation of national liaison officers and Europol , as well as complicating judicial control .
Hence this proposal for a decision , which is intended to update and improve cooperation in this field and to be legally binding on the Member States , unlike the Joint Action of 1996 .
.
( PT ) The proposal of the European Commission already warranted our opposition , but the report by Mr Ribeiro e Castro warrants even greater opposition , because it accentuates the negative aspects of the original proposal .
I shall highlight the following examples :
the seriousness of the prospect of there being ' liaison officers who are dispatched by the various Member States ' without any monitoring by the police authorities ;
the term ' cooperation ' is not confined to the exchange of information , specifically about crime , but also covers the prevention and investigation of criminal offences , which is unacceptable .
Due to the undisputed need for police cooperation in the EU in order to combat multinational crime organisations , cooperation could be undertaken by institutional , judicial and penal means without undermining national sovereignty .
It would be more useful , then , for the European institutions to focus their concerns on the myriad police organisations already in place , created under the Maastricht and Schengen agreements and which operate without any democratic control or monitoring and which constitute serious breaches of the citizens ' rights and freedoms and of the sovereignty of the Member States themselves .
. ( PT ) It appears that the report has largely been well received by the Members of all political groups , given that all the amendments tabled by the rapporteur and those which , although not produced by him , have his agreement , have been adopted .
Only one new recital , proposed by Mrs Buitenweg , which proposes the creation of binding instruments at EU level , has been adopted without Mr Ribeiro e Castro 's support .
The report mirrors the caution of the Danish initiative , which respects the current legal framework , and we therefore feel that we must support it and at the same time congratulate its rapporteur , my colleague , José Ribeiro e Castro .
. ( PT ) I have , of course , voted in favour of my own report .
This Danish initiative is extremely positive and timely as well as being well balanced , fully respecting the status quo of the Union 's institutional development and the Member States ' own competences and now seeking to adopt a binding legislative instrument .
In fact , it is an attempt , by means of its provision for joint working methods , to strengthen the global capabilities of liaison officers posted to third countries by Member State police authorities , which will provide a clear common benefit to all of them .
This specific stepping-up of police cooperation is particularly relevant in the field of information and will doubtless have an increasing role to play in combating organised crime , particularly given the rate at which this type of crime is increasing .
The proposals for amendments that I tabled , with the support of the specialist parliamentary committee , are all intended to increase the effectiveness of the mechanisms for cooperation and shared use between police liaison officers , whilst at the same time attempting to remedy various shortcomings , specifically in the following areas : guaranteeing fundamental rights in the field of data protection , the regular monitoring of the liaison officer system , through annual reports and the study of these reports ; similar treatment for Europol 's liaison officers and , lastly , funding .
. This Report was voted on under Rule 110a of the Rules of Procedure , which allows for no debate and no amendments to the report .
The British Delegation of the PPE-DE Group has previously sought to amend reports which it did not support .
The new rule , however , leaves no option but to abstain on certain reports .
This is a very sensitive area of policy .
The British Conservative Delegation is particularly keen to protect children and their rights , and the standards which are applied in the UK are generally very high .
We therefore believe that improving standards and protecting children is something where best practice should be shared but that introducing a regulation of this kind might well slow down the process of general improvement in approach .
. ( PT ) The common fisheries policy is of the utmost importance to Portugal .
The reform that is currently underway has extremely serious implications for my country and for the Algarve region .
Implementing the reform in its current state would seriously damage Portuguese fishermen , economically , socially and in terms of their industry .
Nevertheless , despite the consequences , I believe that stepping up the fight against illegal fishing is a priority that everyone accepts .
Such activity prevents the effective and sustainable management of fish stocks . I therefore give my unequivocal support to the Busk report and to all measures to eradicate illegal fishing .
In this context I agree with the call to close European ports to vessels flying flags of convenience or which are engaged in illegal fishing .
We will thereby prevent the entry of these products onto the European market .
We cannot , on the one hand , impose strict fishing quotas and , on the other , not take action to prevent illegal fishing activities .
I am therefore , in favour of new control measures at Community level , specifically through :
clearer marking and identification of vessels ,
compliance with the rules , to be monitored by regional organisations ,
dissuasive and uniform sanctions .
To this end , the Commission must make available financial resources that are appropriate to this fight .
. ( EL ) The collapse of socialism in central and eastern Europe had disastrous consequences on research , as it did on all social achievements during the socialist era .
Funding fell to a minimum , research institutes closed , researchers abandoned research , there were no incentives for new researchers and , worst of all , there was a brain drain , with the most experienced researchers moving to the west .
Former socialist countries with advanced research facilities were reduced to living on miserable handouts from abroad and the ? U.
The report recommends the participation of candidate countries in the EU framework programme on research almost as a panacea .
At the same time , however , it advises linking research to industry and creating a favourable business climate ; in other words , it is pushing for the EU model to be adopted and wants research to operate in accordance with market rules .
Although no one could object to international scientific cooperation on equal terms , we cannot under any circumstances allow research to serve and be controlled by major financial interests .
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece did not support the report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we should support the fundamental health protection efforts being made in the European Union .
I am against the tobacco advertising directive for several reasons of principle . Firstly , because it does not have a legal basis , and , secondly , because tobacco is after all still a legal stimulant .
If we were to accept the Commission 's logic , we would also have to rethink our position on advertising sweets , fast cars and alcohol .
Thirdly , a policy that simultaneously subsidises tobacco and bans its advertising is neither logical nor consistent , and cannot therefore really be taken seriously .
As I see it , this is an issue of principle , and needs to be addressed accordingly .
Mr President , is it really not naïve to think that this directive is the panacea for the adverse consequences of smoking ?
Does the European Commission really believe that a complete ban on tobacco advertising is going to stop people smoking ?
This is wishful thinking as far as I am concerned .
I also take the view that people must have the freedom to find out about products as long as they are not prohibited products .
I also think that there are better ways of tackling this problem , for example by drafting European guidelines that lay down standards for tobacco goods .
Finally , I should like to draw your attention to the fact that what we have here is a contradiction in se .
We are going to ban tobacco advertising , but each year millions in European subsidies go to tobacco growers .
Make of that what you will .
I voted in favour of the amended proposal to ban the advertising of tobacco products because all the amendments by the Committee on Legal Affairs were rejected .
These amendments , one : watered down the restrictions in the proposal , two : allowed advertising companies to circumvent them and three : put a question mark next to the legal basis , especially following the annulment of the first proposal by the Court of Justice .
However , even this second Commission proposal still has a question mark next to it , based as it is on the internal market rather than the protection of public health .
No doubt this is the first move in the next set of proceedings in the ECJ .
Money is earned from the production and sale of tobacco , but it shortens the lives of many people and makes them less healthy .
Advertising that encourages people to start using tobacco products or to start using more of them is extremely damaging .
In Directive 98 / 43 / EC an attempt was rightly made to make advertising and sponsorship at European level impossible .
According to the Court of Justice this is not allowed because Article 152 ( 4 ) of the Treaty excludes the harmonisation of statutory and administrative provisions of the Member States for the protection and improvement of human health .
Further proof that the EU is about free competition and economic growth , but not about the protection of human welfare .
In the meantime the EU continues with its subsidies for Greek tobacco farmers .
The solution now proposed of nothing more than the selective prohibition of tobacco advertising will lead to the companies concerned looking for the loopholes in the legislation to continue with their advertising .
Lawyers and the courts will have their work cut out scanning the boundaries of these loopholes , in particular to decide what is or is not to be regarded as cross-border advertising .
I therefore support the organisations that are objecting to this severely weakened proposal .
. ( PT ) Whilst I understand many of the rapporteur 's aims to give the directive greater legal strength - and thereby avoid seeing the courts reject its implementation - I believe that the rapporteur has ultimately compromised the directive 's public health objectives .
I find this intolerable . I therefore prefer the European Commission 's original position to that produced by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
Amendment No 26 , which I support , seeks to prevent this excessive weakening of public health protection .
. ( PT ) As we all know , the Court of Justice annulled Directive 98 / 43 / CE , on the grounds that the article of the Treaty chosen as its legal basis precludes harmonisation designed to protect human health , and that its action should instead be to complement that decided on by the EU 's Member States .
In fact , the general ban on the advertising and sponsorship of tobacco products it provides for exceeded the competence enshrined in the Treaty and was even in breach of the rules on freedom of movement shaping the internal market .
The new proposal for a directive therefore seeks to establish , in terms which are in accordance with the EC Treaty , a less restrictive framework , with new objectives for public health protection , in the conviction that tobacco is a product that is harmful to health , that deterrence from its consumption must be promoted , particularly where younger people are concerned .
The proposal also seeks , whilst respecting the rules of competition and of the internal market , to prevent its widespread promotion in the media .
These are the reasons why I agree with this report .
.
( PT ) I wish to congratulate Mr Di Lello on the quality of his work .
The Citizens of the European Union have the right to expect the Union to effectively confront the problem of increasing threats of crime , which does not recognise borders and which attacks their freedom and their rights .
What is required is rapid , concerted and joint action , which effectively coordinates all efforts to combat and prevent crime throughout the territory of the Member States .
One of the most effective instruments with which to combat organised crime is the seizure and confiscation of the proceeds of crime .
Difficulties arise , however , as a result of the disparities between the various Member State legislations .
The Union must make efforts to approximate criminal law and procedures on money laundering and the confiscation of goods .
The adoption of the framework decision on money laundering has enabled us to make progress but has proven to be inadequate , because there remains a considerable margin for criminal impunity insofar as this decision only established sanctions for serious crimes .
This matter has come to be regulated by two acts of differing legal value , because Joint Action 98 / 699 / JHA has not been revoked .
This proposal for a framework decision is a step in the right direction , because it aims to ensure that all the Member States have in place effective rules providing for confiscation when an offence is punished by deprivation of liberty for a period of more than one year .
I agree with the rapporteur 's position on the proposals by the Danish Presidency on the possibility of ' more extensive ' confiscation and the inversion of the onus of proof .
Any legislative initiative must respect the individual rights and fundamental freedoms of our citizens .
Whilst Conservative MEPs support anything which enhances cooperation between Member States ' law enforcement agencies , we cannot support any prescriptive European measures such as those proposed in this Report .
Such matters should be dealt with internally by the individual Member States .
. ( PT ) As the rapporteur points out , one of the most effective instruments for combating organised crime is the seizure and confiscation of the proceeds of illegal activities , particularly when such proceeds are destined for laundering .
The lack of coordination between the various crime-fighting bodies can only benefit those involved in such activities , which means that we must , to this end , improve mutual assistance in the fight to capture the proceeds of organised crime .
These initiatives and the rapporteur have both sought to establish a designated framework for action under the framework decisions , to safeguard the necessary independence of the national authorities when dealing specifically with incidents that have occurred within their territory - whilst at the same time providing for common mechanisms for regulation in order to pursue the shared commitment to combat all forms of organised crime , in line with the conclusions of the Tampere Council .
The rapporteur has also taken care to ensure that , when considering the illegal origin of property , the inversion of the onus of proof only applies when the prosecution can prove that the property possessed is disproportionate to declared income or the activity pursued , with the person convicted then having the onus to prove the lawful origin of the property .
I have therefore voted in favour of the report .
Mr President , I should like to add my support to your speech on The Scotsman and The Herald .
Before I begin on the Stevenson and Souchet reports , I find it quite disgraceful that colleagues in this House do not recognise that half a million EU citizens die every year because of tobacco use .
A tobacco advertising ban would be an extremely good measure to try and help public health and save lives .
On the Stevenson report , I should like to point out that we voted to maintain the 6-12 mile zones to preserve historic fishing rights and derogations relating to boxes in the North Sea .
We also believe that benefit from fishing agreements should be taken into account in quota setting and that poverty eradication is a key aim of fishing agreements .
We are very sceptical of an amendment deleting the recital which noted that joint ventures can be used to massage fleet reduction figures .
On the Souchet report , we voted against Amendments Nos 10 and 11 , and Recitals H and I for sustainability reasons and abstained on the final vote for very similar reasons , i.e. the environmental impact and making sure sustainable development is at the heart of the policy .
Mr President , as you all know , I was the original rapporteur for this report .
The document was totally destroyed in the Committee on Fisheries and I felt compelled to give up the task of drafting the report , which was given to the Committee 's Chairman , Struan Stevenson .
I know I am in a minority , but I must say that the main reason for my attitude is that the report we have just adopted ignores the main issue .
By this I mean that the reform of the common fisheries policy in 2002 is purely and simply a result of the fact that the transitional period of 16 years granted to the Spanish State and to Portugal , so that they need no longer be intruders in Community waters and have the same rights as the other Member States , has come to an end .
I cannot , of course , accept this situation .
I am also , of course , in favour of the conservation of stocks - I have nothing against this , in fact - but the report and the committee have not given due consideration to the economic and social consequences of the reform .
Nor do they discuss a budget for a reform of such importance , but uphold the principle of relative stability , which is now discriminatory and grants privileges , because it was established when the EU had only six or nine Members .
Furthermore , the report heaps scorn on international fisheries .
I therefore dare say that there will soon need to be a new real reform of the CFP , to ensure that it is a genuinely common policy .
It is now less of a common policy than it used to be !
. ( PT ) The Souchet report is quite positive and warrants our support .
Firstly because of the importance it attaches to the participation of fishermen and their professional associations in the field of research and information on the state of fish stocks , given that fishermen are in favour of protecting the environment , since these are amongst the first people to suffer from its impairment .
Secondly , I agree with the rapporteur 's statement that the pressure fishing places on stocks must not be dealt with in a uniform and global way and must instead take account of the particular characteristics of each fishing area and the specific nature of each fish species .
The report rejects the use of rigid instruments such as the scrapping of vessels , which have irreversible consequences and major socio-economic effects and prefers other , more flexible instruments for managing stocks .
I support the maintenance of public aid for modernising the fishing fleet , which has a direct impact on working conditions , on safety and on the quality of products , thereby rejecting a philosophy which , whilst claiming to be concerned about the environment , is attempting to undermine aid , in what we could call a liberal ' greenification ' .
First , we think the motion for a resolution on environmental protection under the common fisheries policy is a good idea and we support it .
It rightly notes that the European Parliament is opposed to the horizontal application of restrictive measures , that is , measures which take no account of fishing zones or fish species .
The European Parliament is therefore taking an indirect stand against the basic option of reforming the common fisheries policy , which would mean an end to public aid for the modernisation of fishing vessels .
It likewise rightly identifies the dangers to the economies of coastal areas affected by these measures .
It rightly notes that the Commission 's arguments in favour of the application of restrictive policies are not based on scientific data and that specific studies need to be carried out in order to evaluate the real state of fish stocks .
Although it calls for these studies to be carried out , it also calls for restrictions such as TACs and quotas to be maintained .
We would point out that proposing such measures without first carrying out the aforementioned studies is a contradiction in terms and that we have reservations about and are opposed to any further strengthening of the role of the Commission which helps bring about further integration .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.37 p.m. and resumed at 3.03 p.m. )

Mr President , I do not doubt that is what the President 's notes say , but one of the problems with accepting it is that my notes and those of other Members and of the general rapporteur say differently .
The problem is that my notes are in Brussels , not here in Strasbourg , so when I saw this in the Minutes I asked to raise it .
Could I ask that we check the audio or video tapes of that voting procedure to establish the actual position ?
I am of course convinced that what I say is correct , but if I am proved wrong then I am more than happy to accept that .
Very well , Mr Wynn .
We will of course check these tapes as you have asked .
We will then be able to be absolutely sure about the result .
- ( DA ) Mr President , the tenth EU-Russia Summit took place in Brussels on 11 November with satisfactory results .
The meeting reflected the intensity and depth of the cooperation between the EU and Russia .
It showed that this cooperation is now entering a new phase ; the framework for the strategic partnership has been laid down , and now it remains to flesh it out with practical actions .
As you know , there was a major problem , which has been discussed many times in Parliament , that is , Kaliningrad .
Consensus was reached on a joint declaration regarding transit between Kaliningrad and the rest of Russia .
The agreement represents a balance between the interests of the candidate countries , Russia and the EU .
The fact that a solution could be found to the problem confirms the strength of the cooperation between the EU and Russia ; and at the same time the EU asserted that it attaches the utmost importance to respect for the sovereignty of the candidate countries and effective border controls on the EU 's external borders .
We stood firm on the principles that Lithuania is a sovereign country and that it has as much right to join cooperation on Schengen as all the other candidate countries .
This is something that was respected , even by President Putin .
Consensus was reached , and I can add that President Adamkus of Lithuania , too , accepted the agreement which was entered into .
Consensus was also reached on a joint declaration on the fight against terrorism .
This was a key point for both parties .
The summit condemned terrorism in all its forms .
The declaration and the accompanying cooperation plan are indications that cooperation between the EU and Russia on this point is moving on from an exchange of information to practical cooperation .
Lastly , consensus was reached on a declaration on the situation in the Middle East , which confirms the existing consensus between the EU and Russia on this matter .
There was a frank debate on the situation in Chechnya .
The parties were agreed that the conflict cannot simply be regarded and treated as a problem of terrorism and that a political solution is the only way to lasting peace , stability and development in the area .
I know that Commissioner Patten has already spoken of the extraordinarily open debate which took place .
The European Union will monitor developments closely .
Both sides must respect human rights , and the EU must insist that those who do not are brought to justice .
The EU will also demand that the international community be given the opportunity to provide the urgently needed humanitarian aid to Chechnya .
Regional conflicts , particularly the one in Moldova , were also discussed .
It is important to maintain that there are no geographical restrictions on the scope of the political dialogue between the EU and Russia .
The European Union stressed the need for progress on the economic and legal reforms in Russia in order to ensure Russian membership of the WTO .
In addition , the need for Russia to ratify the Kyoto Protocol and the Energy Charter was emphasised .
By way of conclusion , I am able to call the summit a success , with a constructive dialogue in all fields .
The cooperation between the EU and Russia has entered a new phase in which no topic for discussion is ruled out ; and that will be to the advantage of both parties .
Mr President , the European Union / Russian Federation Summit that took place on 11 November in Brussels succeeded in producing an understanding , as you already know , on the issue of transit between Kaliningrad and the rest of Russia .
As you are also aware , as a result of the discussions held at the May Summit in Moscow , the EU had agreed to carry out a review of the matter , taking further into account Russia 's concerns about unimpeded travel of Russian citizens throughout the whole territory of the Russian Federation , including Kaliningrad .
In the relatively short time between the two summits , the Union completed a comprehensive review of the situation .
Following a communication from the Commission in September , this review formulated a new position on Kaliningrad transit issues , which was adopted in October by the European Council meeting in Brussels .
In parallel discussions with both Russia and Lithuania , the Presidency and the Commission managed to develop ways and means to ensure that the vital interests of all parties concerned would be respected .
In addition to Russia 's legitimate interests , the EU was very much aware that any arrangements requiring further definition could not undermine the sovereignty of Lithuania - a future member of the Union - or carry negative implications for Lithuania 's future accession in full to the Schengen regime .
Last but not least , the European Union must adequately protect its borders at all times , a task for which it was essential to respect the Schengen acquis .
The European Commission is confident that the understanding reached at the Brussels Summit strikes the right balance between these parameters , making it possible to resolve the issue of Kaliningrad transit in a manner which is acceptable to all parties concerned .
The Commission has already started work to prepare for the implementation of the understanding reached at the Summit .
Time is short and we are fully aware of the need to launch preparations without delay in order to meet the deadline of 1 July 2003 , when Lithuania will introduce the new regime for Russian rail travellers crossing its territory .
We are confident that by then the conditions will be in place to allow the introduction of simplified travel documents .
I would like to add that resolving the issue of Kaliningrad will allow us to substantially deepen and accelerate our cooperation with the Russian Federation in a number of important areas .
Among these , the European Commission regards justice and home affairs as particularly important .
Indeed cooperation with Russia on issues such as the fight against organised crime , illegal migration , drug trafficking , women trafficking and child pornography among others , is crucial .
On this matter , Russia confirmed at the Summit that the agreement between Europol and Russia will be rapidly concluded .
In addition , Russia and the European Union will immediately launch negotiations with a view to concluding a readmission agreement as soon as possible .
In this context , the Summit also produced a joint statement defining areas for further cooperation in the fight against terrorism , which is a clear priority for both sides .
We intend to increase the exchange of information in a number of relevant areas , as well as to deepen cooperation against terrorism in multilateral arenas and in regard to the provision of assistance in this field to third countries .
Other important issues were discussed at the Summit .
The on-going conflict in Chechnya featured prominently among these .
In this regard , the European Union raised its serious concerns over Chechnya .
I would like to assure you that the well-established position of the Union on the matter was put forward to President Putin in quite clear terms .
While expressing its support for Russia against terrorism in all its forms , the Union explicitly stated that the fight against terrorism cannot be conducted at the expense of basic human rights .
This is also valid for Chechnya .
The Union raised again the problem of unimpeded and safe access for humanitarian workers on the ground in Chechnya .
In addition , the EU urged the Russians to promote without delay a political solution that provides a framework for lasting peace , stability and reconstruction in Chechnya .
At the Summit we also had a good discussion on a number of international issues , including the Middle East , on which we agreed a joint statement .
We reviewed the situation in Afghanistan , as well as the need for Iraq to comply fully with UN Security Council Resolution 1441 .
We also exchanged assessments regarding the threat of nuclear proliferation in the Korean Peninsula .
Finally , we reviewed the situation in Moldova and Belarus .
Russia has already agreed to the withdrawal and destruction of ammunition in the breakaway region of Transnistria .
The EU stated that it is essential that this takes place rapidly in order to promote a solution to the conflict which continues to impede the development on Moldova , which is now the poorest country in Europe .
We also made it clear that we expect Russia to use its influence on the government of Belarus to adopt a more positive approach towards democratisation and respect of human rights .
On the economic side , progress was less marked , except for the change in the EU anti-dumping regulations , which now accord Russia market economy status .
In addition , the Summit endorsed progress reports on the energy discussions and on the concept of a common European economic space .
The EU also raised a number of its commercial concerns , including the discriminatory charges levied by Russia for European aircraft flying over Siberia .
The EU pressed Russia to confirm expectations of early Russian ratification of the Kyoto Protocol and to commit itself to conclude a long-delayed agreement on the clean-up of nuclear waste in north-west Russia , the Multilateral Nuclear Environmental Programme in the Russian Federation ( MNEPR ) .
I trust most of you are already aware that the 11th EU / Russia Summit will take place in St Petersburg , in commemoration of the 300th anniversary of the city .
Taking this into account , Russia has invited all EU leaders to this special summit , which should serve to deepen our bilateral cooperation with Russia even further .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my group advocates a stronger strategic partnership between the European Union and Russia , because we are convinced that peace in our continent is largely dependent upon our ability to maintain a strong and effective European Union and an effective and democratic Russian Federation .
We also recognise the progress that Russia has made in recent years in overcoming the legacy of the Communist era .
We are , however , amazed at some of the circumstances surrounding the Brussels Summit .
This negative view really needs to be aired here .
It concerns both Chechnya and Kaliningrad .
With regard to Chechnya , I would like to say that we are constitutional states and Denmark is also a constitutional state .
It is the indisputable right of the Chechens to hold a peaceful conference in Copenhagen if it is their wish to do so .
I do not wish to criticise the presidency for the fact that the summit ended up being held in Brussels .
But I believe that we need to be courageous and not always give in when our partners in talks put pressure on us and demand concessions .
On the contrary , we need to stand firm .
We are in favour of resolutely fighting terrorism , because terrorism is an obstacle to the peaceful coexistence of peoples .
We very much declare war on any form of terrorism .
However , we also believe that the war on terrorism should not be deprived of its legitimacy by surrendering human rights in its name .
That is why we are demanding that the war on terror should go hand in hand with a global ethic based on human rights .
What this means in practice is that the human rights of the Chechen people should not be sacrificed at the altar of the war on terror , necessary though that war may be .
I was extremely surprised by what I read in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung of 13 November . Russia 's President Putin was reported as having responded to a journalist that ' if you want to become Islamic radicals and are therefore willing to be circumcised , than I invite you to come to Moscow .
We are a country of many different faiths , and we have excellent doctors .
We would recommend carrying out the operation in such a way that nothing grows again ' .
That is typical of the way human rights are breached in Chechnya .
I would be very pleased , Mr President , if in future the issue of Chechnya could be addressed in writing in the communiqués issued following these summits .
I have not been able to find a single word about this in the communiqué , even though reporters told me that Mr Rasmussen championed this cause , and Commissioner Patten also informed the Committee on Development and Cooperation about this .
However , this should also be included in the conclusions of a summit of this kind .
Now let me turn to Kaliningrad .
I read today in my local paper , the Neue Osnabrücker Zeitung , a well-written article entitled ' Russia offers little hope .
People of Kaliningrad expect much from EU , but little from Moscow . '
I naturally welcome the fact that the thorny issue of visas has been resolved .
However , the people in the Kaliningrad region or ' oblast ' - and this is the heart of the matter - look far more towards the West than they do towards Russia .
Igor Rudnikov , the managing editor of the courageous newspaper Novye Kolyosa , which means ' New Wheels ' , has said that the rhetoric and fuss issuing from the Russian Federation on the subject of Kaliningrad has only damaged its cause .
They look towards the capitals of Europe - to Paris , to Warsaw and to Berlin .
The central issue is that the Kaliningrad region should be developed so that it does not become a no-man 's-land in Europe , but becomes part of a development axis running through Poland and into the Baltic states .
It would do Russia credit to put this on the agenda , so that these human problems can be solved .
I would like to encourage you , Mr President-in-Office , and the Commission , to act with this in mind .
If you do that , you will have our support too .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my group thinks it is important that we have a programme of extended and comprehensive cooperation with Russia .
Now we are starting to reap the rewards of bringing down the Iron Curtain .
Now too conditions in Russia are stabilising , except with regard to certain aspects , which I shall return to .
This being the case , we are in favour of establishing a Common European Economic Space .
It will be an important step on the path we are developing towards normal relations with Russia .
The Union has said Russia is a normal market economy .
That is saying quite a lot , perhaps , although Russia is on the right track and this is consequently a step towards accession to the World Trade Organisation .
We have to remember that one consequence of enlargement is that the border between Russia and the Union will lengthen and that is very significant .
Russia will lose its markets to some extent in those countries joining the EU , and that is something we also have to take into consideration to some extent .
I am pleased that the heated controversy over Kaliningrad was resolved at the summit .
I do not think this was perhaps the major problem it sometimes appeared to be in the debate .
We are also responsible for developments with regard to Kaliningrad , and I agree with Mr Poettering that we have to be able to provide help and assistance and work together to improve conditions for the people who live there .
We are of the opinion that the war in Chechnya is a problem for Russia , for us and for the Chechen people , who are at the centre of the war .
We believe that human rights must not be violated under the pretence of the fight against terrorism .
This has to do with Russia and it also has to do with other countries that we have been praising here or which are perhaps our older allies .
The fight against terrorism has become an umbrella that allows violent actions to be carried out by countries against their own and other citizens .
This must not be allowed to happen .
The question of Chechnya is being raised because we have a delegation leaving for Chechnya , and I am its chairman .
There has been a development regarding this in that today , after lengthy negotiations , I received a letter from Dmitri Rogozin of the State Duma , inviting us to go there on 20 January .
It had been suggested that we should go in late December , but that is Christmas and we asked if the visit could be rescheduled .
This being the case , January seems a good time to go , if the members of my delegation agree : all this has happened so very recently .
Russia is a big partner for us .
Trade between us is worth approximately 25 billion dollars a year , while the figure for the United States of America is just 3 billion and for the former countries of the Soviet Union only just over 10 billion dollars .
We are thus a giant trading partner of Russia .
I should therefore like to ask the Commissioner in what state the energy dialogue can be in if all of a sudden Gazprom decides on a gas pipeline - coolly decides to build a gas pipeline .
The energy dialogue between us has not been very visible in this project .
We are the world 's largest energy area , and the energy issue is therefore very important .
I should furthermore like to mention the state of the press in Karelia and elsewhere too in Russia , where there are pressures that are simply not acceptable .
Mr President , Russia is of interest to us and is a partner that presents challenges .
For some reason , when we give our opinions we often stress in particular Russia 's various problems instead of concentrating on its positive achievements and the potential that exists in future cooperation .
Many things are obviously better in the Union but we also have problems Russian Members of Parliament could seize on if they so wished .
To their credit , they do not .
I do not mean that we should keep silent , for example , about environmental problems , lack of democracy or human rights violations in Russia .
It is a matter of how we weigh things and how we handle them .
Right now it is important for us to discuss the effects EU enlargement will have on cooperation between the EU and Russia .
We have been able to resolve problems to do with Kaliningrad 's status but there is still much work to be done .
In this regard the ball is very much in Moscow 's court .
We need them to be unbiased in their approach to implementing changes in Kaliningrad so that there is investment there coming from the rest of Russia and abroad too .
Now that the border between the EU and Russia is to lengthen we must make renewed efforts to develop northwestern Russia and boost cooperation in the border regions .
The Union must make a more serious effort than it has until now to engage in programmes of cooperation in the Barents Sea and Baltic Sea regions and furthermore direct substantial economic resources at those areas .
Another question of current importance is the development of cooperation in the area of energy .
That would enable us on the one hand to help Russia develop its energy economy and protect its environment and , on the other , safeguard our own energy economy .
It is in this spirit that progress must be made in the area of cooperation .
Mr President , my group notes with satisfaction that an agreement has been made that guarantees traffic connections with Kaliningrad after Lithuania and Poland join the Union .
We in the EU must focus special attention on basic repairs of railway tracks in Lithuania .
For that purpose we have to provide adequate financial support .
It is believed in the European Union that the need for energy grows at a rate of 1 % a year .
The intention is to meet the extra demand by increasing the use of natural gas .
Russia is an important partner for the EU because the reserves of gas in the North Sea and North Africa will run out in twenty years or so .
The EU 's demand for gas has to be met with exports from the east .
Cooperation on the issue of energy is not progressing satisfactorily .
The best form of cooperation would be if pipelines were built linking Russia and the EU .
If the pipelines go through Poland , Belarus and Ukraine there will be needless waste .
Early this week Gazprom announced , as Mr Paasilinna stated , that it was constructing , on its own , a gas pipeline from the Shtokmanovsk deposit in the Barents Sea to Central Europe .
That is good news , as in that way the EU countries ' increased demand for the use of energy is satisfied .
It is bad news if looked at from the point of view of cooperation .
The EU is not now a party to the project and it will pay in the future .
Adherence to market conditions in the EU will not solve the problems of the energy market .
Liberalisation of the market makes it impossible in practice to finance new investment by means of long-term supply contracts .
If those who need gas shared in the costs of its delivery onto the market that would improve reliability of supply and over a time span of twenty years that is what will be the most important thing .
With Russia we have to speak about factors that unite us .
One issue that separates us is the civil war in Chechnya .
We all hope for a peaceful solution to the war .
At the same time we note that at the summit attended by leaders of the EU and Russia no demands were made by the EU regarding Chechnya 's independence as a state .
The region is therefore regarded as a part of the Russian Federation .
Human rights cannot be trampled on in Russia using terrorism as an excuse , nor in the United States of America either .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make four comments .
The first one is about Kaliningrad .
I believe that enormous efforts have been made in this regard in recent months .
The Commission and the Council had meetings with Mr Rogosin , the presidential envoy , and with Minister Rasov .
At the instigation of our President , Mr Pat Cox , they also had parliamentary support at two meetings with our Polish , Lithuanian and Russian colleagues .
I believe that we can be satisfied with this and my group is satisfied with the result achieved .
Secondly , Chechnya .
Yes , it is clear that the events in the Dubrovka Theatre must of course be condemned , and as Chair of the Russia delegation that is what I immediately conveyed to Mr Lukin .
We can condemn it and we do of course also want an explanation of the gas that was used , of the circumstances in which action was taken and of how the forces of law and order acted .
I believe that some additional clarity about this is required .
We also note that there is a tougher stance on the part of the Russians with regard to Chechnya .
Nonetheless , the European Parliament has taken the lead in this debate in recent months .
We have said that we are in favour of negotiations and talks , because a military solution is not going to produce a result .
I find that our Russian friends , President Putin not least , have now adopted an extremely rigid attitude and since 11 September have put the whole struggle in Chechnya in the context of the war on international terrorism .
I believe this to be an aberration .
Only holding talks , even with the people around Mr Maskhadov , will lead to a genuine solution .
Thirdly , I should like to express my concern here about the general state of human rights in Chechnya .
Amnesty International has recently published a report about the freedom of the press , about the lack of religious freedom and about the general human rights situation in Russia .
I believe that this warrants some attention on our part .
Finally , I would draw your attention to an environmental problem .
At the beginning of October my delegation visited Murmansk .
There we studied the nuclear inheritance of the Soviet Union .
All the local people and all the local authorities there are asking for a multilateral nuclear environment programme .
I should like to ask the Commission and the Council very clearly how things stand with the negotiations on this treaty ?
It is absolutely essential that there is one , otherwise no one can take responsibility for clearing up the nuclear inheritance of the Soviet Union properly .
I should like to put this question to you Commissioner and to you Mr Haarder , for which my heartfelt thanks .
Mr President , the partnership with the Russian Federation is placing heavy responsibilities on the EU .
How to deal with the ambivalence of Moscow 's policy ?
This ambivalence is manifesting itself in openness to the outside world and growing uncommunicativeness at home .
Putin 's paradox can , harrowingly enough , be tellingly illustrated by the Chechen tragedy .
The just war on terrorists is combined here with the dreadful disenfranchisement of an entire population group , including the muzzling of its own media on the subject .
What can the EU do about this constant mutual bloodletting on Russian territory ?
Little more , but also certainly no less than always having the Chechnya question on the agenda in the consultation with Russia .
I was therefore pleased to hear the statement by Commissioner Patten of Tuesday 12 November .
He said that the Danish Presidency had raised the situation in Chechnya both fully and forcefully at the summit with Russia .
In this context I would ask Council and Commission to offer political backing to the OSCE mission in Chechnya .
I wish Council and Commission persistence in the search for a well nigh impossible political settlement between Russians and Chechens .
At the same time the EU must be candid in raising with the Kremlin other evil manifestations of Putin 's political system of a ' guided democracy ' .
The list of Russian taboo topics of parliamentarian Yavlinsky can provide good service in this regard .
Think for example of the attempts of the powers that be to silence agreeable politicians and other citizens or of corruption in the upper reaches of power .
Finally , I would like to stand up for full respect on the part of the EU for Lithuania 's sovereignty in the transit agreement concluded for Kaliningrad and the Russian Federation .
Serious doubts about this have arisen on the Lithuanian side .
I spent last week with an EP delegation in the United States .
I took soundings in the press where I heard very many concerns from Lithuania about this settlement .
Council and Commission , are these serious doubts on the part of Lithuania justified ?
Mr President , we are becoming increasingly aware - and we are also acting accordingly - that fundamental changes have taken place in Russia .
Fortunately we can now talk of constructive cooperation .
We mention the northern dimension in this regard and all kinds of things that are in our mutual interest .
We hear a great deal about this from our Finnish fellow MEPs in particular .
Rightly so .
There is also talk of the pursuit of a common European economic area .
I think that this is a good thing , because with the enlargement of the European Union with so many Central European countries on the horizon , we must also look at what is happening on our borders .
Do we have a clear policy with regard to adjoining areas , in particular Russia , the Ukraine and Moldova ?
We are going to have to devote some attention to this , so that we can continue to talk of regular cooperation .
The problems of Russia are mostly very clear to us .
We have done our utmost to help bring the Kaliningrad problem to a successful conclusion .
The Lithuanian Government in particular was of course very interested in this .
I am therefore very pleased that President-in-Office , Mr Haarder - we did not expect anything else - in particular underlines the sovereignty of Lithuania .
Yet I would also really like to know how things are going with the development of the solution of the Kaliningrad problem ?
If I have read the situation correctly , it is all tied up with an enormous number of technical issues .
At a certain point Schengen comes into play and really we have to know at any point whether or not the arrangements with Russia are a hindrance for Lithuania .
I think that we must make this a priority .
Russia is large enough , it can look after itself .
You have to stand up for a small country , especially if it has a history with Russia that is as tragic as that of Lithuania .
I should like to see a situation in which , ultimately and in all fairness , the guidelines that continue to apply permanently give priority to Lithuania 's sovereignty and interests .
I should also like to raise the problem of borders .
The borders with Russia and for example Latvia .
On this point ratification continues to be a long time coming .
The reason why is unclear and at delegation meetings in Moscow we are told that it has no priority .
This too is , in my view , another example of a big-country strategy : ' the small fry will just have to wait ' .
I think that we as a European Community are well past this kind of thinking and that we must make clear to Russia that this authoritarian approach , even to the outside world , - internally it is already far too prevalent - comes across to us as very distasteful .
If we help Russia with all kinds of problems , then Russia itself must be constructive too and say : okay , we are going to solve a problem with this candidate country immediately , we will ratify .
In fact nothing else needs to happen .
I should now like to turn to the problem with Chechnya .
It is very clear that even in Russian politics they are at a complete loss as to what to do .
It has indeed changed to being first and foremost a war on terrorism , but the damage for the civilian population is so disproportionate that we cannot take it lying down .
I think that it is very important for military people , possibly those from NATO and Russia , to talk about it - to ask why are you doing that , is there not another way - and in particular to keep hammering away with the message that a political solution will in the end be the only one that can finally bring peace .
Mr President , as a Christian I feel ashamed at the way Mr Marchiani has misused the concept of Christianity .
I do not regard the murder of Muslims as a Christian duty .
Terrorism , arms trading and drug trafficking also exist in other states , including our own Member States .
Nevertheless , no one is suggesting that we should simply be bombing those Member States , including Mr Marchiani 's own country .
We need to be clear about the fact that people are indulging in emotional manipulation here .
We are certainly not talking about a war on terrorism - we are talking about the creation of terrorism .
The Chechens have been the victims of colonial persecution for 150 years .
They were deported by Stalin .
In the modern era , they have twice been overrun in brutal wars serving oil interests .
Mr Putin 's election campaign was one of the factors underlying the intensification of the second of these wars , which is still being waged .
So it has to be said for once and all that this is not a war on terror , it is more likely to encourage terrorists !
We have a share in the responsibility for all this .
So how have we reacted ?
The beautiful city of Copenhagen was boycotted by Mr Putin simply because the Danes exercised their democratic right to respect freedom of expression and freedom of association .
So why did the Council then shift to Brussels ?
Commissioner Nielson , who is responsible for humanitarian issues in Europe , has not announced that he is to visit Chechnya , but rather that he is to attend a banquet for Heads of State and Government in St Petersburg .
Let me say this very clearly : it makes me sick to be part of a Europe that is sipping Crimean champagne in St Petersburg while people are bleeding to death on the streets of Chechnya .
I believe that Europe 's most noble task is to advocate freedom and human rights .
Yesterday we were celebrating the presence of our Baltic colleagues in our midst for the first time .
Our colleagues from the Baltic states also owe their freedom to a Chechen , General Dudayev , who at that time refused to take part in the bloody repression of the Baltic freedom movement as he had been ordered to do as a Soviet officer !
Mr President , Commissioner , I believe that the fate of the entire European Union is far more closely intertwined with Russia than we imagine at present .
After 70 years of the Soviet system , the future development of Russia is of course problematic , based as it is on a combination of deep-rooted structures and a new system .
As I see it , the position of the European Union can only be to provide active support during this massive restructuring process .
Over the next few decades , Russia will be Europe 's most important energy supply partner .
Even during the Soviet era , Russia has always been a key player in stabilising world peace .
That should not blind us to the problems in Chechnya , and those problems cannot be denied , but we have to see the overall picture .
Furthermore , Europe does not have the right to treat Russia differently from other countries that are also in breach of human rights .
I would like to stress once again , for the avoidance of any possible doubt , that this by no means justifies the situation in Chechnya , but we do need a careful analysis of that area .
Europe needs to proceed on the basis that only a fair and open partnership between equals can succeed in the long term .
The most important steps to be taken are systematic actions to build trust , to establish fair trade relations , and to reinforce Russia 's economic development and provide any form of assistance that will promote the development of democracy , a process that has still not been completed after 12 or 13 years .
It must be evident that without a stable , democratic and strong Russia world peace will be at even greater risk than it already is at present .
Mr President , last week in the EU-Lithuania Joint Parliamentary Committee we had an in-depth and critical discussion of the solution arrived at for Kaliningrad .
Mr Haarder called the solution ' balanced ' , but I regard it as being , above all , balanced in terms of allowing Russia to save face and to please our own Schengen purists .
The Commissioner has told us that the European Union needs to secure its borders at all times and in all places .
That is a statement that even Erich Honecker could have signed up to , because transit through Lithuania will be more difficult for passengers than transit from West Germany to west Berlin via East Germany was in the old days .
I think the European Union should be hanging its head in shame to have agreed to this thirteen years after the wall came down .
The practical difficulties will be a matter for the Lithuanian border authorities and the passengers themselves .
Russia will be able to exploit this situation for other purposes as well , because of the enormous potential for technical problems and the likelihood that those affected will complain .
Have you ever considered that the eastern end of these journeys is not in Russia at all , but in Belarus , a country that has not been mentioned in these discussions at all ?
So what would happen if relations between Russia and Mr Lukashenko deteriorated to the point that Mr Lukashenko decided to exploit this situation ?
The whole arrangement would then not even be worth the paper it was written on .
We can also easily imagine what will happen in practice when an application is made for a facilitated rail travel document .
In an extreme case someone in Khabarovsk in eastern Russia would have to give his address with his ticket in the hope that everything would be forwarded to a central Russian office which would then send everything on to the Lithuanian authorities , which would in turn have to process everything on time , so that when the passenger on board the train arrives at the border the Lithuanian border official would hopefully have the transit permit for that passenger with him .
However , it is all too easy to imagine how well all this will work in practice , given the administrative capacity of the Russian authorities .
I therefore urge you to keep an eye on this problem and not to imagine that we can now assume that it has been dealt with .
It has certainly been a lively debate .
I almost saw myself in the role of one of those Members of Parliament who demanded that now the Presidency should do this and that and pointed out that the Council had failed to do this or that or the other .
That is how it should be , and I would call upon Parliament to continue to hold the Council to the democratic ideals on which Parliament is based .
I will not , moreover , continue now with a ' but ' .
I will continue with an ' and ' , because I have always understood our common approach to mean that we must also be good neighbours , that we must also be able to solve common problems and that we must also have sufficient contact with each other to allow a dialogue , so that we can say the things that need to be said .
I would say to Mr Posselt that if we are to move Russia in the right direction in the area of human rights , it is necessary for there to be a place where we can have a dialogue with Russia .
This place existed a week ago in Brussels , but it makes no difference whether it is in Copenhagen or Brussels .
We had the dialogue , the necessary things were said and Mr Patten was a witness .
Mr Nielson has confirmed this today .
The Council said exactly what had to be said to Russia , on the subject of Chechnya too .

With regard to Mr Zakayev , who is currently in custody in Denmark , I should like to tell Mr Dupuis that the Zakayev case is being dealt with entirely in accordance with the principles of the rule of law , in accordance with European extradition rules and in accordance with our established policy on combating terrorism .
Not a single political decision has been taken in respect of Mr Zakayev .
Everything has been done by the book .
We have followed the textbook of democracy to the letter .
The same applies , moreover , to the holding of the conference which created the conflict between Denmark and Russia .
This conference was held because it is a democratic right to hold conferences .
That is not something we can prevent , and we stand by that right , just as we have held firm in all other aspects to our democratic ideals .
I completely agree that , as has been pointed out by Mr Poettering and many others , we must not sacrifice human rights on the altar of combating terrorism .
Of course not .
It was precisely this , moreover , on which the dialogue with Russia at the summit was based .
We are in agreement on the fight against terrorism , but we are not in agreement in our appraisal of what has gone on , and is still going on , in Chechnya , and this was stated very , very clearly .
A solution was successfully found to the Kaliningrad problem , and one which respected the sovereignty of Lithuania and Lithuania 's right to accede to Schengen .
The fact that we managed to solve a problem in the region around us in this way is very important for enlargement .
Moreover , with regard to the yet to be ratified border agreement between Russia and Lithuania , I can state that , during the summit negotiations , the Presidency made it very clear to Russia that we are assuming that the border agreement between Russia and Lithuania will now be signed .
So nothing was forgotten .
There was nothing that we should be ashamed of .
Everything was done by the book of democracy .
Fortunately , the dialogue was maintained , and the problems which were to be solved at the summit were solved .
I would like , however , to end by saying that it is important for Parliament to hold fast to its ideals and take the Council to task if there is a risk of our not doing the same .
Stick at it .
I do not , however , think that there is any reason to admonish the Council or the Presidency for the way in which they handled this very difficult summit which has just taken place .
Mr President , I shall start by saying very clearly that I can agree 100 % with the statement just made by Mr Haarder .
That is a good clear description of the reality .
It is also a reminder of what the Union needs to do and how it needs to do it .
I have listened very carefully to all the contributions .
I shall repeat what I have said before in Parliament when discussing the problem of Chechnya .
The division of responsibility in the Commission is quite meaningful .
If we were not careful in defining the tasks and responsibilities of the Commissioner responsible for humanitarian aid , we would blur the whole issue , especially when it comes to ensuring that access to delivering humanitarian aid is respected .
That is why I am very careful to give a clearcut definition of my responsibilities as the Commissioner responsible for humanitarian aid .
If I were to fall into the temptation of engaging in political discussion on this issue , I would reduce the legitimacy and efficiency of my efforts to protect the access of humanitarian workers in places like Chechnya .
That is why I resist becoming involved in political manoeuvres or political projects , even if I might sympathise with them .
It is for the Commissioner on external relations to do that , and it is important , especially in this case , for us to be careful in our use of the instruments and commissioners available .
If , with my responsibilities , I fell into the temptation of politicising , we would reduce the weight of our efforts and our attempts to insist on having access .
I have , on the other hand , publicly criticised the Russians on that issue , and do so quite frequently .
I feed elements of this kind into every summit that we have with Russia .
Unfortunately there has been no progress .
There are the well-known issues of work permits for humanitarian workers , the ability to use the UN VHF radio system which is important for the safety of people moving around there and the situation of refugees and internally displaced persons in the camps .
All these issues are raised over and over again , and I would repeat my call for Parliament to view the Commissioner responsible for humanitarian aid as keeping to a relatively narrowly-defined remit , which is what I do .
We have others who deal with the political side of the discussion .
This is important not only as regards Chechnya , but also for many other places .
You will see the same approach when we talk about accessing victims of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
Being a political animal myself , I will not engage in a more substantive political discussion on the nature of the conflict and these other issues , however tempting that might be .
Mr Paasilinna and a few others raised the question of the energy dialogue with Russia , and especially cooperation in the area of natural gas .
It is quite difficult to rush into a conclusion in an area where negotiating realities also have to reflect who engages commercially and who does not .
The issue of the gas pipeline negotiation is a long-term one .
There is a risk of contradictions between establishing the very long-term basis of those kinds of deals and the liberalisation of the gas market inside the Union , to which we would give priority .
Against that background it is not that simple to accommodate the desire shown by the other side to have a very long-term , stable kind of contract as a basis .
In any case , it would not be for us but for the companies and the market to establish such a contract , which is another reason why things are not that simple .
Furthermore there are other interesting strategic issues concerning the geopolitics of Europe 's energy supply in the years to come , including issues relating to natural gas , and it is no surprise that this is a complicated and demanding question .
For tactical reasons I would urge some caution as to how Members of Parliament pursue this issue .
It may be worthwhile and important to ensure that we have long-term cooperation and supplies from Russia , but it is also important not to jump into negotiations that ultimately meant our not getting as good a deal as everyone thought we should .
I would therefore advocate caution .
Finally , as regards Mr Oostlander 's clear question about whether Lithuania can join Schengen after this agreement on Kaliningrad , this has been one of the defining points in our approach to negotiations .
This is why we find the solution in which there are no complications of that nature to be a good one .
I will end by commending the cooperation between the Council and the Commission on this issue .
This is one of the areas in which we have been quite successful .
It is also something which has been duly recognised by Lithuania and which has certainly demonstrated to the other candidate countries that we take their situation seriously .
Madam President , there is a political dimension to this , which Mr Haarder mentioned .
I had in mind the arrest of Mr Zakayev , the Chechen representative .
Why has he been in prison for so long without any evidence being brought against him ?
This is a very worrying situation .
I was there two years ago .
My area of responsibility is not being neglected .
We are continually working on this and also in relation to the UN initiative and as the main funder of humanitarian aid to Chechnya .
We are , in fact , the only ones keeping funding activities alive and functional inside Chechnya .
I do not want to discuss my travel schedule here .
For the reasons I gave previously , I remain resolved to avoid mixing up my main responsibility with general political work in this respect .
Madam President , having heard the debate , I would like to draw your attention to a fact : following the terrorist action by Chechen rebels , 120 hostages have died , but also 50 terrorists .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that , although we are talking about terrorists , there can never be any justification for an entirely summary execution such as that carried out by Russian troops when those people were probably fast asleep .
I would also like to draw your attention to the fact that no section of the press has spoken about this , which is very serious , because it is an offence against democratic and human co-existence - whether or not they are terrorists - and also to the fact that there has been no mention in this House of this action , which was outrageously barbaric .
I would just like to repeat to Lord Bethell that not a single political decision has been taken in Denmark concerning the imprisonment of Mr Zakayev .
Some charges have been brought , which the Danish police have investigated .
A judge has decided that Mr Zakayev is to remain in custody for a further period , but if it proves that the charges brought have no basis , then naturally he will be released again .
That is how the judicial system works , and Lord Bethell can be certain that the Danish legal system functions in accordance with all the principles that we uphold in this Union .
Thank you for that illuminating response .
In conjunction with this debate , I have received six motions for resolutions , which were submitted in accordance with Rule 37.2 of the Rules of Procedure
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , just over three years ago General Musharraf took power in Pakistan in a military coup .
This caused great concern in the democratic world and led to much condemnation .
The coup was later approved by the Pakistan Supreme Court provided that Pakistan re-established democracy within three years of the military coup , that is , by 12 October this year .
On 14 August last year , General Musharraf published his so-called ' Road Map To Democracy ' , which described how he proposed to comply with the decision of the Pakistan Supreme Court and restore democracy in Pakistan .
This plan was made up of four parts : 1 ) the establishment of local elected councils ( this took place in August 2001 ) , 2 ) preparation for provincial and federal elections with the establishment of an electoral commission and the preparation of registers of electors , ID cards etc . , as well as the implementation of a number of constitutional amendments , 3 ) the holding of the actual elections , and 4 ) the transfer of governmental power to elected civil provincial and federal assemblies , as well as election of the presidents of the assemblies , etc .
This was to take place in October / November this year .
The election on 10 October this year was monitored by election observers , especially from the EU .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Mr Cushnahan for the great work that he and the other members of the Mission carried out in this connection .
For security reasons alone , it was extremely difficult to implement the election monitoring but , despite this , Mr Cushnahan and his team completed the task that they had been given .
As Mr Cushnahan has remarked in his report on the election monitoring , there are a number of things in connection with the election in Pakistan that one might have wished had been different .
We have noted in particular the report 's criticism of the circumstances in the run-up to the actual elections , especially the constitutional amendments introduced by President Musharraf this summer .
There were unequal opportunities to conduct election campaigns and unequal access to resources and to the media , and there were reports of manipulation in connection with the elections .
Taken together , these factors gave cause for concern .
Nonetheless , it is the Council 's assessment that the holding of the elections was an important step along the way towards the restoration of democracy in Pakistan .
Throughout the process , the EU has conducted an ongoing dialogue with Pakistan concerning the reintroduction of democracy and , in the course of this , has also had the opportunity to express criticism of factors which have moved in the wrong direction .
The result of the election of 10 October meant that a coalition government is to be formed .
Negotiations are not yet complete .
The transfer of executive power to the future prime minister is expected to take place in the course of this month .
The EU and Pakistan issued a joint declaration on signing the cooperation agreement between the EU and Pakistan in Islamabad on 24 November last year .
In the light of the current situation , the EU and Pakistan confirmed the importance of the international efforts to combat terrorism .
In the same declaration , Pakistan also confirmed its commitment to the restoration of democracy in accordance with the said Road Map , something which was welcomed by the EU .
It must be stated that President Musharraf has stood by his promise to implement the promised Road Map .
The conditions are thus in place for taking the agreement further .
Also on the positive side is the fact that the President has implemented a number of reforms aimed at re-establishing the economy and combating corruption .
It is crucial to state that implementation of the cooperation agreement does not rubber-stamp Pakistan 's democracy .
As I have mentioned , there are many things that we might wish were different , as can be seen from Mr Cushnahan 's report .
The agreement includes an initial paragraph in which the parties to the agreement confirm their respect for human rights .
With this agreement in our hands , I believe that we have a better instrument with which to discuss democracy and human rights with Pakistan than has previously been the case .
The Council will continue to expand the dialogue with Pakistan with a view to helping strengthen Pakistan 's democracy .
With these words , I would like , moreover , once again to thank Mr Cushnahan for his outstanding work and for the basis he has provided for assessing the democracy in Pakistan .
Madam President , the Commission agrees with the Presidency that the National and Provincial Assembly elections held in Pakistan on 10 October should be seen as a first step in the gradual transition from a military to a civilian administration with permanent and well-functioning democratic institutions .
The elections resulted in a fragmented parliament which in turn delayed the inaugural session of the National Assembly .
This finally took place on 16 November .
The extensive negotiations among political parties demonstrate that a revitalised democratic process has been initiated following the elections .
We expect that the new government will be equipped with full executive powers .
The Commission will continue to stay engaged with Pakistan throughout the transition process .
The Commission would like to congratulate the EU election observation mission , led by Mr Cushnahan , on the excellent work achieved under very difficult circumstances , notably a particularly challenging security environment .
His dedication went far beyond what would normally be expected of a chief election observer .
The Commission appreciates that the mission was able to carry out its task in full compliance with internationally accepted criteria used for election observation .
Let me also take this opportunity to express the Commission 's satisfaction with the cooperation with the European Parliament in the observation of the election in Pakistan .
In particular I would like to thank the members of the European Parliament delegation , led by Mrs Grönfeldt Bergman , for their invaluable work .
What is more , this is not an isolated case .
The Commission and Parliament have developed very good working relations in the field of election observation in general .
The Commission believes that the presence of the EU election observation mission has served to enhance the democratic process in Pakistan .
Moreover , its recommendations on how to further strengthen this process and improve the election framework will be raised in the dialogue with the Pakistani authorities .
The Commission is also prepared to look into possible follow-up activities on the basis of its report .
The Commission agrees with the EU election observation mission that a general election does not in itself guarantee the establishment of democracy and that those who support the restoration of democracy should work together to achieve that objective .
Concerning the methodology we applied to observation of the election in Pakistan , the Commission would like to stress that we followed our standard approach .
Elections are not one-day events and the whole process , including the pre-voting period , has to be assessed .
The criticism made in Pakistan that the mission was exceeding its mandate because it arrived too early and interfered with the internal affairs of the country by analysing the overall election framework is therefore groundless .
As far as the new cooperation agreement between the European Community and Pakistan is concerned , the Commission would like to recall that exceptional circumstances in the region called for a response commensurate to the risk President Musharraf took in siding with the international community on Afghanistan .
The aim of the agreement is to engage significantly and visibly with Pakistan , both in political and economic terms , and to encourage Pakistan to adhere to the implementation of the roadmap for the return to democracy .
The reasons why it is important for the EU and the Commission to engage Pakistan in an enhanced political dialogue are well known .
They include the fight against terrorism , Pakistan 's difficult relations with India , the need for stability in neighbouring Afghanistan , Pakistan 's deep-rooted economic and social problems and , last but not least , the continuing transition to democracy .
Relevant topics to be raised in that dialogue include basic education , where our aim is to strengthen the secular education system , fostering trade and business links and human rights issues , which are an essential element of the new agreement .
In this connection , Pakistan has been designated a focus country under the European Initiative for Human Rights and Democracy .
The Commission is aware that continuing uncertainty over the role and functioning of political institutions in Pakistan means that we need to monitor closely whether there is genuine progress on the transfer of power to the elected parliament in the coming weeks and months .
Ratification of the new cooperation agreement would allow us to re-establish the full cooperation dialogue with the new government .
Mr President , first of all I would like to pay tribute to all who served on the recent EU election observation mission to Pakistan , particularly the members of my core team and also the European Parliament delegation led by Miss Grönfeldt Bergman .
Secondly , I would like to thank the EU Commission personnel involved in election observation .
Thirdly , I would like to express my appreciation for the moral support and political solidarity extended by Commissioner Patten .
Regrettably , I am unable to add the name of the Council and the Presidency to the list of those I would like to thank .
The reason is that I am very angry at the statement issued by the Presidency concerning the election and I regret that the same sentiments were expressed today .
I would like to seek clarification on aspects of the statement .
How can the Presidency commend the Pakistan authorities for their cooperation with the mission when it was fully aware that we never received a formal invitation from the authorities and that they also refused to sign a memorandum of understanding , including an agreement to provide security cover .
This information was officially reaffirmed in a démarche to the Danish Presidency six weeks after we arrived in Pakistan .
The Presidency should also have been aware of the public attacks on the EOM by several government ministers , using such inflammatory language as ' these Western whites have no interest in peace in Pakistan ; these people come from unfriendly nations and have hostile objectives ; this Mission is interfering in the internal affairs of Pakistan ' .
How can you regard this as cooperation ?
Security cover was indeed finally provided for the second half of our mission , but it came from the provincial governors and not from the federal authorities .
Furthermore , in its statement the Presidency expresses ' concern ' about reports of manipulation - very mild indeed - and you ask the Election Commission to follow up such complaints .
Did you actually read our report ?
Surely you are aware that we expressed serious criticism of the Election Commission and its lack of independence ?
To ask the Election Commission to investigate election malpractice is like asking Saddam Hussein to head the UN weapons inspection team in Iraq .
I would like to remind the Council that the mission I led was not a Parliament mission , it was an EU mission consisting of 88 dedicated people , who discharged their task professionally in line with internationally accepted criteria for election observation .
As you and the Commissioner have said , they worked in a particularly sensitive political and security environment at great personal risk to themselves .
Yet within four days of our preliminary report being published in Islamabad you effectively distanced yourself from our conclusions that it was a seriously flawed process .
You did so despite the fact that Member States received full weekly reports of our observations .
I and members of my core team also briefed heads of mission in Islamabad on a weekly basis .
Yet never once did anyone challenge our ongoing assessment .
And even at the final debriefing of heads of mission in Islamabad , little or no opposition to our analysis was expressed .
Ironically , by comparison , the Presidency strongly criticised the elections in Togo on 27 October , where there was no EU observation mission , yet you chose to ignore the conclusion of the Pakistan mission that had been operating for two and a half months .
Why was the initial draft of your reaction to the election toned down ?
Who influenced you ?
Who pressurised you ?
And because your statement is being used by Pakistan 's embassies worldwide to undermine our report , you betrayed the EU mission you sent into the field and I say on their behalf , shame on you .
I would also like to take the opportunity to refute the untrue allegation made by the Pakistan ambassador in Washington that the EU / EOM leaked an interim briefing report .
In fact this was leaked by an Islamabad-based diplomat for a Member State government , who was in Europe at the time , and was designed to undermine the work of the EU / EOM .
Returning to your reaction , not only does your response betray the EU / EOM , it is a betrayal of the interests of the people of Pakistan , especially those who are courageously working for the restoration of democracy .
Your failure to endorse the conclusions of the EU / EOM and other observer groups such as ANFREL , NDI and the Commonwealth , compounds your predecessor 's mistake in failing to criticise the farcical presidential referendum and is directly responsible for encouraging the Government of Pakistan to behave as it does .
But as well as betraying the EU / EOM and ordinary Pakistanis , you are also betraying the ideals of your own Presidency .
Let me remind you that in your own Presidency programme , you set yourself the twin tasks of ' increased effectiveness and greater openness in the field of human rights ' .
The statement on the Pakistan election showed little commitment to this .
But worst of all , tailoring your response for geopolitical reasons was a total betrayal of the principles underlying election observation , which is designed to enhance democratisation and human rights .
Madam President , I should like to get straight to the point : although today 's discussion should remain focused on the issue of the recent elections in Pakistan , it is clearly a time to assess the entire process of transition to democracy in that major south Asian country .
It is also clear that , now more than ever , international relations at various levels , including the economic and commercial levels , must involve honouring commitments that have been given and the careful management of expectations .
We all welcomed the support given by the President of Pakistan to the fight against terrorism , which has helped to soften an extremely negative image created by the military coup that removed the elected government led by Nawaz Sharif .
We also know that it is impossible to speak of consolidated democracy whilst the military is interfering in the political arena ; but we also know from various examples in southern European and Latin American countries , that it is possible to start a process of transition to democracy by making a pact with civilian political representatives , provided that the various phases and arrangements agreed on are respected .
It is precisely the respect for these requirements that , in the period of transition to democracy , provides the necessary if insufficient legitimacy for the military to continue in some political role .
This is precisely where our main concerns lie .
In August 2001 , the Pakistani president announced the road map for democracy , which included the elections due to take place on 10 October .
This was an historic moment .
In the end , however , we are sorry to say that this opportunity was largely wasted .
We do not wish to issue any kind of judgment on the process of transition to democracy in Pakistan but we can say that this a poor way of promoting it and we hope that the elected members will have the clear-mindedness , the political ability and the courage necessary to lead a new phase of genuine transition to a democratic political power .
Madam President , I should like to make it clear that I am not speaking on behalf of the ELDR or in favour of this resolution .
Although I understand some of the concerns of the people who wrote this resolution , especially in the run-up to the election in Pakistan , particularly that anyone standing for election should have to have a university degree , I do not agree with them .
I agree that President Musharraf took over in a coup .
But let me make it clear for the record that this was a bloodless coup ; political parties were not banned and no restrictions were placed on the media .
Yes , the legal framework order was reintroduced by the president , giving him powers to dismiss the parliament .
But my understanding is that such powers exist in some EU countries .
The French president , for instance , can dissolve parliament .
I think we are looking at it too much from a European perspective .
There have been allegations of corruption for centuries in Pakistan .
These elections are a step in the right direction .
The fact that many who oppose President Musharraf were elected surely speaks for itself .
All parties in Pakistan welcomed these elections .
They have just elected a Speaker .
They are about to elect a prime minister .
President Musharraf actually met his commitment - as the Council said - to hold these elections .
Let us now look forward instead of looking back .
Madam President , I believe we should always pay great attention to our behaviour and political actions towards the countries with which we have relations and agreements in matters of cooperation and aid .
There are times when our certainties or our model of democracy disregard the historical and political context of European integration and new forms of an old colonialism can appear , creating mistrust and feelings of injured dignity , or even injured sovereignty .
We know that democracy is measured not just on election day but on the basis of effective grass-roots participation , civil liberties , equal opportunities , justice and development .
Having said that , I do not in the least intend to give up the widely - and internationally - shared view that human rights are universal , which is why no specific context can justify the death penalty , whether in Pakistan or in the United States .
I took part in the election mission to Pakistan led by Mr Cushnahan , to whom we must all be grateful - I am , at least - for the rigorous and thorough nature of his work .
I agree with the EU report and the criticisms it contains not so much about the day of the elections , which , as far as I could see , were carried out correctly - we were given a very good reception by the people and the electoral representatives , and , moreover , I am talking about Peshawar , an area where the Islamic religious party prevailed - but rather the entire electoral process , with its restrictions and the erroneous decision to allow only those with a degree to stand as candidates .
I believe the transition from military domination to democratically elected political representation will be difficult : the path of democracy in Pakistan is difficult and , without a doubt , is hindered by the military .
I also think it will be extremely difficult to eradicate corruption and poverty , which goes hand in hand with its defeat , and I say so because I myself come from a country that is not poor but where there is still , in actual fact , a lot of corruption .
I believe we must make a major effort in the fields of cooperation and trade and carry out political analysis in the areas of development and education , and I also believe that the human rights of all people should be upheld , even those accused of terrorism .
We must therefore call upon the Pakistan Government to comply with the international treaties .
Madam President , I would like to start by saying that I agree with the statements made here by the Commission and the Council , but I would like to stress a few key points .
Pakistan is now a nuclear power that is even engaging in trade in nuclear technology , if you include North Korea .
The war in Afghanistan was pretty much an acid test for Pakistan , and I believe that it was only the current regime , the Musharraf regime , that made the anti-terror coalition possible in Pakistan at all .
The Kashmir problem has not gone away , and it is one of the major focuses of conflict in Asia .
Unfortunately , the anti-terror strategy has meant encroaching upon human rights and slowing down the process of democratisation in Pakistan , as has regrettably been the case in many other countries as well .
For its part - and in saying this I am simply describing the situation and not wishing to be judgmental - the Musharraf regime is essentially a consequence of the fact that there was previously a string of corrupt governments .
I share the view that we have heard expressed here : Pakistan has for generations been run by corrupt governments whose leadership of the state has given no evidence of responsibility .
That meant that military governments repeatedly came to power .
All those governments made a show of democratisation for the benefit of the West and at the same time had to keep the extremists at home happy .
That was bound to lead to tensions .
One comment about the election : we know that only about 30 % of Pakistan 's population voted , for a variety of reasons .
In Baluchistan and in the north-west of the country , religious fundamentalists were the victors in the election .
That is a problem , because it means the country is becoming more and more unstable .
The MMA , the party that brings together the various fundamentalist strands , will create problems for Musharraf and for the government that is to be formed .
Madam President , this afternoon we have heard three very important statements on the core issue of this particular debate - one by the Council , one by the Commission and one by the chief observer on the European Union mission , who was officially representing the three institutions during the election itself .
I am particularly pleased and happy with the statement made by the Commission .
I very carefully note the balance and the content and I say to the Commission representative here this afternoon that it is a statement that is exceptionally relevant to the situation that developed .
I say to the Council that I expected more .
I expected honesty and I expected the facts .
I say to the President of the Council that his statement embarrasses me , and if it does that to me it must surely embarrass our colleague , Mr Haarder , who we all have known and respected as a man of principle and integrity since his time in this House .
His statement is totally irrelevant to the true situation that emerged .
We have heard from our colleague , Mr Cushnahan , who went there at great personal risk to fulfil a mission , who reported honestly and in a principled fashion on the situation that he witnessed .
But before his statement could be taken for what it was worth , it was totally undermined by the Council .
Mr Haarder , on behalf of his colleagues in Council , did not tell us on what Council 's judgement was based .
He said : ' Council 's judgment was ' , and the statement that was issued was ' Council 's judgment ' .
It is most regrettable that the Council described the situation in this way .
We all want to see democracy restored in Pakistan .
The general took over in a coup .
Bloodless or not bloodless , a coup is a coup .
We in this Parliament decided to terminate our parliamentary relationship with Pakistan .
Now we have the chief observer on behalf of the European Union being somewhat rubbished by a statement from the Council , which was excellent in its artful dodging and with no reference to the serious flaws in the electoral process , just a bland reference to the reports of manipulation .
Elsewhere the Presidency commends the Pakistan authorities for their cooperation with the observer mission for assuring a widely secure and free election day .
In conclusion , I welcome the statements made by the Commission and Mr Cushnahan , but regretfully the statement made by the Council does this House an injustice because it is an insult to our intelligence and for what we stand .
Madam President , I believe that in this debate we must distinguish between two things , as the representative of the Commission has said .
Firstly , the genuinely exceptional circumstances in Pakistan and the strategic role it plays in relation to stability in Afghanistan , to the international coalition against terrorism and to the stability of all the countries of Central Asia .
However , on the other hand , I do not believe that this fact bears any relation to the internal situation in that country , to the increase in Islamic fundamentalism , the interests and people , our allies , who are being attacked in Afghanistan and the human rights situation in the country .
There are horrendous cases such as kidnap , extortion and the captivity of the so-called ' child jockeys ' and , of course , I am also referring to the result of the evaluation of the elections .
Mr Haarder , you know what affection and respect I have had for you since we worked together in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , but I would like to ask you what the point is in sending a mission of European Union electoral observers , the members of which behave in an exemplary manner at great risk to themselves , to carry out an assessment of the situation which furthermore is shared with other international missions , such as that of the Commonwealth and that of ANFREL , if then the representative of the President-in-Office of the Council fails to authorise it .
Do we not already have enough differences in the United Nations Security Council , the General Affairs Council or at European Councils without this further demonstration of disagreement and division ?
I believe , Madam President , that we must take note of this attitude and work together to prevent any recurrence of this type of situation which presents an image of total fragmentation which , of course , jeopardises the image and prestige of the European Union abroad .


Madam President , hearing Mr Cushnahan and Mr Collins speak I find I must go back to my script and see whether it can really be true that what I said was so terrible .
Can it be true that I did not even mention Mr Cushnahan 's criticisms ?
And I see in the script that in fact I did mention and praise Mr Cushnahan and that I mentioned five vehement points of criticism : 1 ) the constitutional changes which preceded the election , 2 ) the unequal access to conduct election campaigns , 3 ) the unequal access of the political parties to resources , 4 ) the unequal access to the media , and 5 ) the reports of manipulation in connection with the elections .
I would like to reiterate my thanks to Mr Cushnahan for the fact that he drew attention to these fundamental faults in the democratic process so clearly .
But it may be that what made him and also Mr Collins so angry was my subsequent sentence , and I quote : ' Nonetheless , it is the Council 's assessment that the holding of the election was an important step along the way towards the restoration of democracy in Pakistan ' .
That is not a backward-looking sentence ; rather , it states that despite everything , we are talking about the step from pure dictatorship to something that is less pure dictatorship , that is , something that also has a democratic element , even with all the criticism that can otherwise be mentioned .
Of course we can ask , as Mr Cushnahan does , why the Council should make a declaration at all ?
But I think it is important to establish - for the sake of future election observers as well - that the EU 's observers act entirely independently of the Council .
Thus a declaration by them is also entirely independent .
That is how things are and it means that even if the Council has said something , the election observers can say something completely different ; and if the election observers have said something , then likewise the Council can choose to refer to this a great deal or a little , can choose to look backwards or forwards . The two parties are independent of each other and I think we should retain that .
The fact that the Council found cause to make a declaration in this case must naturally be seen in the light of the following .
Since the turn of the year the security situation in the region has severely deteriorated , with extensive build-ups of troops in both India and Pakistan .
The situation was so acute that there was an increased risk of war .
And both countries have nuclear weapons .
The Council has been very much involved in the international work to encourage de-escalation , and in this connection the Council saw the election in Pakistan and the provincial elections in the Indian provinces of Jammu and Kashmir as an important step along the way towards an improvement in the situation .
The Council 's declaration also called upon both India and Pakistan to take advantage of the opportunities following the elections to improve their bilateral relationship .
It is in the light of this hope for the future that the Council 's declaration is to be seen .
The Council 's declaration does not diminish Mr Cushnahan 's criticism - absolutely not .
I would ask Mr Cushnahan to believe this and take comfort from it , and I would like to assure him that Mr Cushnahan 's criticism has not been weakened in any way by the fact that the Council said what it said .
Indeed , the Council refers to the criticism and I referred to the criticism .
So can we not now allow each other this : that there is a need for election observers , that there is a need for independent reports which draw attention to everything that is not as it should be .
I have mentioned five major points of criticism here , but at the same time in such a crisis-ridden region of the world there is a need for the Council to attempt to find something to hold on to in terms of a little bit of progress which can provide a hope of peace and which at any rate provides a hope of avoiding war .
I feel strongly that it is possible to work towards both - both towards complete democracy and towards pragmatic attempts to improve the opportunities for peace .
I would like to start off with a few words on the more general subject of observing elections , repeating one sentence from my statement : the Commission would like to stress that we followed our standard approach in the methodology we used to observe the election in Pakistan .
That is important .
It also illustrates the professionalism in the way we do this and also in the way we work with the European Parliament .
In general we have , over the years , managed to build up a global position as a quality electoral observation party .
What has been achieved and contributed in this case certainly adds to our track record .
However , it is important not to confuse the task of election observation with handling the relationship in general , the overall agenda vis-à-vis the country in question .
I liked what Mrs Lynne said about the process .
Very shortly after the signature of the cooperation agreement in November last year when Mr Verhofstadt and President Prodi visited President Musharraf , I visited him on my way back from Afghanistan in the first week of December last year and had a very long and frank exchange with him .
I share the view that on balance he seems to be more part of the solution than part of the problem for Pakistan today .
We must avoid over-simplification .
We talk more about democratisation than democracy .
Working constructively and consistently on the situation as a whole is a better way of dealing with the problems than dwelling too much on the pure and perfect principles of democracy .
That is how we are trying to make a difference in Africa and elsewhere .
Let me make one comment about the cooperation agreement .
What we are trying to achieve through the agreement is a contribution to the process of democratisation , to the promotion of economic development and progress .
I strongly urge Parliament to see this cooperation agreement as a positive European contribution to stability in the region and to foster the dialogue with President Musharraf and the emerging democratic Pakistani leaders in order to speed up progress .
That is the thinking behind the cooperation agreement and I hope Parliament will see it from that point of view .
Without wishing to set a precedent , because we are not going to continue the debate , I am going to give the floor to Mr Cushnahan for a clarification .
Madam President , in response to Mr Haarder may I ask that he read very carefully the declaration of the 12th and then maybe he will understand why I am angry .
Would he not be convinced by the fact that Pakistan embassies are using this worldwide to rubbish our report and to say that there is something wrong with it ?
Would he also accept - and I agree with his point about the strategic importance of Pakistan in the region , especially at this critical time - that failed states , abuse of human rights and abuse of democracy are the very things that feed terrorism ?
The best way to eradicate terrorism is to restore democracy , rather than turning a blind eye to a military regime that is abusing democracy , wants to retain power and does not want to return it to a civilian administration .
Mr President , I agree , but I also agree with the last sentence in the summary of your report , the so-called preliminary statement of 12 October .
You end up by saying ' the EU EOM hopes that following the completion of this election all parties will work together to achieve the establishment of good governance in Pakistan ' .
I believe that is our common hope .
I think we need both views on the situation in Pakistan : your criticism and my point on the strategic importance of Pakistan .
I have received five motions for resolutions
The next item is the Council statement on the tripartite social summit .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Council has been asked to make a statement on the subject of social dialogue and the tripartite social summit .
The Council is fully in agreement with Parliament 's positive assessment of the significance of the European social dialogue and notes the good progress and the encouraging results that have been achieved in connection with the informal summits to date , despite the lack of a formalised institutional framework for these meetings .
Close contact based on reciprocal trust between the public authorities and the parties of the labour market at European , national and local level is of crucial importance for strengthening economic progress , prosperity and social integration in Europe .
The parties stated in the declaration of the European Council in Laeken that the Standing Committee on Employment was not living up to its aims and that the parties would like to see the committee replaced by an established practice of holding tripartite social summits .
The Laeken European Council and the Barcelona European Council concluded that such a social summit should be held prior to each spring summit .
On 26 June this year the Commission submitted a proposal for a decision by the Council on the establishment of a tripartite social summit together with the abolition of the Standing Committee on Employment .
The Danish Presidency gave the proposal high priority and worked towards a rapid resolution .
However , during the initial work in the Council it emerged that the proposal gave rise to a number of issues and legal and institutional problems which could not be resolved immediately .
The Presidency wishes to work towards a position being taken at the Council summit on 3 December on how the efforts towards establishing the social summit are to continue .
Should it be decided to continue working on a proposal for a formal decision , then devising the further details will not be possible until during the Greek Presidency .
However , there is nothing to prevent the social summits being held on an informal basis without the basis of a decision , as has been the case to date .
I hope that this answers the question of what the Council intends to do to establish the social summit .
The issue of consultation with Parliament has not yet been discussed by the Council .
Once the Council has decided the details of how the social summit is to be established there will be a basis for discussing how Parliament can be involved .
I would like to end by thanking Parliament for having raised the issue of social dialogue and the tripartite social summit .
Indeed , it provides a good opportunity to discuss various aspects of this important issue .
I hope that we will have a good discussion and I can assure you that the Danish Presidency will take care to include the points of view put forward today in its further deliberations .
Mr President , as the President-in-Office has already said , the Commission has presented a proposal for this tripartite social summit for growth and employment by means of a Council decision .
This proposal was not isolated ; it was within the framework of the need to change and modernise the European social dialogue .
The aim of this proposal is to formalise the social dialogue summits held in Stockholm in March 2001 and Barcelona in March 2002 .
There is nothing to stop us from holding another informal meeting but , as the President-in-Office has already said , it is very important to formalise this tripartite social summit , because the social partners agreed to it at the European Summit at Laeken .
In any case , it will be a summit on growth and employment and it will replace the existing Standing Committee on Employment .
This forum will play a very important role as far as the implementation of the Lisbon process is concerned , because it is the proper forum for the social partners to submit their proposals and their common agenda for the implementation of the Lisbon strategy .
The Commission chose Article 202 as the legal basis for the establishment of the tripartite social summit , since that was the legal basis for the Standing Committee on Employment .
Although there is no provision for consultation of the European Parliament under that article , the Commission anticipated in its proposal that Parliament would be consulted on the introduction of a tripartite social summit because it is a very sensitive and important issue .
The prerogative as to whether to follow this suggestion or not rests with the Council .
The Commission considers it of the utmost importance for the proposal to be rapidly adopted .
As I have already said , this view is strongly endorsed by the European interprofessional social partners .
It will ensure greater consistency between the different dialogues in which the social partners are involved .
We held informal discussions in the Council and a large majority of Member States agreed on this issue .
We believe we will overcome some of the problems - legal or not - which exist in some Member States .
I hope that this proposal will receive political support in the Social Affairs Council on 3 December , which would allow it to be adopted at the General Affairs and External Relations Council on 9 and 10 December , so that we can have a formal tripartite social summit during the Greek Presidency .
Mr President , what we have here is something of a difficult discussion .
I am very pleased that the response has been given in this way , but I have to say that the answer is rather unsatisfactory .
We have before us a proposal on which , as far as the objective is concerned , everyone is actually probably agreed .
This objective is of course the holding of such a tripartite meeting .
This is where all the problems start , however .
The Commission is making reference to Article 202 ; the Council evidently does not agree with this , because it is deliberating about it .
In anticipation of the result of these deliberations there is no wish to seek an opinion from the European Parliament , in particular the opinion that is being prepared by Mr Ettl .
We consider this a totally unacceptable situation .
As coordinators of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs we have also spoken about it and it is our view that if things go on this way we shall have to seriously consider going to the European Court of Justice , because the rights of the European Parliament are being violated .
I also think , Commissioner , that even if Article 202 is used as a basis , you are not applying the Article correctly .
You must read the second part of 202 , which states that there are indeed cases in which an opinion is not sought from the European Parliament , but that the matter must then have been determined in advance and with an opinion from the European Parliament or that a kind of mandate must have been given .
Now , to the best of our knowledge , no mandate has been given here .
In any event , everything requires full investigation .
I have to say , and this goes for the Council as well , that a lot of trouble could have been saved if the European Parliament had been asked for an opinion .
Failure to do so gives this whole affair a rather sinister undertone .
We are ourselves currently in the process of consulting Parliament 's Legal Affairs Department on this matter .
It is of course possible to use a different legal basis , but I am sure that it will be extraordinarily difficult for the Council and the Commission to find a legal basis where no opinion from the European Parliament is required .
After all , that is what this is all about and we are standing up for our rights .
The rights of Parliament are already relatively limited when it comes to matters of this kind .
That is partly perhaps with good reason , partly also it arises from the Treaty itself , but we cannot in any event accept further erosion of the already limited rights of Parliament in this way .
That is the message I would like to give the Council and the Commission in their future deliberations .
Finally , I have one further question .
If you indeed proceed to act on the basis of Article 202 , should the costs of this operation not be covered by the Council rather than the Commission , as has been the case to date ?
Perhaps it will be possible to give an answer to this question as well .
Mr President , I would first like to thank Mr Pronk for pointing out that Article 202 is by no means a legislative soft option , and it does not make life easy for the Council or the Commission .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner for her clear statement about the arrangements for the tripartite social summit , and to thank the Danish Presidency for attempting to accommodate us .
What I do not understand as the nominated rapporteur , however , is that at a moment when we are anxious to tackle employment policy and growth in an active way , we are wasting time .
The intention was to begin making arrangements for this standing tripartite social summit now , before the spring summit , so that the social partners could start work straight away .
The approach we have now adopted means that we are wasting time again , possibly a whole year , at a point when we want to play an active role on employment issues .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has virtually been neutralised - we do not have an appropriate mechanism here .
This means that the social dialogue will not be particularly mobilised as a fundamental mechanism for the social partners to be able to - or in fact be obliged to - achieve something practice-related .
At a point when the term ' social dimension ' and thus all the mechanism that involves - notably the social dialogue - are constantly on everyone 's lips , and when we are talking about deepening social issues in Europe , we are wasting time .
I just cannot understand that .
One more point : today we stand on the threshold of the enlargement of the European Union .
I have discussed these issues with many partner states and they all want a properly functioning mechanism in this field , and one that would help all the new Member States .
However , I do not believe that it will be easier , if the mechanism does not become operational under the Greek Presidency , to sort matters out later on , once the new Member States have joined us .
Things can only get more difficult then , because the existing social partnerships , industrial relations that is , are not so robust .
That is the problem we face .
I do not need to use all my speaking time ; I have already expressed my indignation about the fact that Article 202 is constantly referred to as a soft option .
Parliament 's Legal Service will give us its opinion on this next week , and I hope that will help us somewhat .
I would like to thank the Danish Presidency and Commissioner Diamantopoulou once again for their support .
I hope that 3 December will be a productive day in this area .
Mr President , the ELDR Group fully endorses the argument that Parliament has a right to be heard .
In this particular week , however , I agree with Mr Ettl that it is appropriate to add something about the need for early involvement of the prospective new members in the tripartite social summit and the state of dialogue within those countries .
The way in which trade unions and employers ' organisations are organised varies considerably from one country to another , as does the manner and extent of collective bargaining .
The development of employers ' organisations is recent and sporadic and their activities are not always coordinated .
Where confederations of trade unions and employers ' organisations exist , they vary in the extent to which they participate in their equivalents at European level .
Much therefore still needs to be done to develop the basis for social dialogue .
I know that this issue is one that the Commission has already begun to address through a variety of measures .
Its work is of major importance , since cooperation between the authorities , trade unions and employers ' organisations is vital for economic and social development and thus for increased employment .
As the Danish Presidency has recently said , tripartite cooperation and the social dialogue need to be strengthened if the new Member States are to be able to participate in the work on equal terms with all the other Member States .
We must ensure that their voices , as well as our own , are properly heard .
Mr President , I should like to say the following : this Council position on social dialogue is contradictory .
On the one hand it claims to be interested but on the other , it continues to obstruct its implementation , as is clear from its postponement of the formal creation of the Tripartite Social Summit .
The Commissioner has already provided important information , for which I thank her and which allows us to draw this conclusion .
Unfortunately , this demonstrates the little importance attached to social issues by most Member State governments .
I would emphasise the case of Portugal , with which , being Portuguese , I am most familiar .
In addition to the questions that other speakers have already raised about Parliament 's participation and also about the significance of postponing the creation of the Tripartite Social Summit , I should also like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council the following : what measures are you planning to adopt in order at least to increase the participation of women in the social dialogue , in terms of the decision-making bodies , in terms of legal bases and also in terms of the content to be addressed in this entire process ?
What measures are you intending to adopt to ensure that priority is given to social issues , specifically in the field of employment , social inclusion , equal rights and opportunities and compliance with the social agenda in general ?
What measures are you planning to take in order to effectively protect social and labour rights and to ensure that they are complied with in practice ?
Mr President , the Council 's answers to our questions this afternoon have been clear , albeit not as full as many of us would have liked .
We are well aware of the importance that Denmark itself attaches to the work of the social partners in that 80 % of Danish workers are covered by collective agreements , but we are also aware that , as we have been hearing , a number of Member States do not share this view .
Parliament is beginning to feel a sense of urgency about the need to give greater coherence to the work of the social partners .
As has been said , this becomes crucial as we look towards enlargement .
We would be interested to hear what involvement is foreseen , and at what point , for the social partners from the accession countries .
We are also aware that there are many areas where such consultation is already being advocated , in the temporary agency work directive for example , and in a whole range of other areas relating to family-friendly work , quality of work , modernisation of work , organisation , active ageing policies and so on .
So we are also hoping that this new approach will be able to look at the qualitative aspects of growth and employment , which are all too often forgotten , and the social repercussions as a whole .
I would echo much of what Mrs Figueiredo has already said .
In terms of funding , I find myself agreeing with Mr Pronk as to the source of funding and again this is going to have to take particular account of the enlargement process .
As far as the role of the European Parliament is concerned , we are beginning to find an increasing number of forms and areas of cooperation in which Parliament is not fully involved .
Open coordination is one area where we are still getting no clear response as to where Parliament actually fits into the whole process .
We are also aware that certain governments do not want to see any extension of parliamentary powers in the convention process .
Some of them seem to be starting early in looking at issues such as the tripartite summit and Parliament 's involvement there .
Whilst we are looking at questions on the legal basis , this is not the only issue where the question of Parliament 's involvement arises .
I am thinking of the coordination of social security for third country nationals .
We look forward to the legal opinion and we look forward to greater involvement for Parliament so that in future this will not be an issue .
Mr President , we make no secret of the fact that there is a certain amount of disagreement concerning the legal basis for these activities .
However , first I would like to emphasise that nobody has raised any objection to the idea of holding tripartite summits .
Indeed , it was supported by everyone both in Laeken and in Barcelona , so there is no disagreement on that .
Nonetheless , there are certain legal problems which are fairly involved .
In brief , I can say that the Commission proposes to use Article 202 as the legal basis .
The Legal Service of the Council is however of the opinion that this provision cannot be used because it does not give the Council unrestricted decision-making competence .
It merely refers to the articles in the Treaty that specify the measures which the Council can take .
And according to the Council 's Legal Service , that does not provide a legal basis .
And when the Commission proposes that the summit should consist of the Council 's presidency at Head of State and Government level , the Council 's Legal Service believes that the Council ( employment , social policy and health and consumer protection ) is not able to make a decision on the introduction of a summit at Head of State and Government level .
This might be able to be solved somehow or other if there is a will to do so .
Neither does the Council 's Legal Service agree with the Commission 's proposal that the results of the summit - which is to take place the day before the European Council - are to be presented to the European Council in the form of a report .
It points out that this would contravene the rules on the organisation of the work of the European Council which the Council itself adopted in Seville in June and that it would be contrary to Article 2 of the Council 's Rules of Procedure , which oblige the Council to prepare the European Councils , including the necessary coordination of all the preparatory work .
Moreover , Article 2 sets out time periods for drawing up the provisional agenda of the European Council and the submission of contributions to the discussions and these time periods are not complied with under the proposal .
However , concerning this point I would like to say that it can probably be solved with the right will .
It simply requires some further discussion .
I believe that the first problem I mentioned , namely the use of Article 202 as the legal basis , is the biggest .
But let us see whether we can make any progress with it .
I have now given an open and honest account of where the disagreement lies .
Sometimes you want to ask the lawyers if they cannot try to reach agreement before letting us politicians know , but that is probably easier said than done .
Perhaps the Treaty basis is not always equally clear , in which case we have to find a political solution which allows us to do what we want to without it being claimed that we are breaking the rules which form the basis of our work .
These were a couple of issues .
I can assure Mr Ettl that we are not wasting time .
However , until we find a correct formal solution we may have to continue with informal summits , that is , follow the informal procedure .
I would like to say to Mrs Figueiredo that I am fully aware of what she mentioned concerning the representativeness of the parties , but this has not yet been discussed in detail .
I do not want to start a major legal debate here in Parliament .
I simply felt that I had a duty to state the reasons why the Council is not yet ready to start a formal dialogue as requested .
However , we are prepared to continue the more informal dialogue until a solution can be found .
Mr President , the Council was quite convincing .
The question is why the Commission proposed this .
I would ask the Commissioner whether it is feasible for the Commission to propose another legal basis .
Under Article 308 , for instance , which is very often used in situations like these , Parliament has a direct right to give its advice .
Was that why the Commission did not specify Article 308 ?
Mr President , the reason the Commission has chosen Article 202 is that this is the basis used for the Standing Committee on Employment and it has worked for many years .
Some of the legal aspects of the proposal have already been referred to .
We believe that these can be overcome with cooperation between the Councils , if from the Employment Council we go to the General Affairs Council and a final paragraph is inserted into the conclusions of the General Affairs Council .
I completely agree that , with political will , we can overcome these problems .
The Council is responsible for the budget , but it is a very small one .
That is because it only allows for the invitation of eight or ten representatives of the social partners .
Since I have the opportunity , I would like to say a few words on the participation of the applicant countries .
These countries will , of course , become members of the European partners , the ETUC and UNICE , and they will participate in the social summit through their European institutions and organisations .
In any case , we are working closely with governments and social partners in all the applicant countries because some of them are having to start from scratch and there are great problems with the functioning of social dialogue .
The debate is closed .
The next item is the joint debate on :
the Council and Commission statements on the extension of the Lamfalussy procedure to the entire financial services sector ( for the Copenhagen Summit )
the report ( A5-0370 / 2002 ) by Mr van den Burg , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the rules on prudential supervision in the European Union ( 2002 / 2061 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great pleasure for me to have this chance to discuss the expansion of the Lamfalussy procedure to include all financial services .
I greatly appreciate being given the opportunity to give an account of the Council 's proposal to the European Parliament so that we can have a constructive and open dialogue between the Council and the European Parliament on this important subject .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has raised some issues concerning the restructured FSPG and the European Parliament 's participation in the discussions on policy in the financial sector .
I hope that these issues can be resolved before the report is adopted by the Ecofin Council on 3 December .
The financial markets are playing an increasingly great role in Europe 's economy .
They are an important factor in the creation of growth and employment , and financial integration in the EU and the realisation of a single market for financial services will make a substantial contribution to increased prosperity .
A report published last week by the Commission shows that full financial integration in the EU will in the long term increase the EU 's GNP by 1.1 % .
Increased financial integration , however , also creates a need for improved cooperation on financial supervision in the EU and greater vigilance as regards financial stability .
The development of the financial markets in recent years has underlined these needs .
The Ecofin Council therefore wishes to extend the structure for financial legislation , supervision and stability in the securities market on which the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission agreed in February this year to cover all financial services .
The interinstitutional agreements that were entered into in connection with the securities markets will naturally also apply in the extended structure .
And the monitoring of financial stability in the EU will be similarly strengthened .
For several reasons it is important and imperative that this new structure be extended to include the banking and insurance sectors :
Firstly , the new structure will contribute to financial stability and effective harmonisation of financial regulation by creating a framework for effective cooperation and convergence between the financial supervisory authorities .
The increasing integration and reciprocal influence of the financial markets in the EU makes this a necessity which must not be postponed .
Secondly , the circumstances which gave rise to the introduction of the Lamfalussy procedure in the securities sector are also present in the banking and insurance sectors .
The way in which rules are formed at present is inflexible , slow and ponderous - and I am fully aware that the Council can also be a delaying factor in the present process .
The common rules are also implemented differently in the various Member States .
The financial sector as a whole is developing fast , and rapid and effective cooperation on legislation and supervision is just as necessary for the other sectors as was the case for the securities markets .
There is a need to be able to react faster than the current structure allows .
Initiatives for new directives such as the implementation of capital adequacy rules in the area of banking and the Solvency II rules in the area of insurance will require certain detailed technical regulations and it is therefore appropriate to apply a more effective legislative procedure in this area , such as that used in the securities market .
The new structure also paves the way for drawing a better distinction between the heart of the matter , that is to say , what is politically central , and what can be left to implementing decisions that can be adjusted on an ongoing basis in line with changing market conditions .
Although the Commission is not expected to produce its proposal on Basle II until spring 2004 , it would nonetheless be useful for the new structure to be in place at an early stage .
Thirdly , the new structure is necessary in order to secure efficiency in connection with the EU 's forthcoming enlargement .
The new structure will be more serviceable and effective in an EU with 25 Member States .
The Banking Advisory Committee , which currently carries out both level 2 and 3 tasks , has 3 members from each state ( that is , one from the ministry , one from the supervisory authority and one from the central bank ) .
Following enlargement it will have 75 members , plus a number of observers .
Harmonisation and convergence of European supervisory practice can best be promoted by establishing a uniform structure for all sectors .
The structure from the securities market provides a suitable model here .
The new supervisory structure will ensure that organisation of the exercise of supervision remains a national task and will create a more transparent committee structure without mixed mandates as is the case at present in the banking and insurance sectors .
It creates a permanent and clear structure for cooperation across the various supervisory committees as well as for the relationship between supervisory committees and the ' level 2 ' committees .
It thus establishes good cooperation on supervision across the sectors and creates a good and clear distribution of responsibility .
In summary , therefore , we can state the following concerning the significance of the new structure :
There will be a greater degree of focus on political issues - and thus on the overall principles of the rules .
The political and technical discussions will initially take place in separate fora , allowing the process to take place more quickly because work can be carried on at a technical level in parallel .
Greater openness and commitment will be created in respect of the financial sectors in many countries and the implementation of the rules contained in the individual directives in the individual states will be more uniform , creating a basis for more uniform supervision .
And finally , it will create a greater correlation between the rules in the individual parts of the financial sector .
It is necessary to find a good structure for the role of the European Parliament in connection with the devising of overall policy guidelines for the financial sphere and I am convinced that this will be possible .
As a starting point , I imagine regular meetings between the chairman of the restructured FSPG , the Commission and the European Parliament in order to strengthen the dialogue on the main policy guidelines for financial services .
However , a rejuvenation of the 2005 Group is also feasible if this is preferable ; this is , after all , mentioned in the European Parliament 's decision on this issue .
With regard to the restructured FSPG and its role in the devising of policy in the financial sphere we would take into account the European Parliament 's concerns .
The role of the restructured FSPG is not to be described as ' devising of policy in the financial sphere ' ( ' policy shaping ' ) as is stated in the text .
Rather , the restructured FSPG would provide an overview and advise the Council and the Commission .
This will be shown in the final report which is to be adopted on 3 December .
The Council notes that if the new structure is to be able to take effect the European Parliament considers it essential that the legislative system in the EU is altered such that a clear distinction is made between primary and secondary legal acts and that there are the necessary revocation clauses .
The Council is aware that the Commission intends to propose to the Convention that Article 202 of the Treaty be amended so as to reflect the powers of the legislative institutions - the European Parliament and the Council .
As is well known , the Council cannot , as an institution , make decisions that impose obligations on the Convention or the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference .
That is solely a matter for the Member States , which will define their own positions in the Convention and at the Intergovernmental Conference .
As president of the Ecofin Council I can assure you that I both can and will encourage my colleagues to make their Heads of State and Government aware of the importance of this topic and at the same time call upon them to deliberate and discuss this issue during their preparations for the Intergovernmental Conference .
We in the Council are aware that the role of the European Parliament must be respected .
It is very important that the Convention and the Intergovernmental Conference give consideration to a legislative system that allows greater efficiency in the legislative process and respects the principle of subsidiarity and the powers of the institutions involved .
It is essential that a solution is found in respect of both the challenges faced by the financial sectors and the challenges faced by the Community as a whole .
We must all be aware , however , that this is a broad issue which does not solely concern financial legislation .
In conclusion , I would like to express my hope that the European Parliament 's final position on this issue will take account of the actual opportunities open to the Council and the assurance of goodwill that I have given the European Parliament today .
Mr President , this debate concerns both the resolution introduced by Mrs Randzio-Plath and the report prepared by Mrs van den Burg .
With your agreement , I shall first speak on the subject of the resolution and then come to the report produced by Mrs van den Burg .
As you may know , the ECOFIN Council has broadly endorsed the EFC reports on extending the Lamfalussy arrangements to insurance , banking and financial conglomerates .
At the request of the Council and the Presidency , the Commission has organised a public consultation which ended last week .
Overall the response of market practitioners , consumers and other interested parties has been supportive .
We shall shortly make those responses available on our website , which is consistent with the open and transparent approach that Parliament wishes to be applied to the whole Lamfalussy procedure .
The Commission supports the Council in extending the Lamfalussy arrangements , fully respecting all aspects of our arrangements with parliaments and our agreement with this House .
I believe it will , in time , bring real benefits as the legislative process becomes faster , more flexible and more transparent .
Let us remember what we are trying to do .
One of our aims is to encourage the convergence of regulatory structures which , for securities , is now beginning to happen .
We strongly believe that this is needed in the other sectors as well .
I acknowledge your concerns about the lack of experience with the Lamfalussy approach hitherto .
Inevitably this is a learning-by-doing process .
We must examine any shortcomings , a task which has been specifically assigned to the interinstitutional monitoring group .
But we still have to prepare , in time , for the decisions ahead , not least because we need time to put in place the framework and the structures to extend Lamfalussy .
Moreover , whether or not we extend that process will also shape the type of directives we introduce in relation to banking , insurance and conglomerates .
We must also take into account the need to establish efficient decision-taking structures before enlargement .
We should not wait , therefore , until the year 2006 and beyond .
Having said that , I fully understand the arguments put forward by this Parliament concerning the need for proper democratic and accountable standards and safeguards .
The EFC 's proposals have benefited significantly from the input of my services .
In particular they respect existing interinstitutional political and legal agreements and the prerogatives of this Parliament .
We have insisted on this throughout , as well as urging that the proposal should be submitted to public consultation .
Incidentally , I do not accept that handing over chairmanship of the financial services policy group to a Member State will weaken the Commission 's role .
The FSPG will have a forward-looking prospective and strategic role but the Commission 's right of initiative and indeed its role in the comitology procedure will not be compromised .
That is explicitly stated in the EFC 's report .
I have noted Parliament 's continuing interest in participating in the FSPG .
But I should also like to note that the role of the FSPG is to advise the Council and the Commission .
It is not an interinstitutional group .
However , we have the 2005 Group - the President of the Council referred to that - within which the three institutions could regularly discuss strategic issues .
I have also noted Parliament 's call for a clear and unequivocal commitment to reform Article 202 of the Treaty .
As you know , the Commission has repeatedly stated that it supports the amendment of this article .
President Prodi said just that in this House on 5 February 2002 , when we agreed with Parliament the democratic safeguards for moving forward with the Lamfalussy procedure .
It is also in the Commission 's governance White Paper , in the Commission 's communication on better regulation and in the Commission 's contribution to the Convention , its communication of 22 May entitled ' a project for the European Union ' .
In all those documents you will find the same opinion expressed , namely that we support Parliament in its wish to change Article 202 of the Treaty .
The Commission will shortly come forward , probably on 4 December , with its communication on institutional architecture .
The content of that is yet to be finalised but I can say that we believe that both branches of the legislature - the Council and Parliament - must in future be treated in an equal manner as regards control of the Commission and the whole comitology process .
That is clear .
What I would counsel against - and here I should like to end my comments on the resolution introduced by Mrs Randzio-Plath - is the adoption of a resolution today which you know in advance is politically undeliverable by the Member States .
They cannot give their approval in advance of an Intergovernmental Conference that will not start until 2004 .
They cannot give their approval to a particular outcome .
Surely the reasonable course of action would be to ensure that these important issues are firmly on the IGC agenda when it begins .
Turning to the van den Burg report , the Commission broadly welcomes this report .
I should like to thank Mrs van den Burg for having produced a report which is indeed timely , given the current debate on extending the Lamfalussy procedure , a debate which is under way in Parliament , the Council and , as a result of public consultation , also among more widely dispersed interest groups .
In my view the report is very focused .
It concentrates on the key developments in the financial sector such as the supervision of conglomerates , the globalisation of financial sector issues and responses to shortcomings in the American regulatory approach .
It strikes a realistic note in recognising the different supervisory approaches adopted by Member States .
The report calls on the Commission to act in a number of areas .
Some of those suggestions are either being addressed or are in the pipeline .
Let me mention four of them : firstly , a dialogue with associations representing the financial and consumer sectors ; secondly , a dialogue with the United States ; thirdly , sound regulatory and supervisory principles for the relevant authorities in the candidate countries ; fourthly , impact assessments for new legislative proposals .
The Commission may decide not to take forward all the suggestions in the report but we will certainly give them due consideration .
I am pleased to note that the report is supportive of the Commission in a number of areas .
For example , it reaffirms the Commission 's leading role in framing legislation , enshrined in the Treaty as the right of initiative .
Indeed it is a monopoly of initiative .
The report also endorses the Commission 's role as a fair power broker .
It notes the important work the Commission services are doing on creating an integrated financial market which , as Mr Pedersen said a little while ago , is vital to the European Union 's medium-term goal of creating the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy by the year 2010 .
Mr President , at the end of last week the Dutch Finance Minister announced measures to restore confidence in the financial markets . I welcome this announcement .
Better late than never , and I notice that similar steps are being taken in many other Member States .
It does look , however , as if each Member State is independently trying to re-invent the wheel .
While we at EU level are busy integrating the financial markets under the inspiring leadership of Commissioner Bolkestein , the capitals are , in my view , overlooking the fact that a great deal of what goes on in the financial markets transcends the borders of Member States and also transcends the borders of sectors .
We began discussing the options for increasing the effectiveness of supervision and European cooperation in Parliament before the summer .
Hearings were held with leading figures from the supervisory world and the report you have before you is a reflection of the discussions that we have held .
Regulators and market players themselves are pressing for further European cooperation and integration .
That is what struck me in this debate and I believe that as politicians we are duty-bound to react adequately to the new risks that are presenting themselves .
In my report I have opted for a pragmatic approach , as Mr Bolkestein said earlier , and proposed a great many practical measures , the details of which I shall not be going into now , but the intention is indeed little by little to work on better cooperation and integration .
I have deliberately chosen not to give a blueprint of what an ideal situation might be , which would then have to be imposed top down , but to work mainly on the basis of current practice to lay the emphasis not on the interinstitutional debate , but in fact on the quality and the effectiveness of the implementation of supervision at the moment .
I believe that this is an important starting point for the debate that we must continue to pursue .
In this way we can work towards further European integration step by step .
What has struck me is that the debate in Brussels , and I am referring in particular here to the EFC report and the discussion in the ECOFIN council , has been about the institutional setting and the mutual balance of power instead of about strengthening structural cooperation and coordination at European level .
Power struggles are being fought over chairmanships and secretariat functions , perhaps with locations already in the back of the mind .
I do not find this sensible .
In my report I have tried to keep my distance from power games of this kind and to focus on the substantive arguments .
Mr Bolkestein has already said , and for me it is beyond dispute , that we need a strong European Commission , which works from the perspective of an integrated market and fulfils the role of an independent broker capable of bringing providers and consumers of financial services together .
For my taste , the Council is still basing this a little too much on the national level alone and I fear that this will lead to large Member States making up most of the team and in the process allowing other interests to weigh more heavily than the interest of better cooperation and more effective supervision .
Another point of criticism is that the discussion within the Council and within the EFC has for the most part taken place behind closed doors , without any national parliamentary involvement .
I think that it has been good that as a result of the debate in Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , we have forced this situation into the open and also made it more transparent .
Well , this discussion is by no means at an end as far as we are concerned .
We call on the Finance Ministers to broaden the discussion .
A number of ideas are being suggested for this , but , as I have already said , no final choices have yet been made in the resolution .
This is precisely why this broader debate is needed .
What I really want to emphasise and also insist on in this debate is the ' enabling clause ' we have included in the report to provide a legal basis for the possibility of the performance of European supervision at European level too .
Perhaps this can be discussed at the IGC and perhaps also by the Convention .
There is currently no provision for this in the Treaty , either for the ECB , nor for other possible regulators that we might imagine at European level .
We are leaving it entirely open as to how and when this issue might be raised , but we do think that it is important to make provision for it now , as a condition for such a development .
Mr Bolkestein was evidently fairly surprised by this proposal when we discussed it in the committee .
I hope that he has since given it some more thought and can now be rather more positive about it , because that is precisely what we have missed with the Lamfalussy procedure , namely that this has been considered in advance and that you must also make conditions for it .
Finally , a word about this Lamfalussy procedure .
I have to say that I myself have no objection to this extension to include banks , the insurance sector and the conglomerates and pension funds .
This is what clearly appears in the resolution too , but I consider it highly essential for us to look at the conditions that have to be created to enable Parliament to play a full part .
We shall , however , be taking a closer look at this in the remainder of the debate .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to say something about my own and my group 's views on the Lamfalussy procedure and on the van den Burg report .
Firstly , we are very much in favour of a swifter , more flexible and more transparent procedure .
That is why we are also in favour of the objectives of the Lamfalussy procedure .
However , it needs to be said here and now that we would not have a problem either with the timing or with the content of the results if the Council were able to work as rapidly and in such a Community-oriented way as the European Parliament .
By way of example , I would like to mention the pension fund directive on company pensions .
Parliament presented its report in nine months , whereas the Council took twenty-six .
My second point is that all dossiers affected by the Lamfalussy procedure are covered by the codecision procedure for the European Parliament .
It has to be said that rules concerning technical details are very often not without some political angle .
Nevertheless , we welcome the objectives of the Lamfalussy procedure - there can be no doubt about that .
Nor are we fundamentally opposed to extending it .
But I hope you will understand if we say that we do not believe in giving blank cheques .
Furthermore , I admit to having some concerns that the Lamfalussy / von Wogau procedure was only ever regarded as an interim measure , a transitional solution , and never as the end product .
The end product , the final result , must be parity between the European Parliament and the Council .
And we have not yet achieved that final result .
We therefore welcome the amendments presented by Mr von Wogau to the Bourlanges report in the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
We support the motion for a resolution adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
We expect the Commission to take this point on board in view of the statements made by President Prodi and Commissioner Bolkestein in the ' shopping list ' presented to the convention .
We also call upon the Heads of State and Government to make a declaration of intent at the summit in Copenhagen .
I would like to propose a joint hearing of the Commission and of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs with representatives of the CESR and of the market participants ' committee on experience with the Lamfalussy procedure in relation to the market abuse and prospectus directives . Part of the purpose of this is to take account of this experience , which is not entirely positive , when preparing the next steps .
We also welcome the van den Burg report , and not only because some of my own amendments were adopted !
A majority of us will be voting in favour of this report .
However , I would like to point out that we do not think that the time has yet come for determining the optimum format for pan-European financial supervision .
We are therefore also advocating that the Ministers for Economic and Financial Affairs and the national supervisory authorities should be called upon to arrange a comprehensive dialogue with all the relevant actors on an integrated European supervisory system , taking account of the role of national supervisory systems and the responsibilities of the ECB .
I also support the enabling clause in connection with the convention , because we do not want to tie our hands in the event of a different political outcome occurring .
This is not about setting the EU and the Member States against each other , but about an integrated supervisory system suitable for a new internal market in financial products .
Mr President , I would like to emphasise very strongly that the van den Burg report has come before Parliament at exactly the right moment , because this debate on supervision in Europe is one we need to have .
Having said that , it is more important than ever to distinguish between the issue of supervision and that of regulation .
I approve of the very open approach that Mrs van den Burg has adopted in her report .
I also approve of the way she has accordingly examined the various supervisory models that we have within the European Union without prescribing a definitive model .
I say that because we need to develop a common approach , we need to learn from our experience , and we need above all to endeavour to keep this debate free of any dogmatic or ideological attitude towards a single position .
That is why I believe that this report provides us with a good basis for the dialogue with the other institutions .
I would now like to concentrate on the problems we face in connection with extending the Lamfalussy procedure , as what we are chiefly dealing with here is regulation .
Mr President-in-Office , you were quite right in saying how necessary financial integration is , but that financial stability is also necessary .
This is an area in which Parliament will not let itself be trumped by the Council or the Commission , because we believe that financial market stability is a good thing for the public and that we as Members of Parliament need to champion the preservation of that stability .
We must , however , constantly ask ourselves whether the process selected will help to contribute to that stability .
When I consider that just nine months ago I supported - with a very heavy heart - an agreement that meant the Lamfalussy procedure was introduced for the area of investment regulation , it seems rather premature for us to be discussing the ' birth of the Lamfalussy triplets ' , by which I mean the extension of the Lamfalussy procedure to the three new areas of banking , insurance and financial conglomerates , let alone support it .
The issue here is not only , as I see it , that we do not yet have any experience whatsoever in this area .
You know as well as I do that the first Lamfalussy directive , on market abuse , is still a long way from being transposed and that the second one is still waiting for a common position .
No , the issue here is that the Commission has very clearly conceded that we still have no idea what urgent legislative proposals we may have to deal with .
That is why it is so important for us to obtain an assurance from the Commission and from the Council that the eleventh commandment , transparency , will continue to be respected in the event of any extension of the Lamfalussy procedure .
I think - and I am saying this expressly on behalf of this House - that we have scored some successes here .
Transparency is certainly a core issue for a properly functioning democracy .
We are not , however , just dealing here with the institutionalisation of further transparency mechanisms .
No , we are also dealing with how we can make further progress with legislation .
I believe that we have still not achieved institutional balance in the legislative procedure , and that we need to amend Article 202 .
Mr Bolkestein has on several occasions pointed out to us that Parliament always has the option of blocking a further directive through the codecision procedure .
But it is not a question of us blocking anything .
This is all about constructive mutual cooperation .
That is why , Mr President-in-Office , I am expecting the Finance Council , and also the European Council in Copenhagen , to agree upon a political declaration on the need for a treaty amendment in relation to secondary legislation , in relation to Parliament 's will as regards enablement , and also in relation to the right of call back , and that they will work to achieve this , not forgetting all the legal implications which are bound to flow from this .
There must be parity between the Council and Parliament as parties to the codecision process .
This is a core issue for the future of this parliamentary democracy , which at the end of the day we all wish to achieve through the convention and through the 2004 Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , my group is broadly supportive of Mrs van den Burg 's efforts on her report .
Therefore , if she will excuse me , I shall concentrate on the Lamfalussy procedure extension .
This group is in favour of extending the Lamfalussy procedure to banking and insurance .
You have only to see the detail of the decisions being taken in Basle on banks ' capital adequacy to realise that it would be a nonsense to incorporate them into primary legislation .
Our American counterparts have already allowed the introduction of all the Basle decisions by secondary legislation and to delay unnecessarily would put European banks at a competitive disadvantage .
However , the Council of Ministers sometimes seems to have forgotten two important things .
First , that Parliament is fully committed to the democratic oversight of committees that establish implementing legislation .
Secondly , that the deal on applying Lamfalussy committees to the securities market was a strictly temporary measure , which is why there are four-year ' sunset clauses ' agreed by the Council in both the prospectus and the market abuse directives .
Temporary means temporary .
If our democratic role in monitoring is to be effective , Article 202 of the Treaty must reflect codecision over implementing committees , otherwise there will be always be a bias in this House against the delegation of powers that are necessary to deal with some extremely technical matters .
For the sake of good governance and democratic oversight , the Member States should commit themselves - whether in a Council declaration or elsewhere - to a revision of Article 202 , which not only introduces equivalent powers for Parliament and for the Council but also ensures there is proper oversight by this House and by the Council .
Then we can proceed to extend Lamfalussy , again on a temporary basis .
This week the plenary session is largely dominated by European Union enlargement .
The debate about enlargement and its consequences for existing and new legislation makes us aware of the differences that exist , alongside many similarities , between the Member States and the candidate countries .
There is a major difference in the area of the social market economy and the independent supervision of its performance .
A social market economy in good working order is one of the conditions for accession of the candidate countries to the European Union .
There is no precise description of what a social market economy in good working order is .
What is apparent though is that our own market economy is not yet performing to optimum effect .
A report has after all been written under the direction of Mr Lamfalussy with recommendations for the improvement of the financial markets .
A prime objective of the Lamfalussy procedure is improvement of the control and the supervision of the financial markets .
I do however have serious concerns about the developments regarding independent supervision in the accession countries .
The creation of frameworks within which the financial markets can operate is in my view a task for government .
Given the development of the markets to a global size and a worldwide sphere of activity , it is very important that supervision and enforcement are organised effectively .
In this way the citizen can be protected and undesirable excesses can be controlled .
It is clear that the developments in the financial markets will have an impact on the countries that will be acceding to the European Union over the next few years .
I should therefore like to ask Commissioner Bolkestein how he thinks independent supervision in the accession countries can be adequately achieved .
Do you expect the candidate countries in the short term to be able to meet the guidelines that cover the area of the financial markets at the same level as the present Member States ?
I apologise in advance for not being able to wait for the answer , but I shall read it carefully afterwards .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to express my appreciation of the work Mrs van den Burg has done on a subject - prudential supervision - that is as vast and complex as its boundaries are ill-defined , especially in relation to an emerging , if only imaginary for the time being , European supervision .
Of course , the cases mentioned most often in the report - Enron and WorldCom , and Vivendi and others in other respects - force us to reflect on the effectiveness of the systems that protect the interests of savers and , in more general terms , market operators , not least in order to satisfy the interest of European consumers , users and investors .
I think it timely that the report points out that there is no evidence that Europe is immune to such dramatic crises .
It is good there has been an Enron scandal , not so much because of the new laws that have resulted and will result from it , but because the scandal has made investors and pension funds more aware of the need for supervision .
Before we condemn the American system , we must first remember that the overall fall on the Dow Jones index this year has been 16 % , while in the euro area the stock exchange indexes have recorded a fall of 34 % . Savers have seen a far greater value knocked off their savings in Europe , therefore , than has happened in this annus horribilis for the United States - and in Germany there has been a fall of up to 40 % .
Just as much prudence is needed , I believe ( and the report gives a very well-balanced definition in this regard ) when citing new rules as a panacea for the ills or difficulties that the markets may encounter , especially if public control is mentioned .
I shall conclude by mentioning a more specific point concerning the integration of the financial markets .
I think keeping prudential and credit supervision at a national level , that is in the central banks , is more and more questionable , especially when - as is the case in Italy - the same institution , the central bank , not only deals with prudential supervision but also takes on antitrust functions in the credit market , thus creating a conflict of interests that does not encourage market efficiency .
Mr President , I support the extension of the Lamfalussy procedure in principle and I hope the interinstitutional difficulties can be resolved as soon as possible , so we can move forward and modernise decision-making structures in relation to banking , insurance and financial conglomerates .
All the institutions need to work together to make this possible and I hope in particular that the Council will be able to make a declaration signalling its willingness to review Article 202 in 2004 .
We welcome significant parts of the van den Burg report : its focus on improved enforcement , its call for supervisors to be given some discretion and to be allowed to exercise judgement rather than inflexibly and unthinkingly enforcing rules and ticking boxes .
We also support the call for a regulatory cost-impact assessment by the Commission and by Parliament for its amendments .
We agree that there is a need for more cooperation between national supervisors and enhanced links and dialogue with the US .
On the issue of a single pan-European supervisor , we have some divergence of views within our group .
We are united in our view that it would be wrong to set up a pan-European supervisor now or in the medium term .
Some of us in the British Conservatives would rule it out in principle , others within the PPE-DE Group would like to keep the option open as a very long-term possibility .
I oppose a pan-European supervisor because it would have too much power .
The concentration of power in , for example , the UK 's Financial Services Authority , is very daunting in itself .
A European equivalent would be a bureaucratic behemoth , unable to keep up with the dynamism and innovation of financial markets .
A pan-European regulator would not have the expertise to deal with transactions and markets as diverse as , for example , the London derivatives market and the many thousands of small German savings and public banks .
An effective regulator must be close to and must understand the markets it regulates .
A single enforcer for financial services in the EU would have an impossible job , given the divergence of rules and legal systems across the EU .
Financial regulators play a key role in prosecution and criminal justice , and these are matters which should remain within the remit of the Member States .
There is so much other work to be done to create a single market in financial services and to really deliver those benefits that the Commission report talked about only a few days ago .
EU decision-makers should accept that a centralised solution is not always the best solution .
Mr President , Commissioner , there is support for an integrated financial market in Europe , and to this end we must draft appropriate rules speedily and in line with the interests of the market and implement them in Parliament .
This was why the Committee of Wise Men created the Lamfalussy procedure .
The goal is to achieve faster and better legislation .
That was the original intention , and that was why Mr Lamfalussy launched this project , which was then supplemented by the von Wogau report .
In general terms , we endorse it .
However , we must measure the process as a whole in terms of whether the objectives are being achieved .
Fast and better legislation is the goal , as has already been stated .
It is not primarily due to Parliament that the legislation did not go through as speedily as had been hoped , and the Council must certainly examine its own role in this context as well .
Before we deal with the issue of implementing the extended CESR-Lamfalussy procedure in other sectors , such as banking , insurance and conglomerates , we must ask one critical question first : how is CESR working today ?
Is CESR effective in the areas in which it operates ?
A great many questions and outright criticism can still be heard from various sectors of the market .
I think that the first issue we should raise here is that of transparency , and of whether it is sensible for CESR to begin its work already , in parallel with draft directives .
The question is whether we are willing to accept this in this form .
I am in two minds here : on the one hand , I am fundamentally opposed to CESR working in parallel to a draft directive .
We have this situation at the moment with the Prospectus Directive .
Here , CESR should wait and see what Parliament and the Council decide before it embarks on its work .
On the other hand , I am actually quite grateful for the fact that CESR does work in parallel , because this means that we find out in time what is going on in CESR 's minds and can put the brakes on during the legislative process if necessary .
In this context , the issue of technical details undoubtedly arises as well .
I almost have the impression that technical detail is regarded as almost anything which , from the Commission 's perspective , an average MEP is unlikely to understand - which would cover quite a lot .
However , with regard to the technical details , we should not overlook the fact - and Basle II has already been mentioned - that there is of course political potential here too : there is conflict potential which will only become apparent over the course of time .
For this reason , it is not enough merely to review Article 202 ; it must be amended .
I would have liked to hear braver words from the Presidency today .
These brave words must be heard in Copenhagen , at the latest . We need clear words that send out a clear signal that the Council and Parliament stand side by side on an equal basis .
There are constant calls to Parliament to the effect that the interests of the market demand fast legislation .
There is general agreement with this position , but I urge the Council to take Parliament 's arguments seriously .
There will be discussions and serious debates , and we do not want any buck-passing on this issue .
This is why Copenhagen will be a good opportunity to send out a clear signal on Article 202 .
The same applies - and I endorse Commissioner Bolkestein 's comments on this point - to the future role of the Commission .
The Commission must retain its central role , for it is the Commission which implements and monitors the interests of Europe as a whole .
Finally , let me say a few words about integrated financial supervision in Europe .
We must ensure that regional aspects are taken into account .
For this reason , I broadly endorse my colleague Mrs Villiers ' comments that we do not need an integrated financial regulator at present .
We must , of course , also give some thought as to how large European companies will operate in this area in future .
Here , I see positive models in the Financial Conglomerates Directive , which sets out a course which we can follow .
Mr President , to outside observers , this afternoon 's two issues could seem too esoteric and technical , but , as various speakers have pointed out , these are issues which are affecting the lives of the citizens and , at the moment , as a result of the great international scandals , they are affecting consumers .
The Enron case in the United States has been mentioned , but , in my country , Spain , for example , we have a great financial scandal going on , the Gescartera case , which has led to the resignation of several top government figures and which could threaten others - the Spanish Parliament is investigating the situation at the moment .
When we talk about financial services , we are talking about something which affects the lives of ordinary citizens .
It affects their pensions and the future of their savings .
We are currently trying to create pan-European financial services , which transcend the borders of Europe .
We are concerned to guarantee our companies the greatest possible freedom and the greatest possible opportunity to act within Europe , but , unless we establish a pan-European system of monitoring , so that the operation of these companies is controlled , we run the risk of the kind of frauds and scandals currently taking place on an exclusively national level taking place throughout the European Union .
I believe that a system of liberalising financial services throughout the Community is inconceivable unless it is accompanied by a system of monitoring financial activities throughout the Community .
We all agree that this issue requires democracy .
Democracy means ' people 's government ' , and this is only possible by means of parliamentary representation - in Greece direct democracy was possible because all the citizens met in a public square .
The attempt to replace democracy with a system of public consultation , without recourse to the ballot box , by means of computers or public consultations for example - as Commissioner Bolkestein said - is deceitful .
The only consultation there is room for today is a public consultation by means of the ballot box and by means of legally elected representatives .
At the moment , for example , there is talk of a procedure according to which the Commission 's proposals could be blocked by a simple consultation with business sectors .
I believe that nothing could be less democratic than to name the interlocutors who would represent that democracy .
We therefore move on to the final point : the proposals of Mrs Randzio-Plath .
Co-decision is not something arbitrary , it is a procedure that has meant the participation of Parliament and is the result of a political process .
It is true that there is an execution phase and a delegation phase , and that it could be argued that , since the execution falls to the Governments of the Member States , Parliament should get involved in this phase , which is outside the actual activity of control .
But , in the legislative field , if we speak for example of delegated rules , I cannot see that it is possible to follow the Lamfalussy procedure unless we establish clear participation by Parliament , by means of the so-called call-back measures .
In other words , Parliament , as the legally elected representative of the people , has the right and the obligation to participate in the monitoring of legislative development .
As Mrs Randzio-Plath has pointed out , we have just adopted the Lamfalussy procedure , we do not yet have any experience of how it is working and we want to continue to restrict the possible participation of Parliament without verifying whether this procedure is working effectively .
Let us see how it is working first , let us see that democratic guarantees are really maintained and , if they are , you may rest assured , Commissioner and Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that this Parliament will be prepared to participate to the full .
But democracy cannot consist of participation - for example - by companies , in arbitrary fora , in consultations of a particular nature .
No committee can replace the will of the people and that will is only expressed by means of elections , Parliaments and parliamentary representation .
This Parliament 's operating system can be improved , the parliamentary structures can be changed in the new constitution , but anything other than the adoption of legislation by means of an instrument elected by the people , with a normal electoral procedure , would be deceitful and would be a way to put decisions into the hands , perhaps , of the very people who would then act as predators to the detriment of the consumers .
I believe that we must strengthen our monitoring procedure , strengthen our mechanisms and make them as flexible as possible , and this should be done by means of parliamentary participation throughout the legislative process , from top to bottom .
Mr President , like many of my colleagues I am pleased to note that the recommendations in the report by Baron Lamfalussy have been implemented .
There is certainly a need to extend them to other financial sectors and to include appropriate provisions in the Treaty for this .
But before taking this step , a proper assessment must be made of these measures in the light of experience .
The issue of secondary legislation was also noted in the Convention Working Group on Economic Governance , of which I was a member .
The Hänsch working group and later the plenary Convention meeting noted that this raises horizontal questions in the area of comitology , such as the role of the European Parliament , which go beyond the terms of reference of the Hänsch working group and should therefore be addressed by other groups .
We are expecting the Convention to look at the issue in the near future .
In the Hänsch working group , MEPs like Mrs Berès and I tried to secure an agreement from the working group that the Treaty should be amended in order to give Parliament a formal call-back right within the framework of this procedure .
I challenge Mr Bolkestein 's view that it is impossible for the Council to give us a political commitment .
If there is enough political will in the Council , anything is possible .
It is nonsense to say that Treaty changes can only be made in the IGC .
That is legal mumbo jumbo .
If there is a real political will in the Council , it can be done .
I still feel that Mr Petersen could be more precise in his words .
The Lamfalussy procedure should also be taken into account in the national development of the financial services sector .
We also need more transatlantic dialogue in the financial services sector at a legislative level .
That is very important .
I would , in addition , like to emphasise the role of consultation .
Consultation processes , as Mr Herzog said , must be formalised and as transparent as possible .
I endorse our rapporteur 's point about the enabling clause .
If it were to be decided that we need a supranational financial supervision authority , that possibility needs to be provided for in the Treaty after the Convention at the next IGC .
Mr President , I would like first of all to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs van den Burg , for the excellent work she has done in preparing this report on the future of financial regulation in Europe , which is such a complicated and controversial subject .
I would like to emphasise that after the global economic downturn which started through the collapse of the new technology market , what was stunningly shown in the United States was the danger of laisser faire regulation in a booming market .
Would the financial accounting scandals have occurred had regulation been as intensive as it is now ?
I wager it would not .
Of course this question can be countered by asking whether it would have been possible to introduce such strict regulations in a booming market .
A booming market has been known to act as a great catalyst to taking liberties with the law and even with honesty .
It is perhaps one advantage of the market slump that we have at the moment that we can use this opportunity to introduce the kind of regulation that will stand us in good stead when euphoria takes over in the financial markets again , as it inevitably will .
One can ask whether the down-turn would have been as steep had we not had wave after wave of revelations about the lack of internal controls and external oversight .
Again , one would say no , but now is the time to strengthen the rules for when the good times return , in a reversal of the fat cows , lean cows story .
I am not arguing in favour of heavy-handed regulation nor for regulation that goes against the spirit of the internal market or the financial services action plan .
I am quite sure that the vast majority of Parliamentarians are in favour of creating a single market in financial services in Europe , as we have shown over the past couple of years in the various positions adopted on financial services action plan legislation .
I do not share some of my colleagues ' compunctions about a European regulator .
I do not see that the Securities and Exchange Commission has done any harm in the United States .
There is much evidence , including the Gyllenhammar report , supporting the benefits of a unified financial market and showing that the integration of the financial services market in Europe would bring substantial economic benefits .
That is only to be expected .
Anything that would prop up the investment process in our economy is bound to bring financial benefits because we are so weak in this area .
According to the report , gains could be in the region of at least half a percentage point per annum in additional economic growth .
One could also call upon the evidence of the results of the new survey published only last week by the Commission , which suggested that total European employment could increase by half a percentage point over the next decade as a result of financial markets integration .
One must accept that increased integration increases the responsibilities of the European institutions to actually discover the best form of regulation , to consult as thoroughly as possible , to implement and interpret legislation as consistently as possible and , when problems arise , to be flexible .
So far , I fear that under the new Lamfalussy procedures there is not sufficient evidence that the Commission has been operating according to these consultation principles .
Lack of initial consultation over the draft market abuse directive and last minute changes to the draft of the investment services directive are not good signs .
I would argue , therefore , that we must be very cautious in extending the Lamfalussy procedures to other financial services fields .
We must have time and the proper analysis of how the process has been functioning .
The institutional monitoring group on the Lamfalussy procedure has not yet produced their first report .
Under these circumstances I am against any hurried extension of the Lamfalussy procedure .
Mr President , I must say that the interesting views and observations that I have just heard have convinced me that the European Parliament and the Council have a common interest in resolving the issue of expansion of the Lamfalussy procedure .
As far as I can see , we agree on the essence of the problem that we are attempting to solve .
We agree that there is a need for financial stability , for effective harmonisation of the legislation in this area and for effective cooperation and convergence between the financial supervisory authorities .
I see too that note has been taken of the Commission 's report on the growth opportunities in the financial sphere through the introduction of the new structures , the inference being that we can contribute to growth and employment .
The Council and Parliament have a common responsibility in respect of the major problems that we see in the Member States in these areas .
I also have a couple of individual comments , particularly to Mr Herzog , who says that I said , or let it be understood , that I was in favour of unitary supervision .
On this point , I must not have expressed myself clearly , because unitary supervision is precisely what I am not advocating .
We are advocating national supervision , that is to say a national solution , and then we must cooperate within the EU .
It is not a case of unitary supervision .
To Mrs van den Burg , I can say that I understand her views regarding the content .
Regarding the comment that the Council should look more to a market structure , I can say that we would like to get out of the dilemma that has characterised previous attempts to solve problems whilst discussing market structures , for we wish to signal that we respect Parliament and the role of Parliament .
We particularly mention this in order to put a stop to the eternal power struggle between Parliament and the Council .
We each have our own responsibilities to deal with , whether we are elected to the European Parliament or elected in national parliaments and are members of a government .
I can well understand Parliament 's various wishes . I would wish the same , were I a Member of the European Parliament .
I consider them entirely legitimate .
The problem is simply that if , like Mrs Kauppi , one says that the Ecofin Council can simply decide to amend the Treaty , that is not in fact the case .
Moreover , it would be a poor principle if the Ecofin Council had those powers .
Consequently , it is necessary for me to refer to the fact that it is for the Convention , and subsequently the Intergovernmental Conference , to amend the Treaty .
What I am able to offer is the fact that we are taking these matters seriously and that we in the Ecofin Council are doing what we can but will also tell our Heads of State very clearly which attitudes prevail in the European Parliament , because the Ecofin Council does not have a vote in the Convention , but our Heads of State do , the countries do , and we should exploit this opportunity .
This leads me on to say to Mr Blokland that the European Parliament is able to exercise influence , our wish in this connection being for the directives to be equipped with the same sunset clause as we are familiar with from the securities market .
That means , moreover , that there must be a review in 2004 and that , if there is not then agreement on the Convention 's conclusions or on the governments ' conclusions at the Intergovernmental Conference , then these directives will lapse .
Parliament is able to exercise that influence .
I would simply call upon you to take account in your statement of what the Ecofin Council is able to do and deliver and refer to the responsibility that we have to get the capital markets to work effectively so that we each make a contribution to growth and employment in Europe .
I would like to express my thanks for the debate . Thank you very much for your views , which I shall pass on .
Mr President , I gather from the various interventions made this afternoon on this subject that there is general acceptance of the extension of the Lamfalussy procedure into new areas such as banking , insurance companies and conglomerates .
There are differences of opinion about how precisely that ought to be done , but the general principle seems to be accepted , which is a good thing .
Many Members of this House have mentioned the matter of Article 202 .
This is only natural , and in my first speech this afternoon I indicated that the Commission agrees with Parliament on this point and that the Commission has been quite clear .
Having made these two points , perhaps I may go into further detail as to what the Members of Parliament have said .
Firstly Mrs van den Burg said that she wants a practical approach - which is always a good thing - and I would certainly agree with her on that .
She wants more cooperation and more supervision , but as part of a steady process and not all at once .
Again I agree with her .
She supported the Commission , saying that it ought to be strong , and I would not disagree with that statement .
Indeed , a strong Commission is necessary in order to preserve the institutional balance .
She then mentioned the intriguing subject of the enabling clause , and whether there should not be an enabling clause in the Convention or IGC .
From the debate this afternoon I notice that there is a difference of opinion on that subject .
Mrs Villiers is very much against .
Mrs Kauppi is very much in favour and Mr Radwan , like Mrs Villiers , is also against , so the score is two against two - at least in this debate .
We should follow Mrs van den Burg 's careful approach because the present Treaty already contains points which may be used by the ECB to do a lot of important work in this area .
These concern the interface between macroeconomic developments and microeconomic solutions and you will find the text in Article 105 ( 6 ) of the EU Treaty .
There is no obstacle , at least on the part of the ECB , to it doing this work .
The whole subject will have to be thoroughly considered in the years to come and the Lamfalussy procedure is essential for that particular point .
In parallel to that discussion , the supervisors must cooperate more actively than at present .
As for myself , I remain somewhat sceptical about that enabling clause .
It does not commit you to anything .
However , let us wait and see how these things develop .
I am very much aware of the various sensibilities of supervisors in this area , so let us remember the good old British saying : that fools rush in where angels fear to tread .
I then come to Mr Karas , who unfortunately has had to leave .
He calls the Lamfalussy procedure the Lamfalussy-von Wogau process .
I shall allow him to attach the name of a member of his party to this process , although I would rather call it the Lamfalussy-Randzio-Plath process .
However , that is a detail and I do not wish to be controversial .
He said that it is a temporary solution .
Mr Huhne also mentioned this , referring to the ' sunset clause ' and so on .
I agree .
It will come under discussion again in the 2004 IGC .
However , let us use the time between now and then to clarify our thoughts and to agree as far as possible on the best way forward .
Mrs Randzio-Plath said that it is too early .
That is an argument that she has used before .
Let me repeat what I said earlier .
It seems to me that we should start relatively soon to prepare for the decisions ahead .
New committees and new structures will need to be set up .
New legal acts will be required and all that takes time .
As I have already said , it will also shape the type of directives which we aim to bring forward .
We must also take into account the need to advance so that we have efficient decision-making structures before enlargement .
Mrs Randzio-Plath repeated the same arguments that other Members of Parliament have used , i.e. there must be equality between the Council and Parliament and the change to Article 202 .
I agree with her .
Mr Huhne also expressed his support for the extension of the Lamfalussy procedure .
He mentioned its temporary nature and pointed to the ' sunset clause ' .
He thought Parliament should have the possibility of calling back implementing measures .
That hangs together with the equality between the Council and Parliament , and I cannot but agree with him .
Mr Blokland asked me how I could be certain that there would the same independence of supervisors in the candidate countries as we have ourselves .
He is right to say that independent supervision in all candidate countries is of great importance .
Furthermore , we have been examining the systems and the organisations of the candidate countries with the supervisors of all Member States over the past four years with precisely that aim in mind .
May I also say that quite considerable progress has been made by the candidate countries .
We must realise they have come a long way and made quite considerable progress , even though not everything is as it should be in certain areas .
Therefore we must monitor the developments in the candidate countries because there is an essential need for an independent regulatory and supervisory agency there .
We have organised a programme of cooperation so that we can help candidate countries improve the quality of their supervision .
Mrs Villiers devoted much of her time to opposing the decision to steer the developments in the direction of having a single European supervisor .
I have already spoken about that issue and , as far as the Commission is concerned , it will defer to Parliament and it can take a decision .
The Commission itself would leave this matter somewhat in abeyance .
Mr Radwan spoke about CESAR and asked how CESAR was working .
To this I would like to say that CESAR is a new organisation which needs time to develop itself and to find a proper way of acting .
As far as I know CESAR has already accomplished remarkable things in the short time it has been in existence .
I have indeed heard some criticism and complaints about CESAR - I stress the word ' some ' - which I have drawn attention to .
The complaints basically refer to its lack of transparency and consultation .
I have made those points and I remain convinced that CESAR will become a very useful committee which we can all make use of .
This is also why we have the interinstitutional monitoring group .
Mrs Randzio-Plath , myself and others have decided to establish this interinstitutional monitoring group so that complaints , such as those mentioned by Mr Radwan , can be dealt with in a proper manner .
Mr Medina Ortega has made reference to certain scandals in the country which he knows best .
He has said that only democratically elected representatives should have the possibility of calling back implementing measures .
This is the same argument which has been made by others and , as I have said , I can only agree with him .
Then I would like to congratulate Mrs Kauppi on her use of language - the expression ' mumbo jumbo ' is not often used in Parliament but it is very colourful and it explains precisely what she means .
That is always a good thing , after all , what would we do if there were no clarity in what we said ?
She wants the call-back rights for Parliament which we discussed earlier .
She also says that there must be a political will in Council .
Let us not be distracted by ' mumbo jumbo ' is what she has said .
I must refer Mrs Kauppi to the President of Council , Minister Pedersen , present here tonight .
She also says there should be a more active transatlantic dialogue and I can assure her that dialogue exists and is active .
In particular , the Director General for Competition , Mr Alex Schaub , has just come back from Washington today where he has these discussions on Capitol Hill in Congress about the so-called Sarbanes-Oxley Act which indeed presents a lot of problems to European auditing companies and other companies quoted on US stock exchanges .
I myself will be visiting Washington in a few weeks ' time and I intend to discuss these matters with the chairman or acting chairman of the securities exchange commission .
This would be a continuation of the discussion we had with Mr Harvey Pitt in Brussels about a month ago .
That discussion was very fruitful .
Unfortunately , as we all know , he has now resigned and we shall have to pick up the thread where we left it when he visited Brussels .
However , I can assure Mrs Kauppi that this dialogue is essential because we want to achieve this great big transatlantic integrated market for financial services .
We cannot do without it , but those relations should be on the basis of reciprocity and mutual recognition .
I can assure all Members of Parliament that it is a top priority in my view to join with the United States in a programme of convergence .
That is what I would like to say to Members of Parliament who have spoken tonight .
Lastly , Mr Katiforis has enjoined the Commission to be cautious .
I am certainly cautious in all I do .
So I would like to reassure Mr Katiforis in this regard .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Bolkestein .
I have received one motion for a resolution , pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The next item is the report ( A5-0373 / 2002 ) by Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on additives for use in animal nutrition ( COM ( 2002 ) 153 - C5-0143 / 2002 - 2002 / 0073 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I would like to thank the Commission for this generally very positive proposal on additives for use in animal nutrition , which I welcome in principle .
I would also like to thank the Danish Presidency and my colleagues on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
This proposal aims to consolidate existing rules on additives in feedingstuffs and clarifies certain procedural aspects related to dossier evaluation and the types of authorisation granted to feed additives , thus making them more transparent for producers and consumers alike .
An aspect of fundamental political significance in this proposal is the ban from 2006 on the four antibiotic growth promoters that are still authorised .
This is not an arbitrary ban , but is based on reports by the Scientific Food Committee , and is consistent with the demands repeatedly voiced publicly by medical experts .
As cross-resistance to drugs used in human medicine can also no longer be ruled out , there is a need for action in order to protect consumers .
In this regard , pressure must be brought to bear by granting temporary authorisation only so that other methods , such as appropriate vaccines , are developed .
In principle , I am in favour of the Commission 's proposal .
I too think it is inappropriate , on the antibiotic issue , to give what amounts to a blank cheque for unrestricted use of coccidiostats in the future .
It is not plausible to ban antibiotics on health policy grounds if these health policy arguments then do not apply to the use of coccidiostats .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , as the committee responsible , wants coccidiostats and histomonostats to continue to be authorised for use until 2008 .
The Commission should then submit a report , before 1 January 2008 , on the use of these substances , together with a proposal on further use .
Where , then , are the points of difference ?
First of all , Amendment No 2 regulates imports from third countries of additives for use in animal nutrition , and states that the rules governing imports must at least be as strict , in terms of application and monitoring , as those which the same Member States apply in order to safeguard human and animal health .
In Amendments Nos 4 , 7 and 9 , I speak out very clearly in favour of guidelines for the authorisation of feed additives .
I call on the Commission , in cooperation with the European Food Safety Authority , to establish and submit guidelines for the authorisation of feed additives .
In its vote , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development clearly endorsed the adoption of guidelines in the interests of simplifying the authorisation of additives .
Once an additive has been authorised , it is surely sufficient for the relevant dossier to be regularly updated , rather than being subject to a full review every time .
Parliament is calling for mixtures and premixtures containing flavouring and appetite stimulants to be exempt from the labelling requirement .
It is stated explicitly that this will not apply to flavouring and appetite stimulants subject to a quantitative limitation when used in feed and drinking water .
There are of course now calls in this House for the use of coccidiostats to be permitted only when prescribed by veterinary surgeons .
I myself take the view - and I speak from experience - that we must have preventive healthcare for animals as well .
Some form of animal protection is required , and it is obvious that an animal which is already sick needs to be treated with far higher doses , so my own practical experience makes it difficult for me to understand the reasoning behind these calls .
As regards the ban from 2006 on the four antibiotic growth promoters , I would like to say to Commissioner Byrne that my Amendment No 31 offers a sensible compromise here .
Finally , I would like to reiterate my sincere thanks to everyone who worked so hard on this issue .
Mr President , I am pleased and impressed that the European Parliament has prepared its report on the Commission 's proposal on additives for use in animal nutrition so swiftly .
This underlines the importance that Parliament attaches to the sensitive issue of animal nutrition in relation to human and animal health .
I would like in particular to thank and congratulate Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert for her hard work on this report .
This issue is also a high priority for the Danish Presidency of the Council .
I hope , therefore , that we can make rapid progress to show the outside world how important the EU considers human and animal health issues to be .
This proposal represents a major streamlining of the current rules on safety evaluation and marketing authorisations for feed additives .
This overhaul is both timely and welcome .
The current legislation has been revised over one hundred times .
The new rules will be much simpler and clearer .
We will have a clear and transparent authorisation procedure .
The European Food Safety Authority will be the first port of call and will be in charge of evaluating all feed additives .
In future , the validity of authorisations will be limited to ten years . The new system also includes an in-built review and re-evaluation process so as to allow new scientific information to be taken into account .
Companies will be required to demonstrate the positive effect on the animal and the absence of any risk to human or animal health or the environment when applying for authorisation or re-authorisation of a feed additive .
Wherever required for the sake of public health , the European Food Safety Authority will propose to the Commission maximum residue limits to be laid down in legislation .
At present , only four antibiotics are authorised for use in animal feed as growth promoters . The EU has already phased out the use in feedingstuffs of all antibiotics that are used in both human and veterinary medicine , in order to avoid cross-resistance .
The four antibiotics in question are not used for any human antibiotic drugs .
The Commission announced its intention to phase out these remaining antibiotics in feedingstuffs in the White Paper on Food Safety .
This reflected scientific advice that the use of antibiotics as growth promoters is undesirable for human and animal health , owing to concerns about increased resistance of diseases to treatment with antibiotics .
The Scientific Steering Committee has also recommended the progressive replacement of the remaining four antibiotics by non-antimicrobial alternative products .
The Commission proposes to withdraw the authorisations for these four antibiotics on 1 January 2006 .
With regard to coccidiostats - substances used to prevent coccidia infections - the proposal contains stricter rules for their authorisation and placing on the market .
The reason for this is that hygiene precautions and improved husbandry practices are not sufficient to keep poultry free from such diseases .
However , in order to ensure the safety of these substances , I propose that current authorisations be reviewed within four years of the entry into force of the regulation .
These are some of the major issues that Parliament has considered .
I hope and expect that we will be able to reach constructive solutions .
I will address the various amendments proposed by Parliament at the end of this debate .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert for her very practical report .
We need to be sure of how we are going to deal with these additives , especially in poultry .
You do not find out that a chicken contains coccidiostats until it is dead and by then it is too late .
The welfare problems of actually handling chicken also have to be considered .
We need to be able to sort out this problem and look at it very practically .
We are very concerned in Europe that consumers should be protected , and rightly so , but what is the Commission going to do to protect European consumers from imports of poultry that have probably been fed growth promoters ?
Millions of chickens are imported from China and Thailand .
The problem is that the poultry meat cannot be tested for growth promoters or , if it is , some time may have elapsed and the meat can no longer be tested for it .
It will be impossible to determine whether growth promoters have been fed to the chickens , and so chicken producers in Europe will be at a complete economic disadvantage .
This will not protect consumers in Europe , because the meat will still be imported .
We will find that European consumers are consuming meat from poultry produced in China and Thailand containing substances banned in Europe .
I would like to ask Commissioner Byrne how he is going to stop this problem arising .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the issue of animal nutrition has become something of a regular feature on this House 's agenda .
Over recent years , we have played a very successful part in shaping EU legislation on animal feedingstuffs .
Let me remind you of some examples : the open declaration of feed ingredients , the establishment of a positive list , and the new regulations on the production and use of meal made from meat .
Today , we are embarking on a new round which focusses on feed additives .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists supports much of what the rapporteur has just mentioned , such as the ban on antibiotics , etc .
She has done sterling work , and has been receptive to many of our proposals .
I would like to express my sincere thanks to her for that .
Overall , then , we are pleased with the report which was voted on in committee .
There are two point which should be corrected , however , and which I would like to explain as follows .
Coccidiostats and histomonostats should not be authorised for use as feed additives ; instead , they should be authorised , in the long term , as veterinary medicinal drugs .
We must be consistent here .
If we impose a general ban on antibiotics in animal nutrition , we cannot immediately make an exception for one product category .
This cannot be justified to consumers .
As regards coccidiostats , these must be subject to controlled use as prescribed by a veterinary surgeon who is familiar with the situation in the farm concerned and can respond appropriately .
Otherwise , the general preventive use of these products , which are also antibiotics , could conceal possible hygiene problems on the farms .
I strenuously refute any accusations that I am trying to generate a new source of income for veterinary surgeons .
We have tabled amendments on this issue , and I would ask you to support them .
My second point relates to the duration of authorisation .
We support authorisation for an unlimited period , provided that this does not impact on product safety .
A re-evaluation of the additives should therefore be carried out every ten years , taking account of new scientific information and research data .
This ensures reliability for the applicant , on the one hand , and animal and consumer safety , on the other .
Mr President , Commissioner , I too would like to thank the rapporteur sincerely for a very balanced report .
The major issue in this report is a ban on the use of antibiotics as growth promoters in agricultural production .
I ardently support the ban .
In certain EU countries this has already been done voluntarily .
The long-term use of antibiotics has serious adverse effects when microbes develop into mutations that are disease-resistant .
The rapporteur has drawn up a very balanced report , as I have already said .
There are , however , different views in our group also .
What should our attitude be towards coccidiostats as a remedy against parasites for use with poultry ?
It would be wrong if their use were not regulated at all and they remained a ' grey area ' .
The aim must be to abandon the use of coccidiostats , but that cannot be done at once as they cannot yet be replaced by vaccination .
A certain period of transition is therefore required .
I enthusiastically support the rapporteur 's proposal .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert for her excellent work in this area .
This proposal is one of the measures provided for in the Commission 's White Paper on Food Safety .
I welcome it and largely agree with the assessment and authorisation procedures it proposes .
The current directive has been amended five times since 1970 and has never been consolidated .
It is a complex and very un-user-friendly piece of legislation regulation at the moment .
In the current climate , it is right that we should do what we are proposing now .
We are amending or reviewing this directive in parallel with the veterinary medicines directive and they are related .
However , I would caution against moving too quickly from a food additive definition to a veterinary medicine definition until alternatives have been put in place and we are ready to cope with them .
I , like others , have concerns about proper controls on third-country imports .
There is one way to ensure peace of mind , not only for our farmers and poultry producers but also for consumers , and that is to increase the resources of the Food and Veterinary Office so that it can keep the situation under surveillance .
To go to Taiwan , Hong Kong or South America once every five years is not sufficient and nobody is fooled by this any longer .
This issue has come up under the Temporary Committee on Foot-and-Mouth Disease review .
It is a major issue , along with exotic diseases and imports of diseases and problems .
If we want to ensure that the regulations are there to create a level playing field within the EU , we have to see to it that our inspectors have sufficient resources to be able to meet our expectations .
I would like the Commissioner to address that particular point .
There is much I welcome in this report and I would like to thank the rapporteur and the Commissioner again .
Let us hasten slowly and be sure we have replacements , rather than moving at a pace which will drive people into veterinary medicines , away from their current practices .
Mr President , I should also like to first of all extend my compliments to Mrs Keppelhoff .
I always feel that reports of this kind are safe in her hands .
I can broadly support the Commission 's proposal .
From time to time there has to be a review of all the additives in animal feed .
I think that this is entirely in keeping with the White Paper on Food Safety .
I also agree with the ban on antibiotics in general in the year 2005 .
The ban on their prophylactic use can be supported .
I have rather more problems with coccidiostatics , because , if we were to ban them too , what then is the alternative ?
I am told that if you were to do that , the next treatment of animals with antibiotics would have far more damaging consequences in general than if we were to leave things as they are .
I can consent to this being evaluated as well and that we look at what must happen on the basis of the outcome .
I would like to reiterate what Mr Peres had to say : we are imposing very strict demands on European farmers .
How can we ensure that the same demands are imposed on farmers elsewhere in the world who want to sell to us , in order to prevent unfair competition ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank the Commission for presenting this proposal on additives for use in animal nutrition to us , and I would also like to express my warmest thanks , and those of my colleagues , to our rapporteur for her outstanding report .
In general terms , let me say that the debate about guidelines for a re-evaluation of additives should be viewed positively .
In particular , additives which are authorised for an unlimited period and which the report describes as harmless would no longer be available for use in animal production if a complex and cost-intensive authorisation procedure were introduced .
We have already seen this happen with a wide range of drugs after re-authorisation was required .
Re-evaluation , rather than re-authorisation , may therefore prevent a thinning-out of the product range .
The key issue in all aspects of food safety legislation , however , is the principle of traceability and transparency , as well as risk assessment .
There must also be genuine openness for us as consumers , and also for producers .
If an additive proves to constitute a risk , its use must continue to be ruled out .
Let me stress that I am in favour of a central agency .
In my view , the European Food Safety Authority would be the most suitable body to carry out this evaluation of additives .
I also welcome a simplified authorisation procedure for additives which are already permitted in foods .
Let me touch on one further point , namely imports from third countries .
The same stringent rules must apply to imports of meat and animal products from third countries as those which apply in the European Community .
For us farmers , this is vitally important .
I urge the Commission to submit a report to us on the use of antibiotic growth promoters by the end of 2007 .
Mr President , I certainly have no intention of keeping you here until midnight .
Allow me to explain my position on the major points of this proposal and in particular the differences which in some cases still remain between our institutions .
Concerning the date for the phasing out of antibiotics , I am happy to note that the Commission 's approach has your broad support .
But there are some slight differences concerning the date of withdrawal of authorisations .
The scientific advice on which this risk management measure is taken mentions the need for a transitional period to allow for animal rearing practices to adapt and also for the development of alternative antibiotics .
For these practical reasons , I cannot accept the amendment which envisages the phasing out of antibiotics from 1 January 2005 , despite my recognition of Parliament 's desire to get rid of antibiotics in animal nutrition as soon as possible .
I agree with that sentiment but would add that this should be in accordance with scientific opinion and should take account of possible effects on animal health and welfare .
Concerning the external dimension of the phasing out process , let me clarify my position .
This has been raised by a number of people , including Mr Parish and Mrs Doyle .

The prohibition of antibiotics will also apply to feed imports .
With respect to the imports of food of animal origin , the residues testing system currently in place will be used to check for the use of banned substances .
This testing system protects human health , since it is designed to reveal residues of medicines , additives and substances in food at levels that present an unacceptable risk to the consumer .
It is not sufficient to verify whether forbidden substances were used in the feeding of animals in third countries , as the residues of such substances may not be present at the time of importation .
I welcome any suggestion that may be made to increase the resources of the FVO and particularly welcome that observation from a member of the budgetary authority .
I believe that the control of imported products and the condition of equivalency between EU rules and third country rules on the rearing of animals should be considered under horizontal legislation .
The Commission will propose a regulation on feed and food controls that will impose rules on this issue .
That proposal will take account of your concerns .
The draft legislation we are discussing today aims only - and I stress only - to lay down rules for the authorisation of safe additives .
On the time limit of the authorisations , I repeat what I said in my introductory statement : I cannot accept anything other than time-limited authorisations for all feed additives .
As regards the status of coccidiostats , I am aware that some take the view that coccidiostats should only be authorised as veterinary medicinal drugs and not as feed additives .
I refer to the point made by Mr Kindermann in this regard .
My position is that the rules imposed by this proposal will ensure that coccidiostats are used in a safe manner , respecting human and animal health .
Precipitate action , not allowing enough time for the authorisation of the same kind of substances as veterinary drugs , or the setting of a cut-off date without prior assessment , would have disastrous consequences for animal production , animal health and animal welfare . I am pleased that a number of you agreed with that proposal .
I am willing for a report to be drawn up on this matter , but I cannot agree to a cut-off date for the authorisations .
Concerning the introduction of flexibility in the authorisation procedure , some amendments improve the Commission 's proposal as they take account of the needs of minor species and non-food producing animals .
The setting of specific conditions for data protection when applying for authorisations for minor species is another welcome amendment .
The Commission can accept these amendments .
However , it is necessary to recognise the impossibility of making special rules for all types of additives and for all animal categories .
In conclusion , I would like again to thank the rapporteur and Members of Parliament for broadly supporting the policy initiated by the Commission which protects public health while taking proper account of animal health , animal welfare and agricultural production needs .
Parliament 's Secretariat is being provided with a full list of the Commission 's position on each of the amendments .
I trust that this will be included in the record for this sitting
I invite the rapporteur to speak again briefly .
Mr President , the Commissioner must listen to me for a moment , otherwise there is no point in my speaking !
Then it might be simpler for you to address your comments to him directly , right now !
Commissioner , I have a further question .
I believe that your response to the problem of third-country imports was simply that you are introducing more stringent controls on imports of feedingstuffs .
However , Mrs Doyle and , indeed , Mr Parish were referring to the end product .
After all , throughout Europe , we have ready-made foods from these countries in our freezers .
This is why we are asking to what extent we have to impose controls , reject the products , or even tolerate distortions of competition with the European Community .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0365 / 2002 ) by Mr Nisticò , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending the Directive 2001 / 83 / EC as regards traditional herbal medicinal products ( COM ( 2002 ) 1 - C5-0026 / 2002 - 2002 / 0008 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Nisticò , as well as the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , for the work and effort they have put into this report .
Mr Nisticò is a well-known expert in the field , but it has been quite a challenge for me and my services .
Let me start with the objectives .
What are the main objectives of this proposal ?
There are three .
First and foremost , to guarantee a high level of health protection for European patients .
They will have access to the medicines of their choice , as long as all necessary safeguards are met .
Secondly , to promote the Single Market for herbal medicines .
Laying down harmonised rules and procedures will facilitate the cross-border trade in herbal medicines , which currently is very limited .
Thirdly , to create a clear and favourable environment for the mainly small and medium-sized companies working in this sector .
As far as specific proposals are concerned , I will concentrate on three key issues .
First , the scope of the new simplified procedure .
The use of herbal medicines is a long-standing tradition in Europe .
Back in the Middle Ages they were already well known and widely used .
For new medicines , providing fresh scientific data is indispensable if patients are to be treated with safe medicines .
But if we already know enough about a medicine , new pre-clinical and clinical tests impose an unnecessary burden and unnecessary testing on humans and animals .
To protect the patient 's health , the information on the product 's traditional use must be reliable enough to enable us to conclude that the product is safe .
Such information exists for many traditional herbal medicines .
For that reason , the new procedure should initially be limited to herbal medicines .
Secondly , the minimum period of use .
To ensure that the information is soundly based , we consider that 30 years should enable us to decide whether the product can be considered safe and effective .
The assessment has to be for use in the EU .
I stress this because the effects of a medicine depend on the setting in which the product is used as well as on the product itself .
As a rule , therefore , the product should have been used for 30 years within the EU .
At the same time , we recognise that there are important medicinal traditions outside the EU . For that reason , we propose that up to 15 years of the use can be outside the Community .
Finally , the new Scientific Committee .
Herbal medicines are different from other categories of pharmaceuticals in various respects .
For some years now , an informal working group has been working on herbal medicines at the European Medicines Evaluation Agency .
Our proposal offers an opportunity to establish an explicit legal basis for this working group and to give it a clear mandate for herbal medicinal products .
This will also allow us to rely on specific national expertise to ensure quality , safety and efficacy of herbal medicines on a European level .
At the same time it helps to improve the free circulation of these medicines .
I am looking forward to the debate in the House today and call on the European Parliament to support this initiative .
Mr President , Mr Liikanen , we are delighted that , at last , after so many years , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has adopted the proposal for a Commission directive on traditional herbal medicinal products , which I am pleased to see takes a responsible , scientific approach .
First of all , I must thank the shadow rapporteurs of all the groups , particularly Mrs Roth-Behrendt for her competent amendments , as well as my other colleagues , Mr Bowis , Mrs Doyle , Mr Schnellhardt , Mrs Müller , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and Mr Whitehead , for their constructive help in improving the directive .


Thanks to the directive we are examining , it will , at last , be possible to register traditional medicinal herbs in the individual European Union Member States through a simplified procedure , provided that - as the Commissioner stated - they meet certain effectiveness and safety requirements .
The directive both recognises the full worth of medicinal products of plant origin and , at last , puts some order into a highly confused and controversial field .
For instance , the scope of the directive is specified and the use of traditional herbs in other areas , such as foods , food supplements and cosmetics is excluded .
In addition , for the sake of safeguarding consumer health , certain features of quality and good manufacturing practice are specified that must be complied with by both medicinal herbs produced in European Union Member States and those imported from third countries .
Parliament has decided to recognise that medicinal herbs are still an inexhaustible source of active ingredients for therapeutic use .
Nonetheless , while the therapeutic value of drugs of plant origin must be recognised , it must not be forgotten that improper use can give rise to a whole range of undesirable and seriously toxic side effects , which , I am afraid , may even be lethal .
In this respect , Commissioner , the US Food and Drug Administration has so far recorded about 2 900 cases of toxic effects , including 104 deaths , principally due to the misuse of ephedrine , a drug that releases catecholamines , causes tachyarrhythmias and can lead to heart failure .
The Food and Drug Administration has also stressed the lack of quality control for such herbs that come onto the market from distant countries like China and India : most of them are , I regret to say , adulterated with a number of contaminants .
This is why Parliament and the Commission have attempted to ensure that the directive will be directed mainly at consumer health protection , both by requiring high quality and safety standards and by making it compulsory for labels and information leaflets to provide citizens with simple , clear information on the product 's potential toxicity and possible interactions with other drugs and foodstuffs .
We draw the Commissioner 's attention to the fact that , by traditional medicinal herbs we mean those that have been used for at least 30 years , at least ten years of which within the Community and 20 outside , as suggested by Parliament .
As a specialist in the area - I am a pharmacologist - I believe that ten years ' use in Community Member States added to 20 years ' use outside the Community is sufficient to assess any potential toxic effects .
I am therefore in favour of reducing the 15 years laid down in the initial Commission proposal , but I do not agree with Chris Davies 's amendment , which does not provide for at least ten years ' use in the European Union , not least in that , given the genetic make-up of different populations , without extensive use in the Member States severe toxic effects might still emerge .
Another positive aspect is the creation of a Committee for Herbal Medicinal Products at last .
As you will have noticed , Commissioner , Parliament is concerned that this committee should be independent and given the same powers as the Committee on Proprietary Medicinal Products .
I hope Parliament 's request will be accepted so that the EMEA can , as always , carry out its work calmly and efficiently .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , you are quite right .
We have very considerable experience of the use of traditional herbal medicinal products .
In the European Union , consumers attach ever greater importance to the use of them .
This is why , in my view , it is time to establish a harmonised legal framework for traditional herbal medicinal products .
For far too long , trade in these traditional products within the Community has been hampered by differences in the national provisions .
I think that in its current form , the directive will correct this imbalance , thanks not least to the excellent work carried out by the rapporteur , Mr Nisticò .
Let me touch upon two points which are , in my view , especially important .
Firstly , the establishment of a new committee on herbal medicinal products within the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products : I believe this is a necessary step , and I welcome the fact that the Commission has opted in favour of this approach .
One of the committee 's most important tasks will be to set up a list of herbal substances .
However , I also think that the classification into various groups , as called for by the committee , is especially important .
I very much hope that we can achieve this further classification .
The phytopharmaceuticals with what is termed ' well-established medicinal use ' should be included in the group of rational phytopharmaceuticals .
Let me briefly explain the significance of this distinction : in the case of phytopharmaceuticals with well-established use , monographs containing generally available data can be presented as evidence for an application .
No extract-specific data are required in this type of evidence .
A different situation applies to rational phytopharmaceuticals .
In this case , evidence is provided through the presentation of specific extract-related data which describe the precise effect of the individual extract .
In order to avoid distortions of competition - and I think this is especially important - the manufacturer , who has invested substantial sums in researching the effects of rational phytopharmaceuticals , should be permitted to draw attention to his special efforts as part of the registration process , thus benefiting consumers through the provision of better product information .
Mr President , I welcome this directive and Mr Nisticò 's elegant improvement of its direction .
We have had our arguments - indeed , we have had some today - but not about this .
Herbal remedies are bought and trusted by millions and by many of us here .
Their use goes back over millennia .
This directive allows the basic registration of traditional remedies .
It should be generous in its interpretation of how and where this traditional use established the safety requirements that are necessary .
Equally , the use of these products in combination with others , including drugs , requires scrupulous attention to the possible side-effects where they may occur .
This basic safety requirement is a modest proposal indeed .
Professional herbal practice associations and consumer groups support it across Europe .
All it requires is that we know about quality and content .
The better the product , the more the maker should welcome this directive .
What is in it ?
What will it do for me ?
These are questions asked by consumers , which you would indeed ask of anything you took - even a wine gum .
The fact is that we are here now facing a very simple process and yet there are petitions , paranoid talk of plots and industrial lobbies mimicking consumer concerns .
What do they fear ?
The European Medical Control Agency has estimated that in the UK , for example , out of 207 notified substances , all but 2 or 3 would sail through the process of registration without the expensive proof required for chemicals .
I would ask this industrial lobby , which has embarrassed many herbalists , are your own products so safe and legal ? Or could they too be adulterated , irradiated or substituted ?
How many tests have been conducted on side-effects ?
How many off-the-shelf shops offer expert advice ?
When the Consumers ' Association in Britain tested this out on a random sample of 30 , only 5 were able to offer knowledge in terms of the recommendations they made .
This is an opportunity to blend tradition and the modern rediscovery of ancient skills .
It gives the consumer a wider choice and offers expansion for the quality producer .
Let us welcome it .
Mr President , any medicine can be dangerous .
If we need any reminder of that , we need only look at the thousands who die each year from taking authorised prescription medicines .
By comparison , the risks posed by traditional herbal remedies are minimal .
So let us keep a sense of proportion and make sure we do not throw the baby out with the bath water .
Nobody should object to rules intended to safeguard health and to ensure that the consumer can make informed decisions .
However , excessively restrictive application of regulations may threaten the future of some producers and specialist suppliers such as health food shops , possibly encouraging consumers to buy from unregulated internet suppliers .
I therefore ask the Commission to be careful in its application of these regulations and to take account of these genuine concerns .
In particular , I ask the House that if a herbal medicine has been used anywhere in the world for more than 30 years and there was clear evidence that its normal use is safe , then we should not deny it to the people we represent .
We must not be so arrogant as to imply that Europe has nothing to learn from others .
Mr President , since the beginning of time people have relied on natural vegetable and mineral substances to cure diseases and to relieve pain .
Even in present-day medicine , despite the advent of modern pharmacology , herbal remedies still play an important role .
It is therefore logical for European quality standards to be laid down for herbal remedies just as they are for synthetic medicines and for steps to be taken to ensure that citizens are informed in a comprehensible manner about the effect and possible side-effects of these remedies .
We are therefore satisfied with the proposal to set up a separate committee for herbal remedies within the EMEA and to make the provisions relating to the monitoring of medicines applicable to herbal remedies as well .
For many herbal remedies that have long been in use new tests are unnecessary however .
The associated high costs are difficult to justify , especially if many years ' use has never given rise to any problems .
I consider it right , though , that consumers are given honest information .
Where the effectiveness of a remedy has not been proven , it is useful to mention this in the instructions .
This encourages the consumer to make a well-informed choice of the kind which the European Parliament also wants other legislation to promote .
Finally , Mr President , I want to stress that scope must be allowed for the different needs of different Member States .
For this reason I would like to propose voting for the proposal in order that if a Member State takes a decision about an application for registration of a herbal remedy it recognises the registrations or licences granted by other Member States .
With this provision it will be easier for small businesses in particular to market regional products throughout Europe , so that all European citizens can benefit from regional products that have been proven to have therapeutic value .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , herbal medicinal products have been used throughout the world for many centuries .
In Europe , too , consumers ' interest has extended far beyond the household remedies which are customarily used in individual regions .
Many people swear by these natural products , whether they are Chinese ginseng root or Indian tea tree oil .
In the European Union , however , herbal medicinal products are not yet regulated on a uniform basis .
In some Member States , they have to be authorised , whereas in others , facilitated evidence of efficacy is sufficient .
Mr Nisticò has presented a very good report which creates broadly uniform provisions governing the manufacture , marketing and labelling of herbal medicinal products and sets high quality and safety standards .
In this context , the following points are especially important .
First of all , there is the issue of quality and safety .
The manufacturers of herbal medicinal products must provide evidence of their safety in the same way as is required for chemical medicinal products .
In the simplified authorisation procedure , the efficacy and harmlessness of a product are proven through its long , that is , traditional , use .
We also need a new committee on herbal medicinal products within the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products .
This committee should take over responsibility for the full range of tasks relating to herbal medicinal products .
It will establish herbal monographs relevant for the precise but speedy evaluation of the applications for authorisation .
The proposal before us not only enables us to achieve broadly uniform authorisation criteria in Europe ; it also allows us to facilitate the marketing of herbal medicinal products in all Member States while maintaining subsidiarity .
European consumers can continue to choose from a broad range of products which have been submitted by the manufacturer in accordance with the legal provisions and have been carefully scrutinised and authorised by the authorities .
This guarantees product quality and protects human health to the greatest possible extent .
Mr President , the more we look into the subject of traditional herbal medicines the more I am convinced that there is urgent need for action .
Like millions of other EU citizens , I am a user of herbal medicinal products .
I want a guarantee that when I go into my local health food shop the echinacea or ginseng I buy is of a high quality and standard .
Sadly , in the UK at the moment you cannot guarantee that this will be the case .
In front of me I have four certificates of analysis and four different types of echinacea products .
The first has on its label echinacea root .
However , the others simply are not good enough .
One failed to comply because of excessive amounts of acid insoluble ash in the product .
Another was apparently free of echinacea root altogether , and the last had not been solely manufactured from echinacea root powder as claimed on the label .
This means that the next time I go and buy my echinacea , I have a 25 % chance of actually purchasing what I want .
This lottery has to end .
These inferior products on the market are cheating consumers and bringing herbal medicines into disrepute .
However , we also require a flexible approach , especially on herbal nutrient combinations , traditional herbal medicines from outside the EU and non-herbal traditional medicines .
Herbal nutrient combinations for products are not classified as medicines .
Currently they may normally be legally sold as foods and that position would not change .
Where these combination products are classified as medicines , currently they are not covered by the present UK regime for unlicensed herbal medicines and therefore require a marketing authorisation .
The EU proposal would offer greater flexibility than what is offered at the moment in the UK because the directive would permit the inclusion of nutrients which were non-active .
Traditional medicines from outside the EU , such as Chinese medicines , will be able to satisfy the 50 year requirement .
However , I agree with those in the herbal sector who would like greater flexibility in taking account of evidence from outside the EU .
The key point is that the quality and relevance of evidence of traditional use is more important than geographical origin .
This directive deserves to be considered in the light of all the facts , in the interest of public health , consumer confidence and expanded choice on the market .
Mr President , it seems that a guiding ethos of this establishment is the precautionary principle , which aims to keep risks as low as reasonably practical .
However , British courts suggest that this requires weighing costs against the measures necessary to eliminate the risk .
If we are to believe the rapporteur , the risks from uncontrolled use of herbal medicines are considerable .
But I have looked at just one of his claims : that is that in the US products based on ephedrine have accounted for more than 1 200 cases of toxic effects , including 70 deaths .
However , the dietary supplement industry estimates that as many as two billion doses of this product are consumed each year in the United States .
As to Mr Nisticò 's claims , the US General Accounting Office has examined the FDA data which he uses .
To reach its conclusions the FDA used a combination of scientific evidence on the effects of ephedrine and a set of adverse event reports ( AERs ) .
According to the GAO the FDA relied upon ' poorly-documented AERs and weak information ' .
Furthermore , it did not perform a causal analysis to determine whether ephedrine products caused or contributed to the adverse effects .
It did not document which AERs were serious and did not establish criteria to determine which events were serious .
It did not perform any reliable assessment of its analysis .
These are just brief extracts from an 83-page report .
I have similar reports on other risks that Mr Nisticò cites .
The risks have been seriously overstated on the basis of scandalously poor evidence .
There is hardly a measurable risk from the use of herbal medicines and it is , in any event , far less than that arising from conventional medicines .
Given the minimal risk , the cost of this measure clearly outweighs the benefit .
There is no justification for it .
I declare an interest . I use herbal medicines every day of the year .
Mr President , although modern pharmacology and synthetic medicines enjoy uncontested status , herbal medicines are still important for human health and welfare .
On the other hand , it must not be imagined that natural substances cannot be a great danger to health when they are abused or prepared without care .
Finding just the right sort of balance is a challenge for us , and I am convinced that my colleague Mr Nisticò , to his credit , has done so in his report .
Stringent quality and safety standards should be set for herbal medicinal products and clear labelling and instructions are required .
The instructions must contain information on the potential toxicity of the substances and their interaction with food , drink or other medicinal products .
In addition , for herbal medicines to be authorised for sale on the market the same practices have to apply , where possible , as with synthetic medicines .
This is not meant as an attack on traditional medical remedies : on the contrary , the goal is to ensure there is a safe framework within which the herbal medicine industry can thrive in the Europe-wide market .
Entrepreneurs in the sector will profit as the market grows and reputations are protected , and consumers will gain in terms of safety and price .
The rapporteur raises some problems that have been encountered with irresponsible manufacturers , especially in third countries .
Toxic vegetable substances or poisons such as arsenic and mercury , or other medicinal substances such as hormones , have been found in medicinal products .
When there is such indifference combined with good faith on the part of the consumer , human lives are in danger .
People associate herbal medicines with something natural , good and safe , and they do not imagine that if the dose is wrong or if there is any other form of abuse this can cause serious harm and even death , or that there may be serious problems of quality with the product .
The European Parliament is now promoting a worthy human tradition : herbal remedies .
Mr Nisticò 's report lays down for this safe and clear limits within which the industry can flourish and succeed .
Mr President , allow me to comment briefly on some of the speeches and amendments .
A full listing of the Commission 's position on each of the amendments is provided in writing to Parliament .
Firstly , on the extension of the scope of the simplified procedure . Let me underline that I am grateful for your support to limit , in principle , the new simplified procedure to traditional herbal medicines .
It is crucial that we gain sound experience with this new procedure before we can plan any possible extension .
At the same time , I understand the request from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy to slightly extend the scope of the procedure to those herbal medicines , which contain additional non-herbal ingredients . In principle , the Commission could support such additives as vitamins and minerals .
However , we have to be prudent and exclude certain substances such as biological ingredients , which involve particular risks . For such substances we must insist on getting the standard scientific data .
Many speakers have mentioned the minimum time of use .
As a general rule , 30 years of traditional use in total and 15 years within the Community are the minimum to ensure safety and efficacy of the products .
However , there will be exceptions .
It may be that a product has been used outside the EU for thousands of years , but has been available within the Community for only 10 years or less .
The Committee on the Environment proposed to shorten the minimum usage time within the Community from 15 to 10 years .
The Commission is ready to lay down specific rules for such exceptions .
From a European perspective , however , it is preferable to provide a European solution .
Where a product does not fulfil the general criteria of 30 and 15 years , we could empower the new committee to look into this product and to assess if the available information is sufficient .
This way of establishing flexibility would have the advantage of meeting the double objectives to ensure the protection of public health while at the same time facilitating the free movement of these medicines within the EU .
The Commission 's proposal already gives the new committee considerable powers .
The Committee on the Environment wants to go even further and replace the committee which generally deals with medicines for human use ( CPMP ) with the new ' herbal committee ' .
In principle , the Commission could support part of the proposed extension .
We agree that the ' herbal committee ' should deal with deciding mutually recognised procedures where divergent national decisions on herbal medicines are involved .
Thank you , Commissioner Liikanen .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0356 / 2002 ) by Mrs van den Burg , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on working conditions for temporary workers ( COM ( 2002 ) 149 - C5-0140 / 2002 - 2002 / 0072 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I should like to thank and make a point of congratulating Mrs van den Burg on her excellent report and on her positive input to the Commission proposal on working conditions for temporary agency workers .
We all know that this was not an easy procedure ; there were serious political and technical difficulties and I really must thank her , because I think that , with the work that has been done , Parliament will help push through this important directive .
Since the beginning of the 1980s , temporary agency work has become an important cog in the wheel of the European job market as companies strive for more and more flexible employment management .
Over recent years , this type of work has increased in leaps and bounds .
Truly massive employment agencies have developed in numerous countries , sometimes with hundreds or thousands of workers , and we see this sort of intervention on the job market as a positive development ; it often creates jobs and it is always an extremely important tool for people looking for their first job .
The growth in temporary agency work is firmly on the agenda of social and economic reform which was strengthened at the Barcelona Summit .
In many countries , however , temporary employment is looked down on , mainly when flexibility and quality of work are not pulling in the same direction .
This is the shortcoming on certain job markets which this directive is designed to rectify or prevent in future .
The aim is to create a broad , flexible framework based on fundamental workers ' rights ; these rights must be protected in all cases so that we can protect the quality of work .
The Commission tabled this proposal when talks between the social partners broke down in May 2001 .
I think it is extremely important that the Council and Parliament manage to approve this directive , which sends out a very important political message that the European institutions are prepared to shoulder their responsibilities and take action even where the social partners are unable to agree .
Mr President , I did indeed intend starting with the difficult legacy of this dossier , which goes back to the early nineties when a number of proposals for directives on atypical work were submitted .
You have already referred to the agreements of social partners and also to the failure of their negotiations in this regard .
Considerable effort has been expended on tabling this proposal in the Commission .
It has taken nearly a year .
Indeed , that whole legacy shows that it was extremely difficult to draft the directive and that it was also highly controversial .
People have therefore often asked me what on earth possessed me to think that I would get it through just like that .
Why have I sunk my teeth into this as I have ?
In the first place , because I have 25 years of experience of atypical working relationships of this kind and of providing protection for people in the weakest positions .
Secondly , because I am utterly convinced of the usefulness and the need for flexibilisation of the European labour market and I see temporary work as a worthwhile tool , provided that the protection of temporary workers is also regulated in a sensible way .
Thirdly , because I believe in the opportunities that temporary work offers workers with specific wishes or problems .
People who need a leg-up into the labour market or people who are seeking tailor-made work patterns that are not provided by the ordinary employers in the ordinary work patterns .
Fourthly , because I believe in the entrepreneurship of the temporary sector and the art of combining the wishes of workers and employers with regard to flexibility in a positive way .
However , I would also say , the art of entrepreneurship is also for example not transferring the risk of underutilisation to the workers , but guaranteeing to workers that as an employer you will ensure that they have work and that they can be deployed at the times that they themselves would want .
Fifthly , because I believe in the regulating and salutary effect of collective employment conditions , which have an important part to play in this proposal too .
It is a question not only of collective bargaining agreements in the sectors in which that work is used , but also collective bargaining agreements in the temporary employment industry , the temporary sector itself .
Finally , because I totally disagree with the trend to declare European regulation in the social sphere out of order .
I actually think that it is very important , especially in view of enlargement and the developments that are under way , to lay this basis in European legislation and to ensure that from here we also go further in Europe .
All this I can see in the proposed directive .
It includes flexibility and security , promotion and patronage , acceptance and protection , liberalisation and regulation .
I think that there is a good balance in the Commission 's proposal , but that this balance has been enhanced by what we in this Parliament have done .
I therefore strongly oppose the attempts of some in this Parliament to remove precisely this balance of flexibility and security .
Their assault focuses in particular on three things .
Firstly , they are trying to remove the equal treatment principle by not linking it to the conditions of employment in the user company , but taking other temporary workers as a reference point .
Then you have something like the equal treatment of women by comparing them only with other women and not with men .
Secondly , they are contesting the fact that the directive should have anything at all to do with pay .
We now have the legal opinions of all three institutions that this is very much possible , because it is a question of a comparison and not of fixing the level of pay .
With this attempt , however , they are also trying to take the sting out of it , because pay is of course the most important condition of employment .
Thirdly , they are trying to exclude the exception that was in paragraph 5.4 of the Commission 's proposal , concerning short temporary assignments , and to make it general and even to raise it to 12 months .
That will mean that the directive no longer has any point , because then the majority , if not all , temporary work will fall outside of its scope .
I know that this is also a major problem in the United Kingdom .
I have also tried to make a proposal to make this possible for a transitional period , that is for the first six weeks .
That has not been supported in this Parliament so far , but I hope that further discussion on this subject will prove possible .
There is one final comment I should like to make .
Last week , parliament in Germany agreed on a system that is very much in line with the directive .
I therefore hope - and I would like to conclude on this point - that the Social Affairs Council on 3 December will try to reach a common position , because in any event the way is now open for Germany too to do this in the line of the directive , and because it would be very good and , in fact , be proof that social legislation is indeed still possible if we could have a decision quickly and then proceed under the Greek Presidency .
Mr President , I find myself with the unexpected privilege this evening of speaking second in this debate .
I speak on behalf of Mr Gargani , the chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs , in whose name our opinion stands .
That is due to the chivalry of my colleague , Mr Koukiadis , who is here tonight and who is the original draftsman of the opinion .
He tried in vain to persuade our committee to support the thrust of the Commission proposals .
By a convincing majority the Committee on Legal Affairs voted in a series of sensible modifications that would have blunted some of the harm that this directive , if it is not changed , is going to do to the economy and employment throughout the European Union .
I thank Mr Koukiadis for doing the decent thing and laying down his report .
As the second speaker , I want to pay tribute to Mrs van den Burg .
I have not had the pleasure of working with her before .
She has worked in a very open-handed and friendly way .
As she said , she has taken advice from a lot of people .
Unfortunately , she has not listened to that advice .
I am pleased that a number of other groups have supported the thrust of our amendments and I thank members of my own political family for going along with some of our ideas .
The problem is that , as amended , the proposal from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs does not achieve the sort of flexibility that its advocates , the Commission and the rapporteur , were claiming .
It has become more intrusive - there is more regulation .
My concern about this report is that it fails to accept that high-quality temporary work , delivered by a caring and well-run agency , is not just a second best for employment .
I wish to conclude by thanking the Committee on Employment for accepting one of my amendments which states : ' Member States shall transpose these provisions in a manner consistent with promoting job creation and making temporary agency work more attractive , recognising the different circumstances pertaining to their own territory ' .
If you had achieved that , I would have been delighted to support the directive .
Mr President , in order to combat mass unemployment , more flexible models of work need to be found .
Temporary agency work is making an increasing contribution to this process .
Successful placement on a temporary basis increases the chances of permanent employment .
This applies to the low-skilled and the long-term unemployed , but also to specialists .
In the opinion which I have drafted on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , we refer to the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
We have incorporated the right to paid maternity leave and parental leave into the draft directive .
We are against every form of discrimination , whether it relates to payment for equal work or work of equal value , is based on sex , or discriminates against temporary workers compared with permanent staff .
For us , it was important to ensure that temporary workers should not be used to break strikes or as a means of imposing radical cuts in full-time jobs or permanent staff .
Men still account for more than three-quarters of temporary workers .
It is the difficulty in achieving a balance between work and family life that explains why there are far fewer women in this category .
Yet temporary work in particular allows adaptation to individual needs , and offers women good opportunities to enter the workforce or return to work .
There are problems in practice , however .
In Germany , temporary work agencies , known as Personnel Service Agencies , are now being established in the Employment Offices ; as part of the public sector , they are subsidised from taxation and bear no commercial risks .
This puts the private temporary work agencies at a severe disadvantage .
I can tell the rapporteur , Mrs van den Burg , that the Federal Government is not implementing its supposedly groundbreaking concepts on a one-to-one basis , as it had pledged , but is watering them down .
Temporary agency staff are to be paid as much as the permanent staff in the user company from day one .
Yet equal pay from the start and the exclusive application of collective agreements are an impediment to temporary work .
It was unfortunate that my proposal to introduce a six-month qualifying period at European level failed to secure a majority .
In the Group of the European People 's Party , we are therefore developing a compromise which takes appropriate account of the different rules in the Member States and respects the subsidiarity principle .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after months of intensive work , we can now vote for the first time in plenary on the draft directive on working conditions for temporary workers .
Everyone involved has made great efforts to achieve the best possible solution for temporary workers , temporary work agencies and dynamic economic development in our EU Member States .
Reaching this outcome was a difficult task .
I would like to thank everyone who helped to ensure that we could present a fairly good compromise today .
With around 10 million jobless and a shaky economy in the European Union , we must be sure that our well-meaning intention - to guarantee a basic level of social provision for temporary workers - does not paralyse an entire sector .
It would be quite inappropriate to term ' temporary work ' an atypical or even an unworthy form of working .
Temporary work can help new recruits find a direction for the future , and it can help prevent employees who are particularly difficult to place from leaving the workforce , or assist them to return to work .
My group attaches particular importance to flexibility in this sector .
We must not create new bureaucratic hurdles , and temporary work must continue to be affordable for small companies too .
Otherwise , the days of temporary agency work are numbered , leaving even more millions jobless in the European Union .
If , when we vote tomorrow , we are guided by the principle of subsidiarity and the concept of pro-active economic development as a basis for more jobs , we will create more scope for the EU Member States to pursue their own courses towards flexible labour market development which does not conflict with appropriate protection for workers .
The measures adopted in Germany with regard to temporary work lead to a dead-end .
I hope we can create a more effective framework here .
Mr President , I would like to add my congratulations to the rapporteur , Mrs van den Burg , and members of other groups who have helped steer us towards what hopefully will be a successful vote tomorrow .
We have heard that provision varies from Member State to Member State in terms of the protection afforded to temporary agency workers .
That is indeed the case and that justifies the laying down of a basic framework of protection for temporary workers throughout the European Union , but I would also underline that it will include the accession countries .
The numbers of such workers are increasing in those countries , but as far as I am aware they have no existing protection for temporary agency workers .
My second point is that tonight we are pursuing a strategy which has been under way since 1997 , when we adopted the employment strategy at European Union level .
In the adaptability pillar of that strategy , to which all Member States have signed up , we agreed to strike a balance between flexibility for companies , of all shapes and sizes , and a degree of security for the workers working within , and moving between , those enterprises .
We have already dealt with that in relation to the earlier proposals on part-time work and on fixed-term contract working .
We were warned at the time of the part-working directive that it would cost hundreds of thousands of part-time jobs , particularly for women workers within the European Union .
We now have the evidence and the opposite is the case , because part-time work has come to be seen as a positive option .
What we are working on now will mean that temporary agency work will also become a positive option in the future .
We are often told that it is already a positive option , and that many people want to be temporary agency workers .
Only 10 % of the 61,000 temporary agency workers in my own region say that they are temporary agency workers by choice .
We can increase that percentage quite significantly if we get it right and bring this proposal to a successful conclusion .
We should pursue that balance between flexibility and security .
Mr Harbour says we have not done it yet but I would say to him that this is the first stage .
This is the opening gambit and not the end game .
This is a codecision dossier .
We have a long way to go , through common position , through second reading and no doubt into conciliation .
We can continue to pursue that balance between flexibility and security .
In my own group , two issues have been of great importance at this first reading stage .
One is ' day one comparability ' .
I therefore hope that Amendment No 42 will be carried tomorrow .
The second is the comparator .
To whom is the temporary agency worker compared in terms of pay and basic employment conditions ?
None of the potential solutions we currently have on paper are that elegant , but they get us through first reading and I am sure we will be getting back to that at the common position and second reading stages .
Mr President , I do not believe the Commission has done enough to address the problems in different Member States .
It is not just a problem for the UK , it is a problem for Denmark , Sweden , the Netherlands and various other Member States .
What we have to do is carry out a proper comprehensive impact assessment .
We wish to return the directive to the Commission for them to do that assessment .
I am in favour of temporary workers receiving protection but believe that it is probably best left to Member States , rather than having the ' fit-all ' directive which we have in front of us today .
The proposal in its current form will reduce flexibility , reduce opportunities for temporary workers and lead to more bureaucracy .
We have , however , suggested various amendments in case the proposal is not rejected outright .
To make it more workable for Member States we would firstly like to exclude pay and other financial benefits from the directive 's scope altogether .
I do not believe it should be an EU competence in any case .
The second major amendment is to give an exemption for 12 months for temporary workers placed in user companies .
That is only for pay and financial benefits , not for health and safety .
Most temporary workers in the UK and some other Member States are covered on health and safety grounds .
Another key amendment is to make sure the user company or the agency can be comparative , to give Member States that choice .
Another area of concern is the temporary-to-permanent contract fee .
Agencies should get some sort of recompense if the temporary worker is taken on by the user company .
In my view , these amendments will make the directive far more workable and more acceptable to temporary workers , agencies and user companies .
Mr President , it is well known that this proposal for a directive has arisen as a consequence of the block that European employers have imposed on the negotiating process on which the social partners had embarked .
Nevertheless , although the proposal is intended to improve the working conditions of temporary workers , guaranteeing them equal rights and equal treatment , it only guarantees these through minimum standards of protection , based on the principle of non-discrimination , with countless derogations and with the dangerous prospect of an upsurge in temporary work agencies , which will contribute to greater job instability .
Consequently , in the debate in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , we agreed with all of the rapporteur 's attempts to improve the proposal for a directive and to guarantee workers ' rights , having tabled various proposals for amendments , specifically the removal of various derogations that could undermine the principle of non-discrimination , the guarantee not to use temporary workers to break strikes and the principle that the work undertaken by temporary agencies must not contribute to increasing job instability .
We regret that most of these proposals have not been accepted , although we welcome the fact that some important ideas have been adopted , specifically on the restriction of derogations , enshrining the application of the principle of non-discrimination from day one with the removal of the six-week derogation , thereby guaranteeing some rights in the field of the information and participation of temporary workers and their not being used to break a strike .
Other articles , however , are worded in a way that is unfortunate , incorrect and in some cases dangerous to workers , in addition to opening the way to further derogations , to be granted by the social partners . These articles are also intended to ensure an active role for temporary work agencies , contributing to greater labour flexibility .
Hence the proposals we tabled for the vote in plenary .
We are attempting to ensure that the European Parliament proposal achieves a significant improvement in the rights of temporary workers and does not pave the way for greater job instability .
Our commitment is to ensuring that the greatest value is attached to work , by creating more high-quality jobs with rights and not to instability and the devaluing of workers .
We therefore hope that you will support our proposals and reject all those that will , in practice , create greater instability and damage the rights of temporary workers who , in most cases , only resort to taking this type of work when they cannot find permanent employment .
Let us not , then , contribute to a dual form of discrimination .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur most sincerely for her hard work and willingness to reach an agreement , difficult though that path has been and will be .
My group will not be supporting the amendments which oppose this directive , but will generally support the rapporteur .
It is quite true that there are many reputable agencies which pay well , which engage in training their staff and which provide very good terms and conditions .
These agencies are generally already used to working within a regulated framework .
This directive possibly changes part of the regulation .
We have been told by certain major agencies , some of the largest operating in the European Union , that they do not oppose a regulation , which is not what the Confederation of British Industry and others would have us believe .
But some of the difficulties raised we found difficult to credit .
Some of the agencies have told us that they cannot compare the work done by their staff with that of the end-user company 's staff as their agency staff do unique work which is highly skilled and is on a project basis .
So , I found myself wondering on what basis , then , is the pay rate set at which the agency charges the end-user company ?
What percentage of that income is then paid to the worker ?
They cannot be working in a vacuum .
Internal pay rates , some have told us , are confidential .
Well , how then do reputable companies perform transparent audits on equal pay for equal work ?
I believe that good agencies have nothing to fear from this directive .
We would like to think that those who should be worrying are the disreputable ones who exploit the poorly-skilled , or people in areas of high unemployment who have little choice as to who they work for and under which conditions .
These include cleaning agencies who employ shifts of temporary night workers and then pay them at training rates for longer than necessary , and companies who effectively employ long-term agency workers at lower rates of pay than permanent staff , and who replace paid staff who leave with agency workers because they can lay them off much more easily and with poorer conditions .
For some strange reason , those agencies have not lobbied us .
We need to ensure that we protect the rights of workers who do not have choices and whose agents know that they can exploit that weakness .
Mr President , I too wish to congratulate the rapporteur on attempting to find a compromise between the different points of view on this issue .
However , as was said on a number of occasions in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , we are starting with a flawed proposal .
It is flawed because we have moved away from the social dialogue and social partnership model where there was agreement between both sides of industry before a proposal came before this Parliament .
This has put us all in a very difficult position , because we who are supporters of social dialogue , of protecting the rights of workers and of increasing the opportunities for employment of all the peoples in Europe want to ensure the best possible conditions for those most in need .
Whilst I have no difficulty with the general tenor or the general intent of this directive , a number of facts have to be recognised before we give greater protection to those who are in temporary work contracts under the aegis of agencies .
Firstly , there are various pieces of national legislation which already protect workers and this is merely duplicating or replicating what is already in place .
Secondly , we have different types of employment systems in each Member State and a ' one size fits all ' approach will not necessarily work .
Thirdly , temporary workers work temporarily by choice and sometimes they can earn more money as temporary workers in an agency capacity .
Fourthly , there is no provision in the Treaties and no place in this Parliament , the Council or the Commission for laying down conditions relating to workers ' pay - that is still exclusively a matter for the Member States .
My last point is on the question of the six-week period .
There are amendments tabled for this to be extended to a one-year period .
This is far more sensible and practical from the point of view of protecting all workers ' rights .
Mr President , I must first say that I find the proposal for a Commission directive highly positive .
I think it could be improved , and I think it was partly improved and clarified by Parliament when it was voted on in committee ; I hope it can be further improved tomorrow when the House votes on it .
I do not wish to add much , or even anything , to the opinion already expressed in the debate by the Commissioner and so many other Members on the question of temporary work . Such work has made it possible to try out necessary and opportune kinds of flexible working , in some cases it has allowed workers to achieve their own plans in life , and it has provided greater opportunities to enter the labour market , which is essentially the main issue here .
At this juncture , on the basis of the experience gained so far , we needed to raise the thresholds for certain minimum levels of compulsory protection and to uphold the principle of non-discrimination .
I reject the argument put forward by some regarding the desire to impose a straitjacket on pay issues from above : no one can specify a Europe-wide level of pay that will be valid in all Member States .
The principle to be upheld was that of non-discrimination , and that has been done , but even more can be done if , as I hope , certain proposed amendments are adopted by this House , without imposing a single model or , much less , denying the direct role of agencies in the three-way relationship that characterises this type of work .
We do not want a one-dimensional Europe but rather a Europe that can retain features that give meaning to a Community model and a Community commitment , which , when necessary , stop us from throwing out the baby with the bath water or , worse still , from running the risk of throwing out the baby and keeping the bath water .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , most Member States already have laws on temporary work or collective agreements , but they vary substantially in quality .
The German legislation formerly in force was certainly not as simple as has been claimed here , and the public , whether they were employers or employed , did not accept it .
Let me list just some of the peculiarities in the German restrictions : the ban on ' synchronisation ' , limitation to twelve months , a ban on fixed-term employment , and a ban in the construction industry .
This is why I think that the German Government and parliament have taken a very courageous and significant step by already incorporating the European directive currently being debated into the qualitative improvements for Germany .
It was unacceptable for workers in Germany to be earning up to 40 % less than the permanent staff .
No wonder the industry as a whole has such an appalling image .
This is precisely what we are trying to change .
What is interesting , however , is that temporary work is most readily accepted by society , and is also increasing to the greatest extent in those Member States where the principle of equality applies , namely in France and the Netherlands .
Of course , the employers want social acceptance as well .
The main reason for using temporary agency workers - as our Foundation in Dublin found out - is not the cost savings incurred , but the option of flexible deployment during seasonal bottlenecks , as a response to personnel fluctuations , and in some cases in the extension of probationary periods .
This is exactly what the European directive facilitates , with Mrs van den Burg 's amendments .
The necessary flexibility is further safeguarded through wage negotiations .
Let us adopt this directive tomorrow and send out a clear signal that there really is such a thing as a social Europe !
Mr President , unlike some colleagues , I do not believe that this House should seek a delay in fulfilling its responsibilities in relation to temporary agency workers .
If we are to promote flexible labour markets then we must ensure that those working within them are not put at a disadvantage .
We cannot risk temporary work being used as a way of bypassing normal employment laws rather than , as it should be , a properly regulated means of satisfying employers ' short-term needs .
It is for this reason that we should not emasculate the proposal by removing pay from the scope of the directive or applying it only to workers in assignments of more than 12 months .
That said , I am not convinced that we have yet struck quite the right balance between flexibility and protection .
There are real difficulties in implementing a fixed-term worker comparative for pay in the case of assignments of a short duration .
Accordingly , I urge colleagues to support Amendments Nos 72 and 74 which should overcome this problem .
Similarly , I hope for a positive vote on Amendments Nos 71 and 73 which guard against any adverse effects the directives might have in both the shorter and longer terms .
Finally , my special thanks go to the rapporteur for the inclusive manner in which she has handled a very difficult dossier and my personal good wishes to her for the outcome of the vote tomorrow .
Mr President , although we must have a European viewpoint , we are inevitably influenced by the situation in each of our countries .
Specifically , in my own country , temporary work agencies - or at least some of these companies - are factories for insecure work .
At the moment , in Spain , 33 % of this work is insecure , more than double the European average , which stands at 13 % .
We therefore have difficulties with some of the amendments which my colleague , Ilda Figueiredo , has already mentioned in that they may possibly lead to discrimination .
The rapporteur herself , in the explanatory statement , says that she is not very happy with those amendments that jeopardise the principle of non-discrimination .
In the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , although it points out that these companies have contributed to improving the labour market , it is also stated that these companies , in certain countries of the European Union , employ illegal workers , and that they regularly violate the rights of workers .
Therefore , as my colleague has already pointed out , if certain amendments mentioned are approved , it will be difficult for us to vote in favour of the report .
At the Lisbon Council , there was discussion of the quality of work and employment rights .
We are therefore tabling certain amendments - I am not sure if they are having much luck - inspired by a principle laid out in one of them : we advocate that this directive should be aimed at improving the quality of temporary work , guaranteeing respect for the principle of non-discrimination .
That is what we are advocating , pure and simple .
And we will support the rapporteur provided that certain amendments by the honourable Members seated opposite are not approved .
Mr President , this is an extraordinarily involved directive with an involved previous history , as has already been said .
We have had great difficulty bringing this directive to a successful conclusion .
I think that the main point is that the legislation this directive is about is very different in what are very different countries , that temporary work is regulated in a very different way in the different European countries and I would like everyone to recognise that .
We must nonetheless seek a solution because of the previous history and also because of the fact that we would otherwise be unable to regulate cross-border traffic .
To move in the direction of the Lisbon process we must develop further the important role that temporary work can play .
We have considerable experience of it in the country where I come from .
It is currently still the country with the highest percentage of temporary workers and experience shows that you can deregulate , but that you must then take certain statutory measures .
That is a fact .
As each country needs its own balance , the directive must be relatively flexible .
Thanks to the work of the rapporteur , but also thanks to the work of the two shadow rapporteurs from the PPE-DE , this has been achieved to a very large extent and I would therefore like to thank all three of them very much .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has also , I think , made a significant contribution , as has the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , to the achievement of a result .
It is very important that there is a result , as I have already said , but there are occasionally some interfering noises .
These interfering noises often come from people who are thinking only of their own situation , of their own country .
This we must prevent .
This we cannot accept .
Finally , Mr President , I would ask the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party to take another look at their own amendments .
Amendments have been submitted in duplicate or triplicate , and contradictory amendments have also been tabled to the same Paragraph .
This is no way to negotiate .
We cannot deal with codecision this way .
I would like to ask whether they would like to go through their own amendment list one more time .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to congratulate the rapporteur on her patient work on a difficult issue .
Parliament can debate today , and tomorrow , I hope , it will be able to adopt a report that improves the Commission proposal .
It is , as has already been said , a very problematic dossier , because the different countries have very different systems to deal with this matter - they range from situations of all-embracing guarantees to a lack of any kind of protection . I too applaud the Commission 's initiative , which is not a straitjacket restricting autonomy and subsidiarity but comes after 20 years of attempts by employers and workers to reach an agreement .
I believe there are three basic objectives of equality of treatment contained in the proposal : equality of treatment for temporary workers compared with other workers in terms of job security and status ; respect for established social standards within the user enterprises , through equal treatment in terms of pay and working conditions of temporary workers and other , comparable workers in the user enterprises ; and recognition of the work of agencies supplying temporary workers as a legitimate professional activity , removing unnecessary restrictions , authorisations and prohibitions .
The purpose of the directive is thus to guarantee and harmonise a common minimum level of protection for temporary workers , without any discrimination .
It is a directive that places temporary work within its own part of the labour market , recognising its importance and value without , however , pushing it until it becomes almost the only system for hiring people .
I also believe , since Lisbon has been mentioned , that this directive regulates temporary work in a way that brings it qualitatively into line with the Lisbon objectives .
Mr President , all of us want to see less poverty and more social justice .
More jobs can provide both .
More employment laws like the atypical workers ' directive will secure neither .
The Commission is trying to impose a straitjacket on something that cannot and does not need to be standardised .
My colleague , Mr Pronk , said a moment ago that he would like everyone to recognise that Member States organise temporary work in different ways .
That is absolutely right .
I too would like everyone to recognise that , and we want Member States to be able to continue to organise in different ways .
The very adjective ' atypical ' in the name of this directive says it all .
Earlier in this debate Ms Attwooll said that Amendment No 71 , for example , would guard against any adverse effects .
That is wishful thinking .
This amendment offers some help , but the improvements are marginal and all our temporary workers , recruitment agencies and client companies will be saying the same thing - that we are still left with a directive that could cost the UK alone 160 000 jobs .
I will address my final remarks to the Commissioner , even though she will probably never speak to me again .
Last week the press reported her as saying that the EU had created a net 12 million jobs over the last six years and that the EU ' s rigid labour market was not the main problem facing Europe 's economy .
It is very easy to say that there is no problem or that , if there is , then it is someone else 's problem .
It is a problem for all of us , but you are , with respect , making it worse .
You are proposing the atypical workers ' directive which , instead of promoting job flexibility , will help to kill it off .
This directive has little to do with protecting the rights of temporary workers , certainly in the UK where happily they already enjoy such protection .
It is notionally about protecting the jobs of permanent workers by making it more difficult for companies to employ temporary staff .
The Financial Times yesterday reported on the labour market problems in Germany , describing how reform is being resisted and vested interests are being protected , all under the guise of promoting social justice .
The Commission should have the guts to strip away this pretence and withdraw this directive .
To encourage it to do so , the UK Conservative delegation will vote against this report .
Mr President , I want to congratulate Mrs van den Burg for an enormously well done job and the Commissioner for introducing this directive .
The kind of detailed work that is involved in this kind of directive is never adequately appreciated outside of this House .
Anyone who has watched the way in which Mrs van den Burg has worked on this directive will appreciate the enormous amount of commitment and expertise that had to be brought to it .
We are trying to balance flexibility with security for workers who , in many countries , still do not have any security at all .
We have been told here that national legislation already exists in Ireland to protect these workers .
That is not so .
We are told that it is best left to the Member States to deal with these matters .
The Irish experience will demonstrate that is not so .
There are close to 100 000 agency workers in Ireland .
The European Foundation for Living and Working Conditions , based in Dublin , published a study in May showing that there is no guarantee of equal treatment for agency workers in Ireland and that there is virtually no legal protection for agency workers at all in Ireland .
That is a study carried out by a foundation funded by the European Union .
It also points out that Ireland has failed to implement the 1991 Health and Safety Directive covering agency workers .
Incidentally , Ireland has also failed to implement the Part-time Workers Directive and is now seriously out of line with the rest of Europe on these issues .
So it is not a good idea to leave these matters in the hands of Member States - and certainly not a good idea to leave it in the hands of the current Irish Government , the ruling party of which Mr Crowley is a member .
I would challenge him to back up his statement in this House tonight that there is already adequate protection for Irish workers in this area .
There is not adequate protection .
There is none .
Mr President , the directive on temporary agency work marks an even more organised and methodological attack on the right to full , stable employment and social insurance .
It shows that the policy of flexible forms of work is alive and kicking , it exacerbates the exploitation of the workers and it confuses the fight of the workers ' movement .
The fact that all this is happening with the assent of the compromised leaders of the trade union movement and the International Labour Organisation merely demonstrates their destructive role .
The claim that the directive safeguards and enhances the professional status of working victims , that it improves health and safety and that it increases employment is pure fraud .
The truth is that this is a well-organised attempt to step up exploitation and share out unemployment by creating modern slave-trade organisations .
Protecting full , stable employment with rights for everyone is always a vital objective but it will only be achieved by stepping up the fight against the monopolies and the anti-labour policy of the European Union .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Commissioner on the presentation of this document , as well as Mrs van den Burg on the efforts she has made to find a balance , and I am going to comment very briefly on three specific points .
Firstly , the purpose of temporary work agencies , as an instrument for flexibility in the labour market , which reconcile the aspirations of workers with the needs of companies .
I believe they are going to provide greater possibilities and opportunities for employment , for accessing the labour market .
Secondly , I would like to comment on the restrictions and prohibitions relating to the use of the temporary provision of workers and , from a doctrinal or theoretical point of view , I would like to say that , where there is permission for contracting workers on a temporary basis , there is no reason to prohibit the contracting of workers provided by agencies .
It must only be objective and duly justified - and therefore restrictive - criteria that regulate prohibitions .
Thirdly , I would like to stress the need for particularly intense action on the health and safety protection of workers during work and on the health and safety of workers provided by temporary employment agencies .
There are various reasons for this : firstly , the temporary nature of the employment itself , which seems to increase risk ; secondly , the diversity of the work to be carried out in the different contracting companies ; and , perhaps , thirdly , the differing methods and procedures , even for a task or post of an identical nature in different companies .
I believe we should seek different arguments - for example , the voluntary requirement for non-discrimination - which could make a reference to health at work possible , as well as conditions in general and pay , in particular , without regulating them , but making this reference on the basis of support for the principle of non-discrimination .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am especially pleased to add to the words of thanks that have already been expressed to Mrs van den Burg and I would once again like to underline how important it is that we have this directive .
Some fellow MEPs have already said that the temporary sector is a very fast growing sector .
If we want to ensure that this sector delivers flexibility in the labour market , at the same time delivers quality jobs for the people who work in it and also does not put permanent recruitment under any pressure , then we need sound protection rules , at European level too .
Mr Pronk is right in saying that the systems and the regulations in the different Member States differ .
Moreover , some Member States offer considerable protection and this we may certainly not undo .
That is why the non-regression clause in the directive is so important .
There are , however , also very many Member States that do not offer good protection , Mrs De Rossa made full reference to this .
Nor is this a one-size-fits-all directive .
There is scope here for various national choices .
I would very briefly like to make three comments .
First of all , in connection with what Mr Hughes has just said , for us , it is crucial that temporary workers are protected from day one .
That was , Commissioner , a point that I found weak in the Commission 's proposal .
You will therefore understand that it is absolutely unacceptable for us to agree to the Liberal amendment that excludes temporary work up to one year .
That would make the directive an empty shell .
Secondly , it is important that temporary workers enjoy good employment conditions .
I still think that equal treatment is best served by the principle by which , as far as essential employment conditions are concerned , a temporary worker is compared with workers of a user company .
However , then of course , we must also ensure that our definition of essential employment conditions is sound .
Such a definition without the concept of remuneration ?
That takes the biscuit .
That would completely nullify the principle of equal treatment .
Thirdly , an exception to the principle of equal treatment is acceptable , but only where the systems concerned provide good guarantees internally in the temporary sector itself , also for the period between two contracts .
The countries where this is properly regulated usually guarantee contracts for an indefinite period of time or long contracts .
I should like to warn our fellow MEPs from the PPE-DE against stepping onto a slippery slope by reducing these guarantees too much .
Commissioner , just like you , I hope that we as legislators will be able to do what the social partners have been unable to do , that is to guarantee all temporary workers throughout the European Union solid social protection .
That will then definitely be to the credit of Mrs van den Burg too .
Mr President , in the last ten years , there has been a steady growth in temporary work in the European Union .
This rapid growth is justified because temporary work enables companies to respond better to the need to be flexible and to adapt to the economic climate .
The aims of the proposal we are discussing are :
to ensure that temporary work is a factor in creating jobs that encourage more stable and longer employment relationships ;
to guarantee the rights and safety of temporary workers ;
and to increase flexibility in the labour market .
The basic premise is to extend , at Community level , the principle of non-discrimination between temporary and other workers .
The guarantee of minimum rights will make this sector more attractive and give it a better reputation , bringing to an end the prejudice against it that still exists .
This report is balanced and represents a step forwards from the proposal for a directive presented by the Commission and I therefore thank the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs from my own group for their contributions to it .
This balance is reflected particularly in the definition of minimum Community requirements , leaving it to the Member States and the social partners to adapt these to the specific situation in their respective countries .
Other issues have been taken into account and rightly so , such as the guarantee of basic protection , the opportunity for women to reconcile family life with professional life and the integration into the market of young people and individuals with fewer qualifications .
I should like to point out that , in Portugal , Article 4 is the provision that could cause the most problems : in fact , current national legislation contains a restrictive set of arrangements on this type of work in order to ensure that it is used only to serve employers ' occasional needs .
Ladies and gentlemen , I shall now suspend the sitting for two minutes , and then we will continue .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.06 p.m. and resumed at 11.08 p.m. )

Mr President , I regret that the concept of social dialogue has been jettisoned by the Commission with this directive .
With talks having broken down , it has run with the views of one side , namely the EU trade union , ETUC , and has largely ignored the EU employers ' body , UNICE .
If social dialogue is to work , then there needs to be a more balanced approach to social measures , particularly in line with commitments on labour market flexibility in the context of the Lisbon competitive process .
The definition in Article 3 of a comparable worker will cause major difficulties , and by adopting a user comparison agency workers will find their conditions of employment varying depending on where they are assigned .
In Article 4 the inclusion of a limitation on the use of temporary work runs counter to employment policy at EU level and there is no economic or social justification for it .
It could even constitute gender discrimination .
In relation to Article 5 , the reference to ' essential ' employment conditions is unclear and has no precedent in EU law .
The Commission has departed from normal practice and the wording used in previous social dialogue agreements should be the template , rather than the views of only one social partner .
The same applies to Article 6 and the matters governed by points 6.2 and 6.3 .
These should be left to the discretion of Member States .
Point 6.4 in Article 7 reflects a poor understanding of employment and commercial relationships .
The reference to ' sanctions ' in Article 12 again departs from previous approaches and social dialogue agreements , and should be dealt with at Member State level , in line with national industrial relations practices .
It is inappropriate to include reference to pay as an aspect of basic working conditions , given the limitation imposed by Article 137 ( 6 ) of the Treaty .
Six weeks is far too short a period to decide whether a temporary agency worker should be made permanent or not .
All workers have a probationary period .
Ireland is behind in transposing EU law in this area but we have true social dialogue and a comprehensive body of national law where there is a general qualifying period of 12 months ' continuous service for entitlement to rights .
In conclusion , the approach of this directive is an example of where an idea in theory has not been thought through in practical terms , both from a temporary employee 's perspective and that of an employer .
My congratulations to our rapporteur , to the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities for their amendments .
We need them , without them this would be inoperable .
Mr President , this initiative by the Commission - and the Commissioner in particular - on a proposal for a directive to supplement the other two directives on atypical employment deserves our support , and Mrs van den Burg , who has tried to retain the spirit of the directive in the face of huge reaction , of course deserves our congratulations .
Mr Harbour has reminded me of our confrontation but I can assure him that our confrontations are always exciting .
Amendment No 87 , part two , and more importantly Amendment No 86 , should not be adopted because they abolish every safety valve accepted by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
If they are accepted as they stand , workers will not in most cases receive the same wages as workers in the user company .
I do not know whether or not this was an oversight , but may I point out that our committee 's Amendment No 40 , which relates to Article 5 , paragraph 2 , stating that Member States shall take appropriate measures with a view to preventing misuse , is deleted under Amendment No 86 .
Amendment No 87 gives Member States the right , wherever derogations are allowed , to pass laws allowing new derogations and , more to the point , the same working conditions as those which would apply to a comparable temporary agency worker .
Where is the balance between flexibility and balance and where is the protection for economic competition on the internal market ?
Mr President , Ms Attwooll said that the rapporteur had been inclusive in carrying out this report .
I would like to go further and say that strenuous efforts were made to understand the situation in some of the highest concentrations of agency workers anywhere in the European Union .
For example , in my own region of London we have cleaners , nurses , IT specialists and now , crucially , manufacturing workers , many of whom Mr Harbour would have been referring to earlier .
The situation now is a classic contrast between flexibility and protection .
There is a need to understand the situation in countries where there is a less-developed temporary agency worker regulation .
That is why I welcome amendments like Amendment No 71 , through the efforts of the rapporteurs and others to understand that situation .
We are not at extremes in this area .
We are in a situation where there is evidence that those vulnerable workers looking to us for protection require that protection and good agency employers require growth and flexibility .
It is a balance which should be struck .
We want to find that balance .
As Mr Hughes said , we are at the beginning of that process .
Let us shape a directive that strikes that vital balance .
Mr President , my sincere thanks go to Mrs van den Burg for the work she has done .
For many years now Europe has clearly not managed to fulfil its aim to become the world 's most competitive economic area .
Unfortunately , this proposal for a directive on temporary agency work will take us even further away from our objective .
The Lisbon targets bind us to a more flexible labour market than before .
Increased bureaucracy and interference in contracts between companies will constrain the labour market .
Do we not want supply to meet demand ?
Since the Treaty of Rome the EU has aspired to the creation of a dynamic Internal Market .
The Member States take care of the social consequences of that by taking account of the interests of employees in the way they themselves consider best .
This lies at the heart of the principle of subsidiarity .
It is not the EU 's job to regulate sectors that do not require intervention at EU level .
For historical reasons there are big differences between the labour market systems in Member States .
One rigid solution in this sector will not suit everyone .
If things have not been dealt with properly in Ireland , it does not mean that this directive should be employed to complicate things in Finland , where they have .
This directive 's implementation will clearly worsen the general situation regarding temporary agency work in Finland .
It would appear that , once again , no thorough cost-benefit analyses have been carried out .
The results will ultimately be reflected in growing unemployment and weakening competitiveness .
The committee 's decision to allow employment agencies to receive reasonable costs , however , is an improvement on the poor proposal put forward by the Commission .
Refusing to pay such costs would lead to the work of the agencies discontinuing .
Temporary employment agencies offer a flexible solution in the way they fill vacancies promptly and speedily in sectors suffering from a shortage of manpower .
Under no circumstances should we make conditions worse for them .
Mr Crowley has a comment on procedure .
Mr President , Mr De Rossa mentioned me in particular and challenged me to an argument .
Rather than take up Parliament 's time explaining how successful my party has been in government in creating employment and protecting workers ' rights , I would like to invite him to discuss its merits and demerits over a drink .
That is a good suggestion !
Mr President , I should like to start with three general comments .
First , several honourable Members raised the question of subsidiarity .
There is a whole body of evidence on subsidiarity ; I should just like to make one very important point .
At a time when national markets are fast turning into European markets and we are on the threshold of enlargement , highly diverse labour legislation and differing rights from one country to another are obviously creating distortions on the internal market .
So there is clearly a need , just as in all other sectors of labour legislation , for a common , flexible framework .
My second comment concerns whether we evaluated the repercussions of this directive .
May I remind you that this directive will apply to 1.5 % -2 % of workers in Europe .
But what is important politically is that this sector is mushrooming and workers ' rights are being distorted left , right and centre , which is why we need to be pro-active and regulate it as quickly as possible within - I repeat - a general framework .
We have taken account and I would ask you to examine the study - available to any Member who is interested - which was carried out by the CIETT , the Confédération Internationale des Entreprises de Travail Temporaire .
The companies themselves clearly conclude in this study that employment legislation is needed in order to resolve the problems which generally arise on the questions of pay and working conditions and underpin the development of this sector , which has a very bad press in numerous countries .
There is a clear reference to the Netherlands and the Dutch model , a model which has managed to combine flexibility with social insurance and protection for workers in a country in which some of the biggest and most successful temporary employment agencies are to be found .
Serious concerns were expressed about the model getting tied up in red tape .
I would say they are completely unfounded .
The legislation does not introduce any new procedures for recruiting or transferring workers and each country keeps its present system .
Flexibility , at least as we interpret it in Europe , means a set of policies and practices to help the company , the worker , the public sector and the law to adapt to new production requirements .
Flexibility must not be interpreted as meaning fewer or no rights as a prerequisite to job creation .
Specific references were made to Great Britain , to the effect that jobs will be cut etc .
All that will happen in that particular country is that there may be a small increase in labour costs due to the minimum social rights granted to workers on the British job market .
I should like if I may , Mr President , to comment on specific amendments in order to give the Commission 's position .
There are two types of amendment .
The first type clarifies the proposal and adds a number of definitions .
The second type amends the proposal materially by adding or deleting certain important provisions .
As far as the first type is concerned , I welcome the proposed new title .
I think it conveys the objective of the directive much better .
I agree with the amendment designed to convey more fully the triangular relationship between worker , agency and user undertaking innate in temporary employment .
We support the amendments that redefine temporary agency work , the user company and the temporary work agency .
We also accept the amendments that clarify the text .
The definition proposed for the term ' assignment ' is far more accurate .
The new wording for the group of workers that Member States cannot exclude from the scope of the directive is a vast improvement .
I agree with the addendum specifying the means to be used to inform employees about any vacant posts in the user undertaking .
I also think it is helpful to state that agencies may receive a reasonable level of recompense for services provided to user undertakings but that agencies must not charge workers a fee if they enter into a permanent contract of employment with the user company at the end of their assignment .
I accept the amendment rewording the reference to social services more clearly .
I also welcome the reference to collective agreements and worker representation because worker representation can indeed be set out in collective agreements .
I agree with the amendment requiring the Member States to ensure that both workers and their representatives are equipped to press the provisions of the directive .
That brings me to material amendments to the directive , which add or delete certain important provisions .
I shall deal first with the amendments that are acceptable and then with the amendments that are not .
I agree with the amendment extending the scope for lifting restrictions and prohibitions on temporary agency work .
This scope was very restricted in the proposal for a directive , because it only applied to restrictions or prohibitions on certain groups of workers or certain sectors .
And of course , I accept the spirit of the amendment designed to ensure that temporary agency workers are not used to replace workers taking part in collective action such as strikes and so on .
I also think the principle of non-discrimination has been cleverly reworded ; I think it is clearer and easier to focus on the working conditions which temporary workers would enjoy were they employed directly by the user company .
I can allow the exemption for permanent contracts to be restricted solely to pay but I cannot allow this derogation to be extended to fixed-term contracts .
Nor can I allow the 6-week period which allows temporary agency workers to be used in certain countries for a very short space of time for work of minor importance to be deleted .
This is a factor which will help significantly in the overall negotiations .
To summarise , I accept Amendments Nos 1 , 4 , 22 , 28 , 33 , 43 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 51 , 52 , 85 and 92 in full .
I accept Amendments Nos 6 , 15 , 16 , 20 , 23 , 26 , 27 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 38 , 40 , 44 and 49 in part or in spirit , if they are reworded .
The remaining amendments are rejected .
I should like to thank you all for helping to bring about a new text which will facilitate the final acceptance of the directive , what is without doubt a politically and technically complicated directive .
May I again congratulate Mrs van den Burg and urge the Danish presidency to take whatever action is needed in order to reach agreement at the Council on 3 December .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0359 / 2002 ) by Mrs Damião , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Commission communication on Life sciences and biotechnology - A Strategy for Europe ( COM ( 2002 ) 27 - C5-0260 / 2002 - 2002 / 2123 ( COS ) ) .
rapporteur . ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have been given the delicate task of presenting the report by Elisa Damião , who is ill and therefore cannot be here today , although she has been lucid and clear-minded enough to follow every step of this report which quite rightly , therefore , bears her name .
I feel very moved to be presenting this report , I send my greetings to Mrs Damião and hope that she is able to return to Parliament as soon as possible , because she is a person of enormous political and parliamentary ability , as well as being a great citizen .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the amazing progress that has been made in biology and in molecular genetics is fascinating and disturbing at the same time .
Scientific knowledge has moved ahead at such a pace that we are now in a position radically to change not only the vegetal and animal world , but also , eventually perhaps , our own species .
This represents a genuine sea change .
The abilities of science and technology have now largely gone beyond the fictions contained in literary masterpieces such as Huxley 's ' Brave New World ' or George Orwell 's ' Nineteen Eighty-Four ' .
Nevertheless , if the truth be told , the visions contained in those works , of societies and human beings oppressed and dehumanised by the manipulation of science and technology , have fortunately not been fulfilled .
The concern expressed by the broader public , however , with regard , for example , to genetically modified organisms and to cloning is a very clear sign , which the political , scientific and industrial world must heed .
An initial response was drawn up by UNESCO when , in November 1997 , by consensus it adopted the universal declaration on the human genome and human rights .
However , of all the revolutions that have taken place in the realm of knowledge , that of molecular biology will , perhaps , be the greatest of all and it is genetics that will have the greatest implications in the economic , cultural and ethical spheres .
Biotechnologies are part of the technologies of the future . The potential development of these gives us a glimpse of major changes in the coming years in the medicinal products , food , agriculture and environmental markets .
Nevertheless , these technologies , in their practical applications , raise ethical and philosophical questions that are now part of today 's culture . Given their implications , there will always be pessimistic souls , as has always happened throughout history and throughout the history of science and technology , who see apocalyptic threats to humanity , awakening age-old fears and trepidation .
We must combat those who exploit fears , ghosts and superstitions with a cautious but optimistic attitude towards science and realise that it must be inspired by high ethical standards and legal frameworks that , whilst encouraging intellectual freedom and scientific creativity , prevent excesses .
The classical humanism expressed in the famous phrase of the philosopher Seneca stated that ' man is sacred to mankind ' .
This classical humanism must inspire contemporary science and all citizens .
The European Union has availed itself in recent years of a panoply of directives and regulations in the field of biotechnologies and science .
Nevertheless , the many legislative acts that have been adopted constitute a genuine rag-bag , lacking a coherent , global and systemic vision of this vast sector .
Some legislation that has been adopted has not been implemented and other legislation has been subject to derogations , moratoria and , even worse , numerous voids and grey areas .
The global battle in the field of biotechnologies is , nevertheless , crucial .
The United States clearly lead the field in this area .
Nevertheless , the Lisbon Summit outlined an ambitious target for the EU for the forthcoming decade : to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world .
How will this aim be achieved without a strong European commitment to biotechnologies ?
Europe is lagging behind the United States .
Although the European Union has 1570 undertakings operating in this field and the United States has 1263 , the fact is that these undertakings in the European Union employ 61 000 workers who produce a volume of business of EUR 42 billion , whereas in this same sector in the United States 162 000 workers are employed , producing the equivalent of EUR 365 billion .
This is a summary , Mr President , of the cultural , political , legal and economic context into which the Commission communication fits . This is broadly supported by Mrs Damião 's report .
In fact , the action plan and the strategy presented by the Commission resolve , with one wave of a magic wand , the diffuse nature , the incoherence and the shortcomings of the legal framework and of European policies in the field of biotechnologies .
We will clearly not be able to achieve this with one wave of the wand , but they do point us in the right direction .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Damião , in her absence , and I agree with what Mr Lage has just said about a report that voices strong and clear support for the responsible development of life sciences and biotechnology in Europe .
I also warmly welcome the fact that the report has been produced on the basis of broad political agreement .
This report marks a very important step : biotechnology is the next wave of the knowledge-based economy and biotechnology research is crucial for strengthening European competitiveness in this field .
There is a growing realisation among Europeans that this technology is important for our future competitiveness and welfare .
A consensus is emerging on how we might strengthen its development in a manner consistent with our European values and ethical standards .
We are faced with a policy choice : either stand aside and see these technologies developed elsewhere , or exploit them ourselves in a responsible manner and to the benefit of European citizens .
As was made clear in the report that Mr Purvis submitted to Parliament last spring , biotechnology is an enabling technology .
It affects , or can even transform , broad areas such as healthcare , environmental protection , agriculture and food and industrial production processes .
It can be a source of innovation for new and established companies alike , and it offers unique approaches to finally solving problems , for example in the fields of healthcare and novel pharmaceuticals .
Europe cannot afford to miss out on the benefits biotechnology will bring .
Members of the European Commission under the leadership of President Prodi have worked together to provide a strategy that encompasses all the various applications of biotechnology , but also tries to enable us to come up with coherent answers to the more difficult questions and choices we are faced with .
The Commission 's Communication on ' Life Sciences and Biotechnology : a strategy for Europe ' builds upon the common knowledge base in life sciences and will lead to skills-based jobs that sustain the economies of the future .
We propose a number of actions for the promotion of biotechnology development in Europe , and at the same time , further measures for responsible governance , to ensure that this development takes place in accordance with our societal values and needs .
The Sixth Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development , under the leadership of Commissioner Busquin , will provide substantial support for the supply of skilled resources and for overcoming the fragmentation of research and lack of critical mass .
We need to ensure that research results can be protected by means of harmonised intellectual property protection , and translated into commercial products and processes through effective innovation and technology transfer .
The strategy also stresses the need to overcome the previous fragmentation in the commercial development of biotechnology in Europe and several actions will contribute to linking up researchers , emerging companies , service providers and financial institutions .
The present downturn in the capital markets and the lack of risk capital needs particular and urgent attention .
The success of the biotechnology strategy will only be assured if the technology is built on a basis of societal trust .
It is vital for developments , and in particular public policy-making , to take place with a maximum of transparency .
We need to encourage public dialogue throughout Europe to ensure that societal goals are met and public concerns are addressed .
The strategy pursues the overarching goal of enhancing coherence between policies at the different levels .
In this way , we can give proper , broad consideration to policy decisions that have an impact on our competitiveness and the future prosperity of our societies .
The Commission has started implementing measures in its own areas of responsibility .
We will shortly publish the first regular report on the stage reached in this implementation work .
However , this strategy will only work well if we all - European institutions , Member States , regions , industry , academia and civil society alike - now make commitments according to our respective responsibilities and resources .
The adoption of Parliament 's report and the forthcoming Council conclusions will provide the essential political backing for the effective implementation of the strategy at European level .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I greatly welcome the Commission 's objective of again giving the EU a leading role in the field of life sciences and biotechnology .
However , the proposed strategy lags far behind expectations .
I would therefore like to thank Mrs Damião very much for her comprehensive report which clarifies the Commission 's strategy document in many respects .
Europe must take on a pro-active role once again if it is not to lose ground in this sophisticated area of technology .
This applies especially to ' green ' genetic engineering - in other words , to agriculture .
A prerequisite is the establishment of an effective , predictable and stable legal framework , both for agriculture and for the biotech industry in Europe .
This framework must comply , in particular , with WTO rules and safeguard the coexistence of all forms of agricultural production .
The removal of the de facto moratorium for product approvals is the precondition for more planning security for companies and the agricultural sector .
The moratorium is especially harmful to innovative SMEs in Europe and conflicts with the Lisbon objectives .
Within the Commission , and within the European institutions , a targeted European policy to promote a ' B-Europe ' policy must be promoted .
Based on the successful concept of eEurope , these same priorities could be pursued on an overarching basis by several of the Commission 's Directorates-General .
Further key points include : support for the development of bioclusters and other models for technological transfer , easier access to risk capital , especially for start-ups and SMEs in biotech research , the introduction of a European patent , and a transparent and scientifically based information policy on the part of the authorities , companies and the scientific establishment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to send Mrs Damião my best wishes for her continued recovery .
I would like to express my thanks to her and her colleagues , but also to Mr Lage , for their excellent cooperation .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats supports the Damião report , not least because the whole thing - the action plan and the report - is based on a report by our fellow Member , John Purvis .
The Damião report sends out a positive signal for biotechnology , but it also makes clear where we need better rules than currently exist .
The report deliberately does not paint a ' black and white ' picture .
There is , after all , a view that genetic technology may be very positive in healthcare , but must be rejected at all costs in agriculture .
The report rejects this position .
We state quite clearly that there are opportunities in both sectors ; in other words , there are opportunities in agriculture as well .
Indeed , the report says that genetic technology can contribute towards finding genuine solutions to sustainable development , and I would like to emphasise this point .
This is why we are opposed to the de facto moratorium .
The Directive on the deliberate release of GMOs into the environment was adopted a long time ago .
The Member States should have implemented it in national law by October .
I sat on the Conciliation Committee with David Bowe at the time , and I never dreamed that so many years later , this de facto moratorium would still be in place .
The report says that it must end by 2003 .
I believe that it should actually end now , because the deadline for the implementation of Directive 220 / 90 has already passed .
Otherwise , SMEs in particular will suffer considerably , as Mrs Müller has already said .
Just as there are not only risks but also major benefits in the agricultural sector , there are not only benefits , but also major risks , in the medical field .
We see a danger , for example , in the uncontrolled use of DNA testing .
DNA tests are not services like any other .
They may only be carried out after competent , expert , independent and individual counselling , and this counselling must cover medical , ethical , social , psychological and legal aspects .
A year ago , our group commissioned an expert report on this issue .
This report says that the European Union has competence in this area .
Offering DNA testing is either a cross-border service , or DNA tests are products traded in the internal market .
This is why we need standards in this area , quality standards and standards relating , for example , to counselling .
The Commission has a task here , and I ask the Commission to do what the report says , namely to initiate legislation .
Mr President , I fully endorse the previous speakers ' comments , and I assume that there will be a majority in favour of the Damião report tomorrow .
There are many reasons for this .
The Commissioner is absolutely right to describe biotechnology as the undoubted key to the future . Some have grasped this already ; others will take longer to do so , but it is undoubtedly the case .
Mr Liese is absolutely right : biotechnology will also help us find solutions for sustainable development .
I would like to add an explanation here , for biotechnology does not work with ' classical ' thermodynamics , but with irreversible thermodynamics ; in other words , it works with very small potential differences to produce a very substantial impact .
Otherwise , we would not grow old , but would leave this mortal coil at the age of 15 .
In other words , biotechnology has many benefits , and this is widely recognised .
Indeed , ' red ' biotechnology is already recognised by large sections of the Green Party today .
The problem is this : how do we deal with green biotechnology ?
This may also have to do with the fact that many people in Europe say that they do not need it ; they say they have enough to eat , and the problem is distribution , not new products .
There is a very different view in the developing countries , however .
For example , if I have a product which can be produced using a minimum amount of water , or have a species of rice which contains specific vitamins , this is a matter of survival for many people in the developing countries .
It does not matter to us , because we can buy other products with our large amounts of money .
What does this mean in practice ? It means that the development of biotechnology , including green biotechnology , in Europe could help many other people .
Let me clear up one misunderstanding at this point , which has also played a role in our own group .
It has been claimed that we aim to combat hunger in the world with biotechnology .
This is not what is said here .
What we say is that biotechnology alone cannot defeat hunger in the world , and that other measures , such as better distribution of the food available , are far more important .
That is what it says here .
Let me clear up this misunderstanding from the outset .
However , biotechnology can make its contribution to reducing hunger in the world .
Let me conclude with one further comment : our conflict here in this House is not that we will reject the Damião report tomorrow , but that we will vote differently during the legislative process .
This is why I call on everyone to conduct a much more far-reaching dialogue here in this House , and with the Commission , on these issues .
Otherwise we will continue to live with this dichotomy , which we are finding so difficult to cope with .
Indeed , Mrs Damião 's report is warmly supported by the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
There are two points I should like to make .
The climate in the European Union , the business climate , and also ethics and environment .
Despite being a key technology , biotechnology is still a poor relation in Europe and also in my own country the Netherlands .
I therefore welcome the strategy of the Committee for biotechnology and life sciences , which is contributing to research and development in Europe .
Not only for industry , but also with regard to health care and food safety .
This does not , however , alter the fact that the committee has been overtaken by events .
After all , did we not , in March 2000 , adopt the Purvis report whose intention was to improve the business climate in Europe ?
Did we not also criticise the Member States over the moratorium on the import of genetically modified products ?
There is still much to be done in Europe in terms of access to launch capital and to patent rights to create a favourable climate .
The patent directive for biotechnological inventions is a demonstrable improvement .
This directive from 1998 , however , has simply been ignored by the majority of Member States .
It has only been implemented by four of the 15 Member States .
What does the Commissioner intend to do about it ?
Another major obstacle to progress and application are the ethical and environmental concerns .
It is of course entirely proper that we as legislators do not ignore these concerns of the consumer .
The Commission 's action plan , however , already provides for the initiation of a social debate .
It does not therefore seem necessary to me to strengthen this report with paragraphs that regulate communication with society in detail .
We do not , after all , have to hold the consumer 's hand .
The consumer is perfectly capable of making up his own mind if we provide the right information .
Mr President , I should like to send my greetings to Mrs Damião in her absence and to wish her a speedy recovery .
I disagree , however , with her report , which her colleague Carlos Lage , has presented to us : it should be noted that this report transcribes in their entirety the positions and interests of the huge biotechnology , agro-chemical and agro-industrial multinationals , as can be seen if we compare the report with the position of UNICE .
We call for the de facto moratorium that has been in place since 1998 for the approval of new genetically modified organisms in the food chain to be maintained and we totally reject the report 's support for lifting the moratorium , which we feel would be a real environmental crime .
Apart from the profound ethical and human rights questions about the commercialisation and patenting of life and natural heritage , we must understand that releasing GMOs into the environment is an irreversible and uncontrollable factor which has direct consequences on the pollution of both conventional and organic farming , and for the destruction of biodiversity . It also has incalculable effects on ecosystems .
What this means is that organic farmers and consumers will not actually see this much vaunted but fictional freedom of choice .
Furthermore , it reinforces the dependency of farmers and of Member States ' food policies on the multinationals .
The degree of interference and pressure exerted on developing countries to introduce GMOs into their food chain is shocking .
It is truly mystifying and unacceptable that , once again , the idea is being aired that food shortages and world hunger can have a technological solution when the issue - as has been stressed in many international fora and organisations - is a political one and is a matter of policy .
We only need think back to the much-feted ' green revolution ' of a few decades ago .
We are committed to promoting the scientific and technological progress of mankind , but we must always respect the precautionary principle .
Mr President , we increasingly see that when biotechnology is referred to , genetic technology is actually what is meant , but this is not stated clearly .
For more than 20 years , promises have been made which have then been broken in practice .
Genetically modified foods and agricultural products are a flop .
The consumers do not want them .
In the field of medicine , it is imitation products , above all , which are manufactured in a slightly modified production process so that patents can be obtained and phenomenal prices achieved , with the health insurance funds being ripped off as a result .
I often wonder why we have been discussing these key technologies here for so many years and why these supposedly key technologies do not succeed in the marketplace .
Where is the market , in reality ?
Biotech companies are complete flops on the stock exchange .
We have no products which are successful and are accepted in the market .
We have simply been ' talking up ' this genetic technology for years .
Let me come to my real point .
For us , it is completely unacceptable to remove the de facto moratorium , as very few of the Member States have actually implemented the directive on the deliberate release of GMOs into the environment .
I also find what is happening here quite unacceptable .
We have the Scheele report , and we have held a debate on the de facto moratorium .
We also discussed the Fiori report in very wide and detailed terms , and it was made very clear that we do not want any patenting of human genes .
The current report demands the very opposite .
There is an obvious reluctance to accept the implementation of what has been called for , for a long time , in the other committees .
I think this is farcical and quite unacceptable .
I think we must recognise that we need absolute transparency for consumers , as well as safe foods .
Then no one can claim that we are prepared to put the interests of industry ahead of consumer protection simply to push these products on to the market .
With this in mind , I would like to state quite clearly , once again , that much of what is written here does not have our support .
Nonetheless , I think it is quite good , and ask you to support our Amendments Nos 26 and 27 , which make it clear that coexistence is very important in agriculture , and that the sustainable co-existence of conventional and organic farming should be ensured .
The Commission calls for this as well .
Mr President , firstly I too would like to wish Mrs Damião a speedy recovery and sincerely congratulate her for an excellent report .
It will add to the encouragement which the biotechnology sector needs in order to realise its potential in my Scottish constituency and throughout Europe .
The thrust of this report is fully in line with the Lisbon Summit objectives and continues the forward-looking attitude consistently demonstrated by Parliament .
It should also serve to bolster the Commission 's new-found courage as regards biotechnology and the life sciences .
But how dreadful the contrast with the Council of Ministers who yet again this week demonstrated their abject failure to follow through on the goals they set at Lisbon .
The grossly mistitled ' Competitiveness Council ' could not reach consensus about the proper jurisdiction for Community patent disputes .
What hope is there of achieving Europe 's potential in this area when the Council is at least one year behind the deadline it set itself for agreement on this vital matter ?
Without a cost-efficient means of patenting intellectual property rights , what incentive is there for our scientists ?
This is only one example of the chronic foot-dragging we see endlessly in the Council and by individual Member States .
Moratoria , legal uncertainty , backtracking and dithering over ethical guidelines , transposition delays , lack of support for those going about their legal business with field trials , elaborate red tape for labelling and traceability .
Mrs Damião , thank you for giving us hope that there is real hope in Europe for biotechnology and the life sciences .
Mr President , you do not have to be an implacable opponent of GMOs - and I am not - to challenge the undiluted advocacy of them in this report .
Many Liberal Democrats will be challenging the report in the vote tomorrow .
We want to see a reduction in the use of pesticides and herbicides .
We want to see insects and wild plants flourish in our countryside .
We want sustainable agriculture in developing nations .
But we need to know that the proposed solution is not the cause of even greater problems .
We hear claims from the manufacturers , intent as they are with stuffing their pockets with gold and making sure that farmers across the globe are locked into their supply chain .
But where is the scientific evidence about the medium- and long-term effects of GM crops upon biodiversity ?
Who is going to compensate organic producers whose crops become contaminated and lose their value ?
We need answers to these questions before we open the floodgates .
The jury is still out regarding GM crops and , given the irreversible nature of these decisions , there is no sound basis for making claims that biotechnology will be the answer to all our problems .
EIB Annual Report ( 2001 )
The next item is the report ( A5-0364 / 2002 ) by Mrs van den Burg , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the European Investment Bank annual report for 2001 [ 2001 / 2256 ( INI ) ] .
Before giving the rapporteur the floor , I would like to welcome Mr Maystadt , President of the European Investment Bank , who will speak later on .
Madam President , let me first start with a word of welcome , also to Mr Maystadt .
I should also like to thank the EIB for the fruitful cooperation which , in the tradition of the past three years , has developed as we have commented on your annual reports .
I think that Parliament can be pleased with the way in which you have taken on board the suggestions from those previous reports , and I hope that this will also be the case with my report .
In your introduction to your 2001 annual report , you described the EIB as a policy-driven public bank whose mission is to help achieve economic , social and , ultimately , political goals .
I could not agree with you more .
The EIB can play an important macro-economic role and underpin EU policy in key areas .
The EIB is a public bank , accountable to the public for the policy it pursues .
It is with these considerations in mind that I have written my report and I have emphasised a number of aspects in this respect .
Today , I should like to single out five elements from my report .
They are : capital increase , pension funds , labour market policy and employment policy , EU enlargement and adequate supervision of EIB policy .
First of all , capital increase .
In its annual meeting of 4 June , the Board of Governors decided to increase the capital by EUR 50 billion .
Parliament welcomes this decision and believes that funding this capital increase from the bank itself is a wise decision .
We condemn , however , the Board 's refusal to agree at this stage to a further increase in the next five years .
Parliament also applauds the decision to increase the funding of some projects in the sectors hardest hit by the economic slow-down from 50 % to 70 % of the total project budget .
I should also like to draw your attention to the facility which the EIB offered during the autumn floods in Central and Eastern Europe to bolster emergency programmes to as much as 100 % .
I think that this fits in well with the image of an active bank which supports the EU 's goals .
In that way , the EIB also becomes visible to the citizens .
I should next like to turn to the subject of pension funds .
In my report , I enlarged upon the role of the bank as borrower on the capital markets .
The EIB plays a major role in this area too , particularly on relatively new markets , such as in some accession countries .
With its triple-A rating and long-term bonds in different currencies , the bank is a major protagonist and a very safe investment for pension funds , for example .
A drawback is that EIB bonds are not always freely accessible .
Government restrictions often apply precisely to investments made by pension funds and insurance companies .
The EIB can play the role of icebreaker in order to promote long-term investments and , as a result , give investors more scope for riskier investments in their new economies .
For example , the EIB could be an interesting partner for pension funds .
This is why I tabled one more amendment before the plenary 's debate on my report , and I should like to invite the bank to play an active part .
I should also like to hear Mr Maystadt 's opinion on the matter .
My third point concerns labour market policy .
The Amsterdam action programme has been more effective in drawing attention to projects in the social sectors .
Since time immemorial , the majority of investments have been in the area of hard infrastructure .
It is , however , also important to invest in social infrastructure .
I would apply the two-pronged Lisbon objective , both economically and socially , to EIB policy .
Like last year , Parliament calls on the EIB to assess the impact on employment of the projects and activities implemented and supported by the EIB and to enhance the internal and external expertise in this field within all the bank 's different activities and directorates .
I am interested what Mr Maystadt 's intentions are in this area too .
With regard to enlargement , we discussed the first round of the EU 's enlargement in Parliament on Tuesday .
The EIB can also do its bit by giving a high priority to activities in the accession countries and by allowing those countries to take part as fully-fledged participants .
I have a feeling that the new Member States take too little advantage of investment opportunities .
It seems as if they are imposing restrictions on themselves because they do not want to run up excessive debts .
A creditable ambition which can bring them closer to monetary union , but something against which I would put question marks at this stage .
Parliament has advised the EIB at any rate not to overlook the social dimension and to set up a special programme for the candidate countries and other partner countries , which should address the objectives of social cohesion .
Mr Maystadt may be able to enlarge on this point too in his response .
Finally , Parliament urges an intensified co-operation of the EIB and the EBRD on the basis of a well-considered and efficient division of tasks .
In fact , this will be discussed in a separate report by Mr Markov in our committee and in this House in the foreseeable future .
My final point concerns monitoring .
The importance of transparency and of the adequate supervision of the EIB group is something that has always enjoyed Parliament 's undivided attention .
As a public investment bank , the need for adequate monitoring is obvious , but there is still room for improvement in this respect .
This is largely due to the EIB 's dual position as , on the one hand , originally a tax-funded public institution and on the other hand , a normal bank which , in the case of the EIF , which also forms part of the group , is also a venture capital fund .
As financial institutions , they are not subject to the normal prudential supervision that is set up for other institutions at national level .
This monitoring at national level was the subject of a report which I supported here yesterday .
I think that this can also play a part in the case of the EIB .
A final point concerns the recommendations tabled by the Committee on Budgetary Control and I shall leave Mr Sjöstedt to put the case for these .
I have given almost all of them comprehensive coverage in my report .
Madam President , President Maystadt , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the European Parliament for having once again taken the initiative of organising a debate on the work of the EIB .
I would congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs van den Burg , on her extremely interesting and comprehensive report which emphasises the EIB 's role as the Community 's primary long-term financing institution for key sectors of the European Union , the candidate countries and other partner countries .
I would briefly like to consider the following four points : collaboration between the EIB and the Commission , the EIB 's work in the partner countries , the EIB 's work in the candidate countries , and the Tripartite Agreement between the EIB , the Court of Auditors and the Commission .
The first point : the EIB is a policy driven public bank .
Its task , as President Maystadt himself pointed out , is to contribute to the achievement of the political goals of the European Union in cooperation with the Commission .
In this respect , the Commission warmly welcomes the growing cooperation with the Bank in various priority sectors such as regional development and the environment , and also areas addressed by the ' Innovation 2000 initiative ' such as research and development , the audiovisual sector and information technology .
The Commission supports the EIB Group 's consolidation of its activities concerning SMEs .
It agrees with the European Parliament 's point of view whereby the Bank should adopt the Commission 's definition of SMEs .
The Commission acknowledges Parliament 's wish to evaluate the impact on SMEs of the ' Multiannual Programme 2001 - 2005 on small and medium-sized enterprises ' , known as the MAP .
In this respect , the Commission intends to draw up an interim progress report on the MAP in 2003 , including its impact on SMEs , as required by the Council decision on the MAP .
Furthermore , again as required by the same decision , the Commission will submit an external assessment report to the Council and Parliament by the end of December 2004 .
The second point : the EIB has increased its financing activities in partner countries , working in close cooperation with the Commission .
In this context , the Mediterranean Investment and Partnership Facility , launched in Barcelona last October , will constitute an important initiative to boost economic development in bordering countries in the south .
The Commission has given substantial backing to this initiative , pledging EUR 255 million of the Community budget over the next four years .
Moreover , the EIB , again in conjunction with the Commission , is preparing to implement the new investment fund for ACP countries laid down by the Cotonou Agreement .
As regards the Balkans , the Commission and the Bank are currently looking into the possibility of granting the Bank a mandate to operate in Kosovo .
The third point : with regard to the EIB 's work in the candidate countries , the Commission endorses Parliament 's view that absolute priority must be given to the Bank 's activities in these countries .
We believe that the funding requirements are considerable and that the EIB and the EBRD must work closely together in order to contribute to the growth of the new Member States of the European Union .
With regard to the integration of the candidate countries into the EIB structure , the Commission is pleased to note that the Member States have , at last , reached an agreement on amendments to the Treaty with regard to the governance of the EIB and on its subscribed capital following accession .
Once the agreement of the candidate countries has been obtained , this will enable the new Member States to be integrated into the EIB structure immediately after accession .
Lastly , the fourth and final point : a very brief comment on the Tripartite Agreement between the EIB , the Court of Auditors and the Commission .
The Commission feels that the basic principles of the Tripartite Agreement reflect a fair balance between the rights of the Court of Auditors and those of the EIB , and that these principles must not be altered .
As for the Community budget , in accordance with the Tripartite Agreement , the Court has access to a wide range of information about the Bank 's operations under mandate and is entitled to additional information whenever it so desires .
The Commission warmly welcomes Parliament 's initiative calling on the interested parties to review the agreement , an initiative which will doubtless constitute an opportunity to update a number of technical and administrative aspects in the light of changes which have taken place .
Madam President , I want to say a few words about the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control regarding this report .
My committee and I are grateful for the fact that the rapporteur and the committee responsible have chosen to take on board so many of the views we have presented .
Thank you very much .
The European Investment Bank has for many years been one of the EU 's more anonymous powers that be .
At the same time , the EIB has very great influence by virtue of the extensive loans both to the Member States and to the candidate countries .
It would be sensible to have a more comprehensive political debate on the bank 's approach and also more comprehensive scrutiny of the bank 's activities on the part of the other EU institutions .
The reason for the European Investment Bank 's having been a fairly anonymous wielder of power in the EU is no doubt the special status of this body .
It is a bank which , moreover , is basically owned by the Member States , at the same time as being a part of the European Union .
We suggest , partly by means of the following proposals , that it be scrutinised more carefully .
We wish to increase the Court of Auditors ' access to information from the European Investment Bank .
In the long run , this access to information should be similar to the access that exists to information from the European Central Bank .
This is something that can be brought about through the tripartite agreement , which is subject to future review .
We should like to see increased cooperation between our committee , the Committee on Budgetary Control and the European Investment Bank .
It should , for example , be possible to welcome the chairman of the bank to our meetings .
We should also like to acquaint ourselves with more documents concerning the European Investment Bank 's internal audit .
We should like to see the environmental dimension strengthened through the EIB 's incorporating the Århus Convention and the obligations under it into its policy .
We are concerned here with public access to environmental information .
In a year or so , we should also like to see a progress report made on the task taken on in Gothenburg concerning impact on climate change .
Finally , I just want to add that there is a need to evaluate the system of global loans which is at present a little too vaguely defined .
A thorough evaluation needs to be made of the actual impact of the loans .
Madam President , Mr Maystadt , this is the third time that Parliament has been able to give its opinion on the EIB 's annual report .
The report by Mrs van de Burg is balanced and consistent , and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has therefore adopted it unanimously .
I would nevertheless like to make some observations .
First of all , I should like to comment on the role of the Bank .
The role of the EIB is important .
The Bank is a major investor on the European market and outside , with considerable macro-economic clout .
This macro-economic clout does not require the EIB to have its own macro-economic policy .
The agreement is that the Bank serves the EU 's goals .
The Bank deploys its investment funds in order to strengthen the EU 's macro-economic policy .
In other words , the Bank 's mission does not require it to adopt a pro-active role .
The EIB is to promote economic and social cohesion within the EU by financially supporting the goals which the European Union has in mind .
As a result , the EIB naturally has macro-economic influence , and , indeed a great deal of it , but this influence is not a goal in itself .
I should now like to turn to the plan by the Group of the Party of European Socialists to include in the structure of the EIB a body to define the scope for employment and the effects on employment of EIB projects .
Creating employment is not one of the Bank 's tasks as such , but it is sometimes , of course , a side-effect .
The Bank 's task to modernise means the effect could also be the complete opposite , intensifying the eternal dilemma between productivity increase through high-grade investments and employment .
Given this dilemma , there is no point in setting up an extensive employment barometer .
In my view , employment is not a goal in itself as far as the Bank is concerned .
In order to avoid unnecessary administrative costs , we have agreed to the simple registration of employment effects - or employment impact assessment , to use a fine phrase - but without any snags .
In other words , employment impact assessment should not take on the scale of the Bank 's environmental section .
Sustainable environmental policy is one of the Bank 's explicit tasks .
We are thus opposed to a comparison of the employment barometer with the environmental section .
We will try to prevent the comparison between the two , suggested by the word ' similar ' in the amendment , by a split vote .
We believe that the EIB funds should be used for investments and not for the system itself if this can at all be helped .
Finally , there is the question of monitoring .
At present , the Bank 's outgoings are covered by the EU Member States .
It also generates money itself by issuing bonds .
In our view , the issuing of bonds to pension institutions , as proposed by the rapporteur , is unwise for the time being because there is as yet insufficient transparency within the Bank .
We hope that the amendments we have tabled will prevent the link being made to pensions in the final report .
We expect of the Commission that , after three years of debating the issue of monitoring , it will finally produce proposals on how better monitoring can be arranged and what the Court of Auditors ' exact role might be .
I believe in the Dutch saying : ' vertrouwen is goed , maar controle is beter ' - trust is good , but control is better .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report we are currently considering , which I must commend for its quality , clearly emphasises the importance of the European Investment Bank as a crucial instrument for the funding of projects throughout the European Union . It also , however , highlights the decisive role that this bank plays in the economies of the candidate countries for which it proposes , as a matter of fact , to create a special social policy programme .
For this reason , the increase in social capital recently decided on can be considered to be in line and consistent with these structural objectives , which are so important to achieving a global European economy that is prosperous and fully sustainable .
The European Investment Bank is already responsible for more than 5 % of all investments made in the Union , which has enabled more than 400 000 jobs to be created , specifically through the support that the bank gives to small and medium-sized enterprises .
It should be remembered that the European Union has recently taken on increased responsibility for the funding of venture capital , in particular for small and medium-sized enterprises , through the EIB .
Unfortunately , as the rapporteur also points out , the work of the European Investment Bank is sometimes limited by the orthodox and rigid rules for the consolidation of public finances , which must be complied with under the growth and stability pact .
We must remember that a large part of the EIB 's remit is geared towards investments of a structural nature , such as infrastructures or venture capital for small and medium-sized enterprises , and that the success of these investments is often dependent on the possibility of mobilisation in partnership with public spending .
The understanding that has just been reached , therefore , is not indifferent , in the framework of the current budgetary rules , to the flexibility that is crucial to the correct implementation of the growth and stability pact .
Today it is increasingly clear that Europe has an aim which is also an undeniable need : that of becoming a highly competitive area and therefore , of creating wealth and of harmonising its distribution .
This aim can only be achieved , however , through support for structural investments and is , consequently , unfettered by restrictions that could endanger these investments .
The quality of expenditure , whether public or private , must be the guiding framework for investment policy and the European Investment Bank has an irreplaceable role in this framework .
I congratulate the rapporteur on the content of her report and on having been able to interpret these aspirations .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Maystadt , I want to begin by thanking Mrs van den Burg for the sterling work she has done .
There is also cause , I think , for sincerely commending the EIB and Mr Maystadt for the way in which the dialogue between the European Parliament and the EIB has developed in recent years .
From having been , as Mr Sjöstedt pointed out , a fairly closed institution , the bank has since opened itself up to dialogue and the exchange of opinions .
My first coming into contact with the EIB a number of years ago was due to the fact that independent organisations complained about the EIB 's lack of transparency and its failure to appreciate the need to contribute significantly to the EU 's efforts to devise a policy in favour of a sustainable environment .
Crucial progress has been made within both these important areas .
As we all know , nothing is so good , however , that it cannot be improved , and that applies too to access to information in several languages .
Madam President , the rapporteur 's ambition has been further to emphasise the EIB 's overarching role in macro-economic and financial terms and in terms of political strategy .
I share that approach in principle , but I would at the same time warn against we in Parliament 's expressing too many wishes , legitimate enough in themselves but meaning that we cease to focus upon the EIB 's main tasks , namely those of promoting regional development , supporting forward-looking technology , taking account of the environment and concentrating on the candidate countries and what are termed the partner countries .
As you can hear , the EIB now already has more than enough on its plate .
I would emphasise , however , that the EIB 's efforts in the Balkan countries , which are part of its remit , deserve increased attention .
Where supervision of the EIB is concerned , we would repeat our proposal that the issues be addressed at the forthcoming intergovernmental conference .
Finally , I should like to ask Mr Maystadt how he views our desire for a panel of experts to be set up , of the type to be found within the World Bank .
I know that there is a certain scepticism within the EIB where the view is that the EIB cannot be compared with the World Bank and that , moreover , the EU has the institution of the Ombudsman .
What does the EIB intend to do to disseminate further knowledge concerning the global loans , that is to say the loans to small enterprises ?
Madam President , as permanent rapporteur on loans and guarantees for the Committee on Budgets , I have only positive things to say on the whole about the EIB .
I have , it is true , been astonished at the levels of bureaucracy that exist between the Bank , the Commission and the Council , evident from the financing of environmental protection investment in Russia 's Baltic basin .
What happened showed that the Bank is not just a financial institution but also a political playing field .
The environment suffered as a result of the political games played by representatives of the Member States .
The European Union guarantees a large portion of what the EIB lends and its loans in this respect do not carry any risk .
A 3A credit rating keeps the cost of borrowing low in other forms of fund-raising on the part of the Bank .
As the EIB has a good credit rating and the bad debt risk is low , it should adhere to stringent social and environmental criteria when granting loans .
We have to promote aims that work for the common good .
With that purpose in mind , the Bank must listen very attentively to the totally justified opinions of the NGO , Bankwatch Network .
Our group backs the calls for improved monitoring of the Bank .
Madam President , I warmly welcome this report .
My group has submitted a small number of amendments which aim to highlight the importance of greater transparency and environmental commitment in the work of the EIB and also , in particular , to ensure that the EIB applies the highest ethical standards possible in project financing , including withdrawal from any project carried out in breach of national legislation or where corrupt enterprises are involved .

In connection with that last point , I am sure Mr Maystadt is aware of the ongoing court case in Lesotho , where European companies are on trial for allegedly paying bribes to win contracts in the Lesotho Highlands water project , a project part-funded by the EIB .
Since corrupt practices in the award of contracts for development projects represents a major threat to the provision of good governance , would you agree , Mr Maystadt , that it is crucial that the EIB examine its due diligence procedures , with respect not only to the Lesotho project , but also to all future projects , and will you report back to Parliament on its findings ?
A brief question to the Commission : will the Commission honour the commitment made several years ago to provide the necessary financial support to the Lesotho Government , so as to enable it to pursue these court cases to their conclusion and thereby guarantee good governance ?
Madam President , Commissioner Monti , President Maystadt , please allow me to congratulate the rapporteur on her calls for the EIB to attain higher targets in terms of support provided for the Member States ' economies .
This Bank performs a special task : the distribution not of all funds , but only of funds intended to contribute to the achievement of the Union 's objectives .
This institutional task has helped to create new wealth and to support entrepreneurial initiatives in the regions of the Union which are most lagging behind .
The Bank 's efforts to support certain sectors , such as the environment sector , where EUR 5.9 billion has been allocated to environmental protection projects , are certainly commendable .
The most important aspect for territorial development is still support for SMEs .
In this case , partner banks which also distribute funds need to provide detailed information about the investments .
It has therefore been suggested that a credit ceiling is set in advance for SMEs and that , at the end of the financial year , a report is submitted to the European Parliament on the actual use of the pre-established ceiling and on any reasons or difficulties encountered which caused it not to be used , or only to be used in part .
I certainly support the major undertaking of the EIB in the candidate countries , but objective 1 regions should not be forgotten : even after they no longer have this status , they should be monitored as appropriate and given substantial credit support so that they can conclude their development process - certainly not fully completed - by 2006 .
We should pay special attention to the Bank 's Statute , which can only be amended in accordance with the procedure for amending and revising the Treaties laid down in Article 48 of the Treaty on European Union .
In particular , Article 5 , which provides for 6 % to be paid in by the signatory Member States , should be amended .
An increase in this percentage would lead to higher loans and , consequently , greater support for the areas concerned , and greater profitability for the Bank or , alternatively , with the same amount of revenue , a reduction in the applicable rates .
Mr President , I should like firstly to commend the rapporteur , and also Mr Sjöstedt for his opinion on this report .
I have had the satisfaction of working on EIB matters for many years , and I often say that it is more difficult getting into the EIB than into Fort Knox .
It is still a hard fight to obtain greater transparency and supervision where the EIB is concerned .
The bank is still very unwilling to open its accounts and projects up to external supervision .
It is almost impossible for the Court of Auditors to obtain access to documents .
The bank always refers to banking secrecy or to the fact that the money does not come from the EU budget but from its own resources .
In March 1999 , the EIB , the Commission and the Court of Auditors signed an agreement concerning the Court of Auditors ' being able to supervise the EIB , but I firmly believe that the agreement must be altered so that it gives the Court of Auditors the same right to supervise the EIB as it has to supervise the ECB .
I am extremely pleased , moreover , that Parliament is now making this demand .
Why should the EIB have special status ?
That is something I absolutely cannot accept .
I would compare the EIB with the goblins ' bank in the Harry Potter books , namely a totally closed institution in which no one must interfere .
Madam President , allow me first of all to tell you how much I appreciate having this opportunity to continue the dialogue with the European Parliament , in particular at a time when this House is opening up to members of parliament from States that are soon to join the European Union .
Two weeks ago in Vienna , speaking before the annual European Investment Bank Forum , President Cox recalled the historical importance of enlargement and emphasised , with particular eloquence , that this move is the essential extension of the work towards peace and stability commenced by the founders of European integration .
For its own , modest , part , the European Investment Bank , which was created by the Treaty of Rome for the purpose of providing financial support for the political objectives of the European Community , is trying to contribute to successful enlargement .
The European Investment Bank , which already has a portfolio of loans of around EUR 18 billion in this region , making it by far the main backer , will , of course , continue to back the necessary investments in the future Member States .
Three areas in particular are targeted : infrastructures , with particular regard to transport , energy and telecommunications ; the environment , because tremendous investment is needed in order to achieve compliance with Community standards ; and , lastly , direct foreign investment , because it is a particularly powerful tool in bringing conditions in the candidate countries into line with those in the current Member States .
The preparation of the candidate countries for accession is therefore one of five priority axes adopted by the Council of Governors of the EIB last June , when it agreed to a 50 % capital increase for the European Investment Bank .
I shall briefly mention the other four priority axes .
First of all , regional development , with a view to devoting 70 % of our direct loans and at least 50 % of our global loans to projects based in regions eligible for assistance under the Structural Funds .
Then what we call the i2i ( Initiative innovation 2000 ) programme , which was implemented following the Lisbon European Council and which aims to encourage investments that contribute to transforming the European economy into an economy based on knowledge and innovation .
Over EUR 13 billion of loans have already been approved within the context of this initiative .
Another priority axis is environmental protection and improvement , with the objective of devoting between one quarter and one third of our total loans each year to environmental projects .
The fifth and final priority axis is our support for the European development aid policy , in particular with the launch of two new facilities : the Euro-Mediterranean Facility , which was established by the Barcelona European Council , and the new Investment Facility created by the Cotonou agreement between the European Union and the ACP countries .
Having thus briefly summarised the five priority axes for the coming years , I would now like to try to respond to the various speakers . I confirm that I will be available to give fuller , more precise answers at committee meetings .
I would like first of all to respond to your rapporteur , Mrs van den Burg , who has put a great deal of effort into preparing this excellent report .
I would like briefly to raise a subject close to her heart : the use of EIB bonds by pension funds .
In the United Kingdom , pension funds have already invested in long-term EIB bonds .
We have not yet had the same success on the euro market , but we are trying to find formulas that might be of greater interest to pension funds and insurance companies .
Employment , which many of you have continued to focus on , clearly constitutes a final objective .
I believe , however , that it would be dangerous to make the number of jobs created directly by a project the deciding factor in the decision on whether to finance the project .
In this regard , I share some of the reservations expressed by Mrs Peijs .
We consider that our project must have a positive impact on the economy , through the innovation-productivity-growth-employment chain , but that it would be dangerous to establish too direct a link between the number of jobs created and the choice of a particular project .
With regard to the financing of SMEs , I would remind you that we finance small and medium-sized enterprises in two ways : on the one hand , through global loans , as half of our global loans go to small enterprises , and , on the other , through the provision of risk capital from the European Investment Fund .
I would say to the Commission , in response to the comment by Commissioner Monti echoing one of the report 's recommendations , that , in fact , we plan to adopt the Commission 's definition of small and medium-sized enterprises .
We must , however , first solve one problem , which is that of medium-sized enterprises .
The latter are in danger of being considered too large to receive global loans but too small to benefit from direct loans .
When we have found the appropriate method for medium-sized enterprises , we will in effect be able to adopt the Commission 's definition .
With regard to the important matter of monitoring the European Investment Bank , I would say that , naturally , we are entirely open to monitoring by the Court of Auditors within the scope of its competence .
Mr Blak , I can assure you that the Court of Auditors has access to all the documents it wishes to obtain within the context of the tripartite agreement concluded between the Commission , the Court of Auditors and the European Investment Bank .
This agreement operates to the satisfaction of all three parties .
The President of the Court of Auditors confirmed this to me and you have just heard Commissioner Monti say that the Commission , too , is satisfied with this agreement , which will be renegotiated and renewed .
In this regard , there is therefore no problem .
The Court of Auditors has the power to monitor the use of Community funds and , insofar as the EIB uses Community funds , the Court of Auditors must clearly be fully able to exercise its monitoring powers .
There is also , however , the sector of EIB activities which have nothing to do with Community funds and are financed by our earnings from financial markets all over the world .
These activities , naturally , also need monitoring .
Moreover , it is in our interests to be monitored effectively , and we are already monitored by a verification committee and external auditors who report directly to the governors .
That said , I think it would be desirable to find a form of supervision that is appropriate for a bank .
I have already said this before the House , and I confirm it today .
We are entirely open to the idea , and even keen to be subject to a form of banking supervision .
Furthermore , that is why we are following with great interest the discussions taking place on the possible creation of a European banking supervisor .
Mrs Lucas raised some interesting points , but I have already exceeded my speaking time .
I will be able to give her more information in committee , in particular with regard to the Lesotho project she mentioned .
I can simply confirm that , as soon as we became aware of signs of possible fraud , we ordered a detailed audit and communicated the information assembled during this audit to both Olaf , the monitoring body with which you are familiar , and to the Lesotho legal institutions .
We did not uncover any fraud with regard to the use of EIB funds , but our enquiry at that time enabled us to discover other factors which we communicated to the competent authorities .
I shall be able to say more about this in committee .
Madam President , I hope that the House has found my response informative and that it has given you an idea of the way in which we and all the Bank 's staff view our responsibilities and intend to put them into practice over the coming years , in close cooperation with the Commission and maintaining dialogue with Parliament .
Mr President , thank you for coming here today and for the information you have kindly shared with us .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
report ( A5-0352 / 2002 ) by Mr Lipietz , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission 's XXXIst Report on Competition Policy 2001 [ SEC ( 2002 ) 0462 - C5-0282 / 2002 - 2002 / 2142 ( COS ) ]
report ( A5-0353 / 2002 ) by Mr Herzog , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the 2001 scoreboard for state aid ( spring 2002 update ) [ 2001 / 2196 ( INI ) ] .
Madam President , in the short time available , there being two reports to be discussed , I will try to consider a number of different issues .
First of all , I would like to thank the rapporteurs , Mr Herzog and Mr Lipietz , for their excellent reports .
Once again , they both reflect Parliament 's overall support for European competition policy , support which is so important for the Commission and its departments .
Allow me to set out the main features of our competition policy in the state aid sector .
The Commission has continued its efforts in this sector in order to simplify , modernise and clarify the rules and practices .
New regulations and Community guidelines have been drawn up .
For example , at the start of this year , new multisectoral regulations were adopted setting out a much clearer body of rules for the assessment of regional state aid for major investment projects .
Another important example is the use of block exemptions , which allow Member States to grant aid without the need for prior notification .
Block exemptions for small- and medium-sized enterprises and for training have been adopted and , recently , an exemption for state aid for employment too .
With regard to the reduction and adjustment of state aid , the Member States undertook to reduce the level of aid in the Conclusions of the Stockholm and Barcelona European Councils .
In effect , we have seen a clear downward trend , but undeniably , the cumulative effect of aid totalling EUR 82 billion is continuing to substantially distort competition in the Union .
I will now , if I may , respond to some of the points raised in Mr Herzog 's report .
I firmly believe that the best way to promote overall Community industrial competitiveness is precisely to maintain a firm policy on state aid. state aid policy is criticised at times , in that it is said to be at variance with measures seeking to attain certain Community objectives .
In my view , this variance is , in the majority of cases , more imagined than real .
The aim of state aid control is to ensure that the positive effects of one particular measure are not counteracted by the distortion in competition which the measure itself creates .
I also endorse the view , expounded in the report , that we need to focus more on assessing the effectiveness and efficacy of aid .
This is one aspect of the aid policy for which the Member States are chiefly responsible .
They must develop ways to assess aid schemes , whereas the Commission , for its part , intends to help this process by providing a forum where experiences can be shared .
As regards competition law , our activities have been characterised by our debate on the Commission proposal to update its procedural rules .
Work being carried out by the Council regarding the Commission proposal - a proposal fully supported by Parliament , which once again , I would thank - is now nearing completion .
It is expected that the Council will agree on the text of a new regulation next week .
I am sure that we will also see considerable improvements in our procedures with regard to the aspect which Parliament emphasised most in its resolution , that is the fact that European competition rules should be applied in all cases where trade between Member States could be affected .
Updating Regulation 17 , ladies and gentlemen , is an example of the permanent culture of reform which the Commission is seeking to encourage within the institution and which - as we shall soon see - also applies to mergers .
I would like to point out , moreover , that as regards updating competition rules , it was the Commission , three years ago , which took the initiative .
You will also recall that it was not all that easy , at the start , to persuade the Member States that it would be in the interest of better European governance to have more decentralisation in this respect .
As regards mergers , the number and complexity of cases which reach second phase investigations has increased rapidly .
In 2001 , the Commission issued five prohibition decisions .
Even though this is the highest number of prohibition decisions issued in a single year , this figure continues to represent only around 1.5 % of all final decisions .
In this connection , it probably will not have escaped your attention that , in October , the Court of First Instance overturned two of these prohibition decisions , in the Schneider / Legrand and Tetra Laval / Sidel cases , and there was also the judgment in the Airtours / First Choice case , already referred to in your report .
A detailed discussion on the consequences of these judgments for the Commission 's work would take more time than we have today .
I would , however , like to make a few comments .
We are carefully considering the judgments , both in order to decide whether to appeal to the Court of Justice , and in order to take appropriate action for the future .
Nevertheless , we should not allow these specific , individual cases to distort our view of the Community merger control policy .
As you know , we initiated a vast reform of merger control procedures a long time before these recent rulings .
If necessary , it may be appropriate to take advantage of the lessons we have learnt from these judgments in order to put into effect an even more radical reform than that originally planned : this is precisely my intention , as I have already said .
Regardless of whether or not we appeal to the Court of Justice , it is right and proper that the Commission learns as many lessons as possible from certain assessments which have been made and , accordingly , the reform will be even more far-reaching and sweeping .
I am , however , keen to specify , quite clearly , that the improvements which we expect to see in the instrument will in no way mean a more lenient policy .
We believe that merger control policy - just like competition policy in general - must be fair but , at the same time , strict .
I intend to propose to the College a sweeping reform of the merger control system by the end of December , and I would like to briefly highlight some of its aspects now .
The first point concerns the length of investigations .
A major advantage of the European system is the short investigation times , as is widely acknowledged .
Nevertheless , these short time frames also create some drawbacks which translate , as it were , into a certain tension , at times quite charged , in the final dealings between the parties and the Commission .
Therefore , we will not relinquish the benefits derived from these short investigations - which exist in Europe but not in the United States - but we will also propose the introduction of a certain amount of flexibility through a series of provisions to extend certain deadlines .
The other improvements to the decision-making process which I plan to propose include : the formalisation and extension of the existing system of cross-checks in all cases which reach second phase investigations ; greater transparency , allowing access to the dossier and dialogue between opposing market views at an earlier stage than is currently the case ; more human resources in the Competition Directorate-General , both in order to work in a more appropriate fashion with regard to the high standards set by the Court and to improve our economic analysis capabilities .
I would also like to touch briefly on judicial control in the event of company mergers , which I am aware is of great interest to the European Parliament in general and to Mrs Riis-Jørgensen in particular .
Recent judgments have shown that the European courts exert strict , meticulous control over the Commission 's analyses in merger cases .
Judicial control , which exists and is strict , should not , however , only be effective in terms of thoroughness , but also in terms of speed .
In this respect , there is still substantial room for improvement , in terms of the speed with which judgments are issued .
A fast track system has already been introduced , and we sincerely hope that the Court of First Instance will be able to deal more swiftly with and increase the number of fast track cases .
The Commission is willing - as we have already stated - firmly to support the granting of further resources which the Court will certainly need to implement these improvements .
Furthermore , it may be helpful to consider whether it would be appropriate to have judicial panels of experts handling certain categories of cases at first instance or a unit specialised in mergers at the Court of First Instance .
Whatever kind of reform is considered in order to achieve a successful system , it is , in any case , important not to lose sight of the many merits of our administrative system .
I must say that , following the publication of the Commission Green Paper , there were very few calls to abandon or make radical changes to the current system .
If forced to choose between our system and the US system , many businesses - several of which are American - have indicated a preference for the European Union 's system during consultations .
Moreover , as you know , systems grounded on administrative decisions in this field are certainly not exclusive to the Commission .
Indeed , this is the model used at national level , in the majority of Member States , and it reflects European legal traditions .
My proposals will therefore significantly improve the current system : in some fundamental aspects , they will completely transform the present system .
My ambition is that what we propose will be the most modern and effective merger control system , and it will improve the European model by incorporating certain aspects of the US model .
As time is short , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I will not expand on other important points addressed in the two reports by Mr Lipietz and Mr Herzog .
In particular , I am unable to consider one point which I know , however , to be of great interest to the Chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , Mrs Randzio-Plath , and that is international cooperation , an area in which considerable progress has been made over the last year .
Madam President , Commissioner , please excuse the absence of my colleague Mr Lipietz , who has had to stay in Paris this week because a loved one is very ill .
Our committee was not , in actual fact , unanimous on the report I am about to present to you on his behalf , in contrast with its unanimity on the report on the European Investment Bank .
That is why around 40 amendments , including , moreover , a dozen or so tabled by my own group , have been tabled for discussion in plenary .
Despite the differences of opinion that are quite traditional within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on this type of report , I shall emphasise the points on which we agree , first of all highlighting our warm support for the work carried out by Commissioner Monti and his staff .
Everyone in our committee is in favour of a well-organised European competition policy and the Commission 's report for 2001 bears witness to the efforts that you and your staff have made .
International action , to which you have just referred , does not present any more of a problem .
We are in favour of establishing global rules .
The report therefore emphasises the need to strengthen international cooperation in the field of competition .
The majority , if not all of our colleagues are opposed to renationalising competition policy , and this is a strong political message .
You have just referred to the recent judgments of the European Court of Justice .
Paragraphs 4 and 5 of our report clearly state : ' the European Parliament does not consider the recent judgment of the Court of Justice ( ? ) as disqualifying the work of the Commission ' .
The issue we should be raising instead is the reorganisation of the Court of Justice .
You mentioned various alternatives .
The report describes the creation of a new legal chamber .
I do not know what your opinion is on the problem of state aid , which is the subject of the report by Mr Herzog .
If I understand correctly , next year we shall have a single report on competition policy and state aid policy .
I am delighted to hear it .
Another point of agreement of great political importance concerns the fact that state aid should , as laid down by the Treaty , focus on horizontal objectives .
In committee , the disagreements tended to concern the way in which the objectives were defined and implemented .
We have already discussed this with you at length .
A great deal of progress remains to be made .
I have just learnt of the conclusions of the Competition Council in this regard .
We must work towards making the various actions of the Commission compatible and coherent with European policies .
In this context , the opportunity for recourse to state aid in order to achieve these horizontal objectives should be reiterated .
There is one last point of agreement between Members : we need to strengthen the legislative role of the European Parliament in all aspects of competition policy .
The report specifically calls - this work is naturally the responsibility of the Commission - for Parliament to have the right of codecision with regard to legislative procedures concerning competition .
Two points have caused a great deal of controversy and a number of amendments concerning them have been tabled in plenary .
The first concerns our stance with regard to the candidate countries .
There is a consensus within the committee that competition rules should be considered to apply without discrimination to all the Member States .
The effective implementation of competition policy , however , has led to debate .
Although we must be strict in combating corruption - and the Commission 's reports emphasise how serious these problems still are in many of the candidate countries - some of us would like to see a degree of flexibility in the assessment of this state aid , along the lines of the attitude of the European Union during German reunification , when it seems that we adopted a particular attitude towards the new , reunified Länder .
The last point of agreement between committee members is their favourable view of the liberalisation of several economic sectors .
Some consider that the processes underway are generally balanced and satisfactory , while others believe that these liberalisation processes do not comply with all the objectives of the European Union .
Madam President , in order to avoid having to speak again , I would like very briefly , on behalf of my group , to highlight the importance we give to a number of amendments we have tabled on our assessment of the examination of state aid in the candidate countries .
Then there are our Amendments Nos 19 and 22 on services of general interest , both at international level - WTO negotiations - and national level .
Lastly , Commissioner , I would like to hear from you .
As you know , the Convention has already received a number of contributions on the subject of services of general interest .
Others will follow and I believe it would be appropriate politically for the Commission , also , to communicate to the Convention a contribution on the way in which it envisages the relationship between competition policy and services of general interest .
Mr President , I would like to thank all my colleagues who have supported me and in particular those who share the view of this report , which I believe to be balanced and concerned with real situations .
I note that the amendments tabled by Mr Evans and Mrs Riis-Jørgensen ruin that balance and in fact condemn any state aid in market activities .
I therefore hope that these amendments will not be retained and that the balance achieved in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs will be preserved in plenary .
I worked together with the Directorate General for Competition , which very carefully manages state aid policy , and I am very pleased with how the dialogue progressed .
Like any competition policy , the policy on state aid is facing new challenges .
Its prime objective remains to reduce all aid that distorts or could distort competition , but other objectives should also be taken into consideration : competitiveness and growth - the Lisbon objectives - and social cohesion , which involves support for struggling regions to catch up and develop .
This is why the Stockholm and Lisbon European Councils made the commitment not to reduce all aid , but aid in the sense of Article 87 , in other words aid that creates unfair competition .
They particularly advocate redeploying aid towards the horizontal objectives .
All of these Council decisions must be implemented firmly , but with discernment .
I stress in my report that the effectiveness of horizontal aid must be evaluated .
For example , the legitimacy of aid for research , the environment , training and employment is clear , and increases in this aid are often desired .
However , it is not always effective in terms of the Lisbon and Gothenburg objectives , and we should therefore move forward with our recommendations .
It would be dangerous to ban any notion of sectoral aid , however .
This aid could prove to be essential for strategic projects on which Europe is falling behind and the market is declining , but also for dealing with unfair competition on the global market , or to save production operations that are faced with very serious economic shocks .
We are aware that the Commission has also itself opened the debate on the interaction of competition and industrial policy .
The enlargement of the Union to the Central and Eastern European countries also poses difficult problems which must be dealt with fairly .
If the private sector will not fund the modernisation of the steel industry in Poland and the Czech Republic , in a global context of excess capacity , should we nevertheless ask those countries to give up developing that sector ?
A re-examination of steel aid is essential .
In the same way , while it is legitimate to aim to eliminate special tax arrangements and convert them into regional aid , it should not be forgotten that countries such as Ireland benefited a great deal from them until recently and that as the economic level of the Eastern regions concerned is particularly low , it will not be possible to create viable companies straight away .
Regarding services of general interest , a perspective of progress is emerging .
The Council and the Commission are re-assessing their interest for the Community .
In accordance with the wishes of Parliament , the Court of Justice recognises that financial compensation , in return for the obligations imposed , is not aid .
We therefore want the Commission to speed up its discussions on this basis and to propose new tools soon in order to ensure free choice , resources for services of general interest , and competition , as well as to safeguard non profit-making activities .
Finally , we ask it to speed up the work on considering tax systems , described by the Primarolo group as encouraging unfair competition , in terms of state aid that should be eliminated .
Ladies and gentlemen , the scoreboard is a step forward in achieving transparency and in the public debate , and we welcome this .
However , the Commission is aware of the limits that we have highlighted .
The comparability of data between Member States is not guaranteed , the effectiveness of aid has not been evaluated and a comparison between the Union and its major world competitors has not yet been provided .
These are also areas to work on in the future , and in view of which , it would be desirable to increase the involvement of civil society .
Allow me to add a few words on competition policy as a whole .
Competition is essential for the viability and efficiency of the internal market .
However , the European Union has a great deal of progress to make in terms of industrial and technological development .
We should not move backwards in terms of competition policy , but we need to bring industrial and competition policies to the same level in the treaties and in practice , otherwise the Union will fall behind in terms of innovation , scale effects , networks and creation of companies .
Experts already believe that its potential for growth in terms of production and productivity has slowed down , while we wish to speed it up .
The process of mergers is only one aspect of the problem .
We are aware that the general centralisation of powers within the DG poses a problem , but we do not want to swing towards the American model .
In the reform under preparation , we would prefer a much more open , deliberative instruction procedure , which allows for reasonable timescales , while the decision would still be the responsibility of the Commission .
Mr President , thanks are due to the Commissioner for the competition report , but congratulations also go to both rapporteurs for presenting us with their analysis of the issue .
The competition report is based solely on the accountability of the Commission .
This means that our comments carry about as much weight in the Commission as Economic and Social Committee opinions , and no more ; we must be clear about this .
This is not to say , however , that the Commission , which has been given considerable competence here , wishes to restrict its rights in the field of competition .
Allow me to make a number of critical comments about the further development of competition policy per se .
Progressive globalisation , the fact that the European economy is characterised by mergers , and an ever tougher competition policy have consequences for the situation on the ground in that they bring changes for the labour market .
This does not mean that I wish to bring this process to a halt ; I want to put to you the view of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , which is that the employment guidelines are no longer sufficient on their own to compensate for the labour market problems arising from increased competitive pressure combined with today 's weak growth .
I know that we should not , indeed we must not , pin excessive blame for current problems on competition policy ; I am clear about that .
But what I wish to say is that the possible extension of competition rules to services of general interest would appear to me to be problematic .
It is not for the Commission to define these on its own ; it must be done by politicians in general .
Competition policy is undoubtedly of value in itself , but must be reconciled with socially important areas of general interest , and this is even more important as the European Union prepares for enlargement .
I hope that you will have sympathy for this view , Commissioner .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , I should like to make a few comments , which are mainly procedural in nature .
We welcome the abolition of the notification requirement for competition agreements .
I think this is a positive development that will reduce the administrative burden on companies and the authorities .
We would , however , urge the Commission to fulfil a justified desire on the part of companies to obtain more legal certainty , particularly in complex matters .
We would ask the Commission to investigate whether it would be possible at all in exceptional cases , involving large investments , to make general statements about the compatibility of agreements with European competition rules , as is common in America with the Business Review Letter .
The modernisation of competition policy can only succeed if the competition rules are applied in a uniform and consistent manner across the EU .
What we need is a European appeal option against decisions taken by national competition authorities .
We would ask the Commission to take the necessary steps in this direction .
As Mrs Peijs said a moment ago : trust is good , but control is better in cases like these .
Thirdly , the network of national competition authorities requires a clear and transparent statute .
At the moment , it is still unclear how cooperation goes on , and there is no real statute for it .
Such a statute should clearly set out how the Commission and national competition authorities should relate to each other and how mutual cooperation takes place , particularly , for example , in the exchange of confidential information .
I think that very sound and clear agreements are needed in this respect and I also believe that the candidate countries should be involved in this .
Finally , we take the view that it would benefit the democratic legitimacy of economic competition legislation if Parliament , too , were to be given codecision rights in this area .
Mr President , the control of state aids is one of the three pillars of competition policy .
Many of these aids concern industry , the energy sector , the transport sector or agriculture , which is why the Committee on Industry has issued an opinion on the Herzog report .
In this opinion , which was adopted by a large majority , we firstly welcomed the State Aid Scoreboard , which provides greater transparency and openness and gives a clearer overview of the situation .
Secondly , in conjunction with this , we adopted a series of demands in the Committee on Industry , which are addressed to the Commission .
Firstly , we welcome the objective of continuously reducing overall aid allocations .
Secondly , we say that future scoreboards should include subsidies in the accession countries .
Our third demand - and this is an old request - is for the thresholds applied to the ' de minimis ' rule to be raised .
In the future we want the smaller cases to be exempted so that local decision-makers have more room for manoeuvre .
In addition , we want the special tax arrangements to be subjected to more intensive scrutiny and to be included in this Scoreboard .
Finally , in particular where services of general interest are concerned - other Members have already commented on this - we want the Commission to at last get round to doing its job , as it has been saying it will for so long .
We know that a Green Paper on the provision of services of general interest is currently being prepared .
We hope , Commissioner , that this Green Paper , which is of course being drafted primarily under the authority of the Commission President , will encompass all aspects of services of general interest .
We do not think that in general these services should be exempt from the competition rules , as has just been said , but that where the picture is unclear , clarity can be achieved .
Our final point in the Committee on Industry is a long-standing demand on the part of Parliament .
It concerns the regulations on which you have just reported , Commissioner , and which will entail an update of Regulation No 17 .
We want these regulations - including the forthcoming rules on services of general interest - to be classified as internal market legislation and to be subject to the codecision procedure .
I know that this is not in your interests , but it is in ours .
Nevertheless , we hope for your understanding on at least some of these points .
Mr President , I am speaking today on behalf of Mr Evans , who is the shadow rapporteur for the PPE-DE Group .
He very much regrets that he cannot be here today .
We have presented some amendments to these reports , with the general aim that they should provide more encouragement for free trade .
In the last few years , the European Union has rightly focused on the need for greater competition and consumer choice and has often used its powers to great and beneficial effect .
Increased free trade and the reduction of unfair subsidies have been a most positive result .
Just as policies of this kind produced handsome rewards for businesses and consumers when my country , under a Conservative government , rediscovered and pioneered these practices in the 1980s , they are now doing the same in the rest of the European Union .
Encouraging greater competition is an enormous task .
For the first three decades after the Second World War , state aid and protectionism were less controversial .
It is still difficult to combat these traditional ideas and entrenched interests , especially in a climate where the opponents of free trade often have the catchier slogans .
We are most fortunate that we have , in Commissioner Monti , someone who is convinced that the opening of markets and the freeing of trade is in everyone 's interest .
We are most grateful to him for his persistent and hard work in combating anything , be it cartels or subsidies , that impedes the operation of a fair market .
The report by Mr Herzog concerns the newly-introduced scoreboard for state aid .
This is a most useful tool .
We fully support its introduction and are anxious that it should be used enthusiastically .
It is most encouraging to note that it points to a decline in state aid , although we would like to see a further decrease .
The disparities between countries show that some Member States provide up to three times as much state aid as others .
It is our hope that the scoreboard will serve as an encouragement to Member States to continue and accelerate their reforms and that the scoreboard will also assist the reforms of the new Member States after their accession in 2004 .
Mr Lipietz 's report focuses on general competition policy and we are pleased to see that it reflects many of our concerns .
In particular , the report highlights the lack of progress in the liberalisation of the gas and electricity markets and urges action in the opening up of European markets in energy , transport and postal services .
The report rightly congratulates Commissioner Monti and his staff on their approach .
We in this Parliament should urge him further along the path he has chosen to take .
I would like to conclude by commending the continuation of the European Union 's policies in these areas to Parliament .
I hope Parliament will support our amendments and I look forward to even greater progress in the years to come .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Monti , on the subject of the report concerning the scoreboard , I wish , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , to say that we are not satisfied with the outcome of the vote in the committee and have therefore , together with the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , tabled a number of amendments .
On condition that these amendments are adopted , we shall vote in favour of the report .
I would also thank the Commission for the work done on the scoreboard , which is a very useful tool for achieving the objective of a general reduction in state aid .
I welcome the report on the Commission 's 31st report on competition policy .
I am especially pleased with the support given by the committee to my proposal that consideration should be given to setting up a competition court , Article 225 A of the Treaty of Nice having paved the way for such a possibility . A competition court would increase the legal protection of European enterprises .
A competition court would have to operate as a counterweight to , and supervisor of , the Commission 's experts on issues relating to competition policy .
It would ensure that the Commission was no longer viewed as the body that both investigates and judges enterprises . It would make for greater transparency of the enterprises concerned .
I absolutely do not want to see a weakening of competition policy in general .
On the contrary . Nor do I want to see the Competition Directorate-General 's role in competition policy weakened .
I want to support Commissioner Monti and all the other forces for good in their view that , in the future too , competition policy should remain precisely that , with no interference from other policy areas , such as industrial policy .
I am delighted that Mr Monti is well disposed towards a European competition court .
I would also take the liberty of looking forward and commenting on the Commission 's motion for a resolution for reforming EU competition law .
Throughout the reform process , the ELDR Group has supported the Commission in stating that reform is necessary .
At the same time , we have maintained that this must not lead to a renationalisation of competition policy .
The Commission has assured us that this will not happen and has referred to a network 's being set up , consisting of the Competition Directorate-General and the national competition authorities .
I am confident that this network would be effective . At the same time , I would , however , put forward a proposal that I hope the Commission will consider .
It is about creating a special unit or task force in the Competition Directorate-General whose task it will be to ensure , and monitor the fact , that the competition rules are applied equally in all the Member States .
This is a large and important task that will become still greater with the forthcoming enlargement .
I shall go into this in more detail in a letter to the Commissioner .
Mr President , Commissioner , now that the internal market is complete , our regions are obviously operating in a more competitive environment .
That is why it is necessary constantly to improve European rules in this field .
Since , however , the European Union does not exist in isolation from world trade , a competition system is also needed in the WTO context .
If we are to take seriously the task that we set ourselves at the Gothenburg Summit , following on from the Lisbon Summit , then competition policy must not only be limited to economic conditions , but must also take into account social and environmental factors .
An economy cannot be competitive if it does not have a highly skilled workforce at its disposal , if wages and salaries are so low that competition does not bolster domestic demand but chokes it , and if manufactured products carry no guarantee that they are not harmful to public health .
That is why we need a change of thinking here , to transform the internal battle for subsidised locational advantages into a debate about how we can make the way people live more sustainable .
Competition policy must champion the concept of equal opportunities .
It will not , however , be possible to achieve equality of opportunity if technical standards are insufficiently harmonised , if Member States ' tax policies differ so greatly that it is impossible to compare the actual cost burdens , and if social standards in the Member States diverge widely .
I do not oppose state aid ; I support it , provided that these aids have a binding legal basis that is the same for everybody and provided that they do not help to perpetuate the use of old , environmentally damaging techniques and technologies but instead promote investment for the future .
In short - and this brings me back to where I started - competition policy is about creating an equilateral triangle around economic policy , social policy and the environment .
Mr President , the report by our colleague Mr Herzog is excellent , and the amendments tabled by our group only add to it .
However , the amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party really destroy it , in that they delete at least ten articles and paragraphs from it .
I am therefore surprised , as in a way it is the whole human aspect of this report that is deleted by those amendments .
You are aware that the Treaty establishes that aid provided by Germany to regions of East Germany is in line with the single market .
Our colleague quite rightly states that this aid could be allocated to regions of the candidate countries .
But there is just deletion and more deletion , and given the extent to which the PPE-DE declared its support for the social market economy in Estoril , I must admit that I do not understand .
Mr President , in sport , an opponent is needed in order to win .
Football is such a sport , which can only exist by virtue of there being an opponent present .
In a fair game , an opponent should have the same means available as the other party .
This is , after all , about fair competition in which a battle can be fought for first place , but also for honour .
In professional football we have noticed , in the Netherlands for example , how a Commission measure on state aid triggers reactions .
For example , I gleaned from a Dutch newspaper this week that our Socialist fellow MEP , Mr Max van den Berg , would like to exempt professional football clubs from European rules on state aid .
However , in my view , this reaction overshoots the commercial goals pursued by professional clubs .
Unlike Mr van den Berg , I would therefore express my support for the measures which the European Commission has taken to reverse , if possible , the aid granted to professional football .
In my opinion , the granting of state aid is , and continues to be , a measure which is explicitly temporary in nature .
If aid is granted for a longer period of time , then competitiveness becomes distorted .
An aid-based relationship of dependence between industry and government is an interference in the functioning of the market .
I would also at the same time acknowledge the positive effect state aid has .
After all , if thanks to a temporary measure , socially useful goals are achieved , temporary aid is quite justified .
This is to give companies an incentive to achieve such goals .
I should at this point like to draw your attention to the importance of granting aid in order to implement environmental legislation .
It is a fact that industry is hit by high costs as a result of a plethora of new measures .
If , as a result of environmental measures , Europe 's competitiveness were to suffer compared to non-EU countries , I would deem it justified for costs to be borne by society to a limited extent and subject to clear conditions .
With regard to the accession of the candidate countries , a new chapter should be added to competition policy and the question of state aid .
A number of candidate countries provide foreign investors with favourable fiscal conditions .
This is with a view to protecting local employment .
Paragraphs 17 and 18 of Mr Herzog 's report expressly refer to the issue of aid to the steel industry in different accession countries .
In this connection , I am of the view that Amendment No 16 concerns a change that leaves no room for doubt .
I would call for the unambiguous and fair treatment of the candidate countries with regard to state aid and competition .
I therefore endorse Amendments Nos 20 and 21 to the Lipietz report which clearly state that the accession countries are faced with problems that are different from those of the current Member States .
However understandable state aid is from the standpoint of the candidate countries , this is , and always will be , a form of state aid that does not fit within the rules on state aid and competition .
A clearly defined exemption position gives the new Member States the scope to improve healthy economic relations .
I should like to conclude with a question to Commissioner Monti .
Over the past couple of years , it has become clear that the accession countries have an economic structure that is different from that of the EU Member States .
This structure and mentality change less quickly than we would like them to , so the accession countries require an approach customised to the needs of each of them .
Application of the rules in full is a measure that does not do any justice to the development of a social market economy in the accession countries .
How do you propose to find a fair solution to the problem of state aid in the accession countries ?
Mr President , the Treaty establishing the European Community does not prohibit dominant positions , only the abuse of them .
It does not establish a system of prior approval for mergers .
Therefore the creation of a dominant position following a merger does not have to be negotiated in advance with the Commission and such a dominant position is not in itself contrary to the Treaty .
Once again the Commission , in order to maintain its importance , has taken on powers that it does not have , inventing entirely arbitrary , or worse , ridiculous criteria to serve its cause . An example of this is when it analyses market shares country by country and product by product , while taking advantage of the frivolity or even absence of the French authorities when it comes to safeguarding French industrial interests .
Meanwhile , while the Treaty establishing the European Community in no way forbids the development of state companies , the Commission in Brussels hounds French public companies as symbols , which in its eyes are intolerable , of triumphant Colbert-style state intervention .
In this respect , any attempt at forcing the French Government to privatise public sector companies will provoke a vigorous response from all employees or , and why not , a general strike across all sectors of industry .
It is not only the services of the Directorate General for Competition that need to be reformed , but also Commissioner Monti , who knows nothing about industry , who should be disowned , and the Commission in Brussels needs to be put back in its place .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as you can see we have before us a whole host of topical matters and decisions related to competition policy .
Given the short time available to me , I will have to confine myself to state aid policy and therefore to Mr Herzog 's report , which we Social-Democrats fully support .
Allow me first to make a comment , Commissioner : do not be too disconcerted by what the previous speaker has just said .
This really is far removed from what the vast majority of Members of this Parliament thinks .
I believe that the vote on the two reports later on will also show that we do not agree with what has just been said .
As I have already mentioned , we endorse this report by Mr Herzog on state aid , which supports the strict policy of state aid control that is implemented by the Commission on the basis of the treaties .
It is a balanced report , which points out that state aid policy also has to meet other EU objectives , in particular competitiveness , growth and employment , and this in accordance with the Lisbon strategy .
That is why I am very pleased , Commissioner , that you also mentioned this principle explicitly in your introductory remarks and expressed your support for it .
It is good that there has again been a decline in state aid .
This is the result of the Commission 's tough aid control policy .
Because not only do these aids carry a risk of distorting the market , but also aid must of course , in each instance , first be obtained from elsewhere and may then be lacking in another area .
Neither can they be rejected wholesale , however .
Instead qualitative criteria must be used to assess each grant of aid to ascertain whether the objective sought might not justify distortions to the market , which may be limited in time , or whether these measures might even eliminate existing distortions to the market in the medium term .
In this context , Commissioner , I should like to recall two points , in connection with which I asked questions and made requests during a debate on the same subject all of a year ago .
It is true that the most competitive region , which is of course what we want to be , has to distinguish itself by having competitive companies .
This means that the companies should manage as far as possible without aids and that any aids have to be directed at increasing the competitiveness of these companies .
In the process , however , it is not only the individual company that needs to be assessed ; the entire net product chain of which the company is part needs to be taken into account .
If you wish to apply qualitative criteria it is not enough to focus solely on one single company .
My second point concerns a request that I wish to make in the field of regional policy .
Today we are already discussing how regional policy will actually work after 2006 .
Much will change for the present EU of 15 , for the old Member States , and it is right that it should .
But in this context we really do need to consider how we are going to rebalance regional aids across the Member States .
We need to discuss this and we need to do it in good time .
We might conclude that everything can stay the same , but we might also conclude that we need a new mechanism of some kind .
Do not make us wait until the end ; let us start this discussion now !
Mr President , solely in terms of free competition and the free market , any aid , whether it is state aid , European aid or local aid , disrupts competition .
Incidentally , I believe and would like to say that this influence on competition is positive when it enables land to be developed , the provision of efficient public services , a reduction in inequality , better social management , consideration of the long term and more research and development .
By approving the approach of Mr Herzog , whom I would like to congratulate and whom I support , I therefore confirm that state aid is necessary and justified , as he says , on at least two conditions : on the one hand that it clearly and solely fulfils the objectives set in terms of amounts and duration , and on the other hand that it is transparent and that its results are monitored and evaluated .
Mr President , Commissioner , I agree with what Mr Monti said in a recent interview , namely that the considerable gap between growth and unemployment rates , which puts Europe at a disadvantage compared with the United States , is caused to a large extent by economic structures in this continent which continue to be much less open to competition .
In my view , a competitive economy open to competition would bring tangible social benefits in the European countries .
The Commissioner thus concluded that we need an even more vigorous competition policy than that in the United States , and we should give him credit for having pursued it , even accepting the risk of making mistakes or in any case , making judgments different from those made by judicial bodies called upon in some cases to decide .
With regard to state aid , in particular , Europe is set to face an extremely important challenge over the next few years in the current negative economic climate .
Efforts to recover state aid are being made alongside protectionism and state intervention in the economy : a perilous path to take .
The Treaties wisely set strict limits on state aid and these limits must be preserved and confirmed , not least where governments seek to misuse or liberally distribute state aid , something they will increasingly seek to do .
There are other unresolved issues : former state monopolists - starting with EDF , Enel , France Télécom , Deutsche Telekom - state aid for broadcasting , state aid in the event of structural adjustments and , in this context , also state aid disguised as something else .
Mr President , I will close by saying that the Italian Radical Members will vote for the Riis-Jørgensen and Evans amendments , which will make the Herzog report more balanced .

Mr President , European competition policy is one of the European Union 's central policy instruments and that is why I would very much welcome it if the Commission were to stand alongside Parliament and also include this sector in the codecision procedure .
I really do think it is important for us to make competition policy more democratic and invest it with greater legitimacy than it has had so far , because after all the decisions that the European Union makes on the internal market , the market economy and competition are justified by the fact that competition has a distributive function and is therefore said to contribute to fair income distribution , increase social welfare and act as a mechanism to ensure that the factors of production are efficiently allocated .
This should improve supply to the benefit of producers and consumers and finally it should also act as an incentive to promote technical progress and maximise the national product .
Obviously we all consider market power and processes of concentration to be damaging .
These considerations should also play a role in our debate about a constitution and in the revision of the treaties , and I very much hope that they will also be even more visible in the application and reform of competition law .
Finally , this policy must also be brought into line with the Lisbon process and its objectives .
That is why the annual report is certainly a successful report and it is also positive that for the first time it addresses the issues surrounding services of general interest .
Unlike Mr Langen , I expect the Green Paper to provide not only a thorough analysis of how to handle the provision of public services of general interest , but also a decision on a starting point for future legislation .
In this context , I welcome the fact that you wish to put the public service guarantee on the same footing as the principle of free competition .
I hope that the Commission will produce a proposal for a framework regulation or framework directive as quickly as possible and that it will take account of national specificities and traditions and in particular leave it up to the Member States to define public services .
Commissioner , you were right to say how important it is to control cartels and mergers .
I should like to stress once more here that there is certainly a need to analyse the individual parts of the latest court rulings in precise detail and to draw conclusions from them .
But these court rulings do not in any way dent Parliament 's confidence in the Commission 's competence , which has been amply proven over the years .
Commissioner , I should like to ask you to take greater account of workers ' rights in your merger control work ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , as a result of competition policy , large sectors of European industry have lost jobs and a significant share of the global market ; more to the point , they have lost hundreds of thousands of workers to the dole queues .
This policy has helped create huge monopolistic groups which have acquired a dominant position on the market by promoting mergers , alliances and takeovers and greater unaccountability when it comes to price fixing , thereby ousting competitors - mainly small and medium-sized enterprises - from the market , and has resulted in massive waves of redundancies , spiralling unemployment and loss of wealth .
The view that competition policy is the sine qua non to job creation has proven to be misguided , because exactly the opposite is happening in practice .
What worries the European Union is the delay in finalising the liberalisation of the natural gas and electricity markets , the energy markets , and transport and postal services , and the delay in completing the full liberalisation of the markets and privatisations and making temporary and provisional forms of employment the norm .
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece support the workers standing up against and opposing this liberalisation ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
We will vote against the three reports by Mrs van den Burg , Mr Lipietz and Mr Herzog , which complement each other in the field of so-called competition policy .
Your economy based on private profit is entirely incapable of dealing either with long-term expenditure on infrastructure or with all the social and human consequences of a competition that could turn out to be fatal to society .
This is why we need , on the one hand , a European public bank to fund infrastructure projects and , on the other hand , a degree of state interventionism in order to do what private capital scorns and to dress some of the many wounds opened up by your economic system .
We are in favour of defending public services that are useful to the population .
We are against the state being used as a crutch for private capital .
Our vote against these reports as a whole expresses our opposition to the whole current economic system , which only serves to provide maximum wealth for a privileged few and in no way to properly satisfy the needs of the majority of the population .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as the final speaker in this debate I should like to stress once more that competition policy lies at the very heart of the internal market and I believe that for the European Union it is a very important policy instrument for strengthening Europe 's position in the world and pursuing the Lisbon objectives .
Competition policy is supposed to protect European consumers , lead to fair market prices , create increased supply and increase all market participants ' dynamism and capacity for innovation .
Competition policy prohibits both State and private monopolies .
It fights measures that distort competition and it is a precondition for all companies to have fair opportunities in and on the market .
We are on the right track , but unfortunately we have not yet reached our goal .
We are on the right track because we are seeing a fall in the number of cases investigated and because there has been an increase in the fines imposed .
We have not yet reached our goal because obstacles to fair competition abound and there are many different bodies with responsibilities in this field , which allows distortions of competition to creep in , and because we are too slow in implementing some directives .
We have not yet reached our goal because we have not completed our work in the interests of public welfare , because services of general interest do not yet have the clear exemptions and rules within competition law to make it possible to allow services of general interest and competition law to function harmoniously together .
I also welcome the Commission 's proposal to apply the ' de minimis ' rules to all arrangements between SMEs and call on the candidate countries to implement the competition rules quickly so that there are no distortions of competition between different industrial locations .
Mr President , I very much appreciate the strong across-the-board support expressed by this House for a vigorous competition policy in Europe .
It is an enormous task , as Mr Purvis stressed .
It is also very important to note , as Mr Junker did , that there is a fundamental consensus in favour of a vigorous competition policy involving international cooperation and against a renationalisation of European competition policy .
I also note the willingness to keep the European Commission as the decision-making body , under the judicial review of the courts .
Ladies and gentlemen , within the framework of interparliamentary relations , it is my great pleasure to welcome a delegation from the Syrian Parliament .
The delegation is led by Mr Abdul Kader Kaddoura , Speaker of the Syrian Parliament .
This is his second visit to the European Parliament .

In welcoming Mr Kaddoura and his delegation , I should like to highlight the importance we attach to this visit . It is the first of its kind to the European Parliament since 1983 .
Syria is the last remaining country in the Mediterranean basin with whom an Association Agreement has not yet been finalised .
Negotiations between the Commission and Syria have been continued since 1997 . I am informed that a very positive atmosphere reigned at the most recent meeting , last week .
Further , contact between the Syrian Parliament and the European Parliament could trigger ongoing dialogue within the Euromed Forum .
We trust this visit will help to strengthen links between the European Parliament and the Syrian Parliament .
Mr Kaddoura , I very much hope that the meetings you and the members of your delegation held proved fruitful .
I hope too that they will signal the start of a new era in which the people of Syria and the European Union will come closer to each other .
( Applause )
Mr President , yesterday we held a debate on Mrs van den Burg 's report on temporary work .
This debate lasted from 10 p.m. to 11.30 p.m. and 28 speakers took part in it .
When I asked this morning whether there was a video recording of it I was told that there was not because proceedings were only filmed up to 8 p.m.
Mr President , we say that we want to treat all debates alike and yet those whose reports are debated after 8 p.m. are always at a disadvantage .
Transparency is not guaranteed .
We are there ; the interpreters are there ; only the audiovisual service cannot be there because its resources have been drastically cut .
I consider this to be an unacceptable situation .
( Loud applause )
I think that your comments , which were also a complaint , should be carefully considered .
I hope that you will receive a positive response .
Mr President , MEPs are at present in danger of being scalded since , in the last half hour , there has only been hot water in the showers and toilets .
Is there by any chance some new scare about new germs spreading here ?
I would ask the Quaestors to investigate the matter .
Thank you for your comment , Ms Thors .
Mr President , we propose to reintroduce , from the original Commission text , the words ' after consultation of the social partners ' in the first sentence .
Mr Pronk , do you have any objections ?
Mr President , it is possible but we have to say ' where appropriate after consultation of the social partners ' .
We had mentioned this before , and it is also more logical , so : ' where appropriate after consultation with the social partners ' .
Mr President , I would like to ask the movers of Amendments Nos 31 and 37 to clarify whether they intend that this should ban the therapeutic cloning of human embryos .
Mr President , this amendment has nothing to do with stem cell research .
It deals exclusively with the issue of human cloning .
The wording I have used is taken from Parliament 's own resolution of September 2000 on human cloning , where we called for a universal ban .
The debate has already taken place .
I think that the intentions are quite clear in the text .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I just wish to explain something : Mrs Damião has been suffering from quite a serious illness . Consequently , she has not been able to attend this vote or be involved in drafting the report .
On behalf of Portugal 's socialist delegation , I wish to thank the House , in particular the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , for the support they have given her , which has given a serious intellectual boost to her recovery .
Mr President , I thought that Mr Herzog would present the oral amendment in his text .
It will then read : ... ' welcome the bank 's commitment to improved transparency and efficiency of its global loans and its response to critical questions regarding these instruments ' .
That will be the first line .
It is the Greens .
Sorry , I am mixing it up with another report .
We withdraw the first part of the amendment , which deleted three words , therefore we retain the terms in the report ' financing the economy ' .
If , following the floods that engulfed Central Europe this summer , the earthquakes in Turkey , Greece and recently in Italy , there were still a need to demonstrate the necessity of an aid fund for victims of disasters , the news of the sinking of the Prestige should finally convince us .
Although this Solidarity Fund is a necessary guarantee , it is not a sufficient one , however .
Providing aid to the victims of such disasters should not prevent detailed consideration of their causes , our production methods and economic orientations .
On the contrary , it should encourage us to radically question our economies of profit !
These economies produce small profits for shipowners registered in Panama , recruiting Filipinos and flying the flag of Gibraltar !
But personal and family tragedies , incalculable losses for the European and international communities caused by each sinking of an illegal tanker , destroying the socio-economic fabric of the coasts for years and damaging ecosystems and marine biodiversity for centuries !
What I am calling for is more than a solidarity fund , but the creation of a European bank for environmental protection and restoration , which is permanent and one step ahead of environmental disasters , so that the recent Prestige disaster is the last warning shot for these attacks on the environment .
. ( PT ) The aim of this report was to propose an interinstitutional agreement on the funding of the EU Solidarity Fund and the conditions regulating the use of this Fund .
The interinstitutional agreement in question was proposed jointly by the Commission , the European Parliament and the Council , in the aim of laying down the technical arrangements that will enable the revenues necessary for this Fund to be raised .
Under the terms of the agreement , an accelerated procedure was established , guaranteeing the necessary financial flexibility and the speed of the Fund 's intervention , starting in the 2002 financial year and running until 2006 , in other words , throughout the current financial perspective .
The recent disaster involving the oil tanker Prestige , which has already affected the coasts of Galicia and is also threatening the northern coast of Portugal with the crude oil that it has spilt , is a typical example of the effective and rapid use of this Solidarity Fund , which could only persuade me to vote unreservedly in favour of this proposal .
. ( NL ) At first reading , I concluded my contribution with the words : ' I am pinning my hopes on the Council 's good judgment ' .
I can see that I have not been completely let down in this .
The Interinstitutional Agreement that is now before us is clearly better defined than the draft in Parliament .
I should like to illustrate this with three points .
The first one is the Interinstitutional Agreement 's scope .
This is largely confined to major natural disasters , with good reason .
In the case of disasters of other types , those responsible will be held liable .
The second point concerns the threshold values .
The raised threshold focuses the scheme on major disasters and holds out the prospect of this resulting in substantial aid to selected regions .
Thirdly , with regard to the exemption options , the 7.5 % limit ensures that the lion 's share of the Fund reaches its actual goal .
The Commission has now made the first proposal for granting aid from this Fund .
I hope that as these aid applications are dealt with , it will become clear that the Solidarity Fund functions as a supplement to national measures , both in terms of prevention and correction .
The current situation will then improve on all fronts , with regard to both the affected states and longer-term mutual solidarity .
This is why we have endorsed the Interinstitutional Agreement , albeit with reservations .
I voted in favour of the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund .
This vote is the realisation of the fast legislative work that has been done since the proposal was presented by Commissioner Barnier on 18 September .
I would also like to thank him for his efforts in this matter .
When the political will is strong enough , Europe can move forward quickly and effectively .
I only regret that we did not reach the same result following the terrible storms in 1999 , which hit France hard .
Today , we can only welcome the mobilisation of this new European instrument of solidarity .
The EUR 728 million will provide additional comfort for the families that have suffered as a result of the natural disasters in the summer .
In my region and in several departments in the South of France , violent storms and torrential floods hit around 400 municipalities on 8 and 9 September , causing the deaths of 24 people and causing very considerable damage .

Today my thoughts go out to those families , the elected representatives of those municipalities and all those , whether civil security forces or voluntary organisations , which have provided help and support during the emergency .
They know the price of solidarity and appreciate , I hope , the gesture that Europe has made today .
Mr President , the proposal for a Council recommendation with regard to the prevention of tobacco smoking only partly corresponds with my views .
In some areas , the Commission goes much too far .
In addition to the many prevention and control aspects , this recommendation also aims to regulate tobacco advertising .
Why is the Commission tabling two texts both of which intend to impose restraints on advertising ?
Surely it cannot be the intention that advertising other than that promoting tobacco should fall within the scope of this recommendation ?
It is very unfortunate that Parliament is not considering brand diversification businesses . These are predominantly specialist , and often very small , businesses that use an existing brand to market new products .
However , I can , of course , content myself with the fact that it is ultimately only a non-binding instrument , which must serve as an incentive for the Member States .
Mr President , as someone completely new to Parliament , I have to say that matters such as Mr Maaten 's report on the prevention of smoking and on initiatives more effectively to combat smoking and other tobacco use make it difficult for the individual citizen to appreciate the good work we do .
I am happy to leave it to children 's parents to decide about this issue .
In this case , it is the form that is dangerous , and not the content .
I think it should be the other way around .
We have chosen to refrain from adopting positions on quite a few parts of the report .
Several of the proposals are such as not to require any common policy at EU level .
Bans on cigarette machines and rules governing gifts and self-service in shops are better drawn up at national level .
We consider bans on food made to look like tobacco to be a case of unnecessary regulation .
The EU should instead immediately abolish the extensive subsidies it pays out for the cultivation of tobacco .
. ( DE ) Several of the recommendations made by the Commission and Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy are to be welcomed from a health policy point of view .
I am thinking in particular of information campaigns and programmes to treat addiction to smoking .
The amendment seeking to introduce measures against involuntary exposure to environmental tobacco smoke in indoor workplaces , enclosed public places and public transport also enhances the recommendation .
I particularly welcome the call to promote economically viable alternatives for tobacco growers and to promote the gradual replacement of subsidies for raw tobacco with alternatives .
Obviously we cannot simply take these producers ' and their families ' daily bread away without offering them an acceptable alternative .
I am not especially happy , however , with all of the recommendations in this report .
The recommendation to the Member States to raise the price of tobacco products artificially by increasing the tax burden will not , I think , be effective in the fight against tobacco consumption .
In the United Kingdom a packet of cigarettes costs twice or three times as much as it does in Luxembourg .
I have yet to hear , however , that tobacco consumption in the British Isles is much lower than in the other Member States as a result , let alone that the problem has been solved .
The only ones who could welcome this would be our finance and budget ministers , in particular those who are having to contend with a larger budget deficit and are therefore facing a ' blue letter ' from the Commission because they have exceeded the Stability Pact criteria .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 , Paragraph 1 of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( NL ) At the time when this proposal was put on the agenda , support from an overwhelming majority was already guaranteed .
This support is much wider than was the case for previous proposals on the subject of tobacco .
Perhaps this is because it cannot be objected to on legal or economic grounds .
This is not a piece of legislation , but merely an initiative that gives an opinion on Parliament 's behalf , a non-binding recommendation for the Member States , of which they are free to make use as they see fit .
In many cases , I wish that decisions from this Parliament had this status , particularly dealing with such matters as the liberalisation of the economy or the reduction of government spending .
This is different from cross-border environmental and public health issues , in which it is useful to learn from each other and to carry out the toughest protection measures as a joint effort .
Unfortunately , according to the UN Treaty , the prevention and control of smoking do not fall within the scope of the market but under public health , an area in which the Commission can merely make a recommendation to the Member States .
I have come unstuck on this point before , when I made proposals for protection against asbestos .
This time round , the Council has already made known to us its lack of interest in Parliament 's opinion .
I endorse the proposals against smuggling , cinema advertising , and chocolate cigarettes , but do not hold out any high hopes .
. ( EL ) We are against direct or indirect advertising of tobacco products and [ support ] measures to reverse the spread and increase of this unhealthy habit , especially among young people .
May we emphasise once again , however , that an anti-smoking campaign is not the same thing as an anti-tobacco campaign and that the anti-smoking campaign should not take the form of a campaign against tobacco cultivation in ? U member states , as the EU argues in Amendment No 17 of the report .
To say tobacco farms are to blame and that tobacco farmers should be punished by proposing that subsidies be abolished , is to deliberately confuse the question of protection of public health with maintaining traditional single-crop farms so that tens of thousands of farmers in mainly poor southern areas , who are not being offered any specific alternatives , can survive .
These proposals are hypocritical and underhand and run counter to consumer interests and public health , given that 70 % of the European Union 's tobacco is imported .
Consequently , abolishing aid for Community production will not reduce smoking ; it will merely make us dependent on imports and flood the European market with tobacco from third countries .
.
( PT ) Despite the fact that the European Court of Justice has annulled the directive on advertising and sponsorship of tobacco products , of 14 May 2001 because it overstepped Community competence , we see that this report contains a set of non-binding recommendations , which places the emphasis on reducing tobacco consumption by raising consumer awareness . It also presents a range of proposals designed to deter smoking , particularly amongst children and adolescents , which can only deserve our support .
We wish our position to further emphasise that the concern the European Parliament is showing for public health must not interfere with the competence of national legislators and particularly with protection measures and measures to find economic alternatives that are needed for all those who are economically dependent on tobacco production .
Smoking kills , the litany is becoming tiring .
I will therefore take the liberty of irritating some people by repeating that smoking kills one in two smokers .
There is no doubt that those who do not want to hear it are tired of it .
According to the evidence , however , it does not scare people .
The figures are most edifying : in Europe , 500 000 people are struck down by this plague each year .
In Belgium , 33 % of young people between the ages of 15 and 24 are regular smokers and 51 % have smoked .
More serious is the fact that a quarter of women have tried their first cigarette before the age of 15 .
In short , young people are smoking more and more , and currently no anti-smoking policy is capable of curbing this infernal trend .
This is why I welcome the adoption by the plenary of the report by Mr Maaten which , by taking up the major anti-smoking measures advocated by WHO , proposes measures to the Council that would be effective in preventing smoking and prevent teenagers from being conditioned by cigarette manufacturers .
This is why I am also categorically opposed to the sale of chocolate cigarettes or liquorice pipes : mimicking a gesture at the age of 5 carries a risk of registering it and getting used to it .
The risk is established , the symbol is disastrous , and all for a quite laughable market !
The Commission is proposing to make the regulations on additives in animal feed more coherent , and we approve of that approach .
However , on the grounds of making what appears to be a technical alteration to an existing regulation , it is taking advantage of the opportunity to make fundamental changes to the authorisation procedure .
Regarding the regulations on additives , we support the proposals aimed at bringing an end to the use of the antibiotics that are still authorised to promote growth , with a transition period , and at simplifying the authorisation procedure for additives that are already authorised for human food .
We also share the principle of continuing to consider coccidiostats and histomonostats as additives until we find other methods of protecting animals against those illnesses .
However , we await proposals from the Commission that will assure us that the same requirements will be applied to imported meat .
With regard to the authorisation procedure , we cannot support the Commission 's proposal granting the European Food Safety Authority sole responsibility for investigating applications , which until now was under the authority of the Member States .
For this reason we cannot vote in favour of the report .
. ( PT ) I have decided to support this report , primarily because of the knock-on importance that the proposal by the European Commission will have for the quality of the products offered to the end consumer .
In fact , this proposal is intended to regulate additives intended for animal nutrition , clarifying existing rules in this field and consequently the authorisation procedures for their marketing .
I think it is entirely appropriate to promote strict quality standards for additives intended for the nutrition of animals that are in turn intended for human consumption .
This is the way to avoid the future occurrence of further episodes such as the outbreak of ' mad cow ' disease , enabling us to trace and identify potentially harmful components , eliminating them from the food chain and from the market .
Furthermore , it will allow upward monitoring to take place , both through the obligation on companies to prove the effectiveness of the product and the absence of risk to human health , animal health and the environment and by establishing requirements for the use and marketing of additives .
. ( EL ) First , it is right that there should be controls and rules on the herbal medicinal product market , which is in total chaos , leaving the way clear for quacks to profit at the expense of public health and consumers .
The question , however , that bother us is how herbal medicinal products are to reach patients and consumers .
The report explains that these medicinal products will be available over the counter , thereby shifting the entire responsibility for selecting a suitable product on to the patient or consumer , whose only source of information will be the manufacturer 's advertisements .
Basically , therefore , consumers will be at the mercy of misleading information from the private sector and large industrial facilities , who will be able to profiteer as they please .
The second question which arises is whether these medicinal products should be sold through pharmacies and by qualified pharmacists or whether they will be available on supermarket shelves .
Probably the latter , it would appear .
We believe that once these preparations are classified - and they must be classified - as a medicinal product , they should be prescribed through the proper channels by a doctor or pharmacist and should be available on the national health .
. ( PT ) The use of medicinal herbs dates back to time immemorial .
Whilst acknowledging the predominant role played by modern pharmacology , it should also be recognised that medicinal herbs still have their place in medicine and that their therapeutic potential can be exploited .
We therefore welcome the Commission 's proposal to create a Committee for Herbal Medicinal Products , which is autonomous and separate from the Committee on Proprietary Medicinal Products , which will be responsible for the regulation and monitoring of all aspects of herbal medicines .
It is , however , crucial to make the distinction between a medicinal product , even a herbal one , and food or cosmetic products and to ensure adequate deadlines for the herbal product industry to adapt to the new legal situation .
We are counting on the national authorities to provide this support and , confident that they will do so , we have given our vote to Mr Nisticó 's report .
In line with the commitment made in Lisbon to a future for Europe involving a quantitative and qualitative improvement in employment and greater social cohesion , I will only support this report if Amendment No 42 , which deletes the Commission 's proposal of applying a deadline for ensuring the essential protection of temporary workers , is adopted .
I feel it is essential that the so-called principle of ' non-discrimination ' , which states that a temporary worker should not be treated less favourably than a similar worker in the company using him from the point of view of working and employment conditions should be applied fully and therefore without ' discrimination ' !
In short , this principle should be guaranteed from day one : there can be no exemptions or waivers , particularly given that this atypical way of working , in comparison with all atypical ways of working , is the one that is most liable to violations , despite Community legislation on the subject , and to shameless exploitation , in other words to a sort of ' reification ' of employment .
In accordance with this fundamental idea , I will also vote in favour of the amendment obliging the Member States to prevent the use of temporary workers to subdue a strike movement .
This vote entirely distorts the spirit of the directive on temporary work .
Equal pay for equal work , certainly , but the key issue is the reference point .
For the Commission , the reference point was clear : the company employing the worker was the reference point .
Now , the salary of a temporary worker would have to be assessed according to the scale of salaries in the temporary employment agency .
This is a subtle but decisive shift , because by its nature it legitimises a two-tier employment market , or worse the creation of real networks of slave traders slashing prices .
Those who welcome this vote are short sighted , because establishing a salary division between temporary workers and the workers in the companies employing them deals a fatal blow to social cohesion , and that is the Achilles heel of temporary work .
Integration cannot be legislated .
Temporary workers have more accidents than other workers and suffer more harassment .
They pay very dearly for their status .
The social reality is intractable .
If they are paid less for identical work in a company , they will lose any chance of being integrated into it .
Are temporary workers just like any other worker ?
No they are not !
And this directive , which is dead before it is born , will certainly not bring them justice .
. ( NL ) My concern when voting was primarily with the protection of Dutch legislation dating from 1999 , which intends to put temporary work on a more equal footing with normal work and to protect against abuses .
Without such legislation , employers can take advantage of temporary workers and rob groups of employees of their basic security , pay them lower wages , offer them less say , force them to work under worse conditions , make early dismissal possible or break strikes of others .
The intention is to create dependency by preventing people from moving on to permanent positions at the businesses that originally hired them .
Temporary work is admissible only if it is a free choice on the part of the people involved , albeit in the service of the temping agency , and if they have all the normal rights of employees .
The two largest groups have reached a compromise that prevents the more far-reaching protection that my group has proposed .
Despite this , Dutch employers are trying to persuade their counterparts in other Member States and the Right-wing section in this Parliament to reject even this minimum level of protection and to ensure that the rules are either rejected or relaxed .
In doing so , they are hoping to cut costs and increase temporary work .
I can only vote in favour if they are frustrated in what they seek to do .
With this proposal for a directive , the Commission is seeking to regulate working conditions for temporary workers in the Member States .
The choice of this restrictive measure is going to force regulations on the Member States that are not necessarily adapted to their specific national characteristics and which could therefore penalise this way of working , whereas the aim was to encourage it .
Although the only possible reply is that promoting temporary work , which provides flexibility for companies and integration or reintegration into the labour market for some types of workers , is quite commendable , there is absolutely no question of doing it at any price .
It would seem that this proposal for a directive does not have a sufficiently sound basis .
Also , this field is the sovereign responsibility of the Member States , which are undoubtedly in a better position to assess the situation of their labour market .
This is why I cannot vote for a text which , far from achieving its objectives , runs counter to them .
The UK delegation of the Labour Party recognises the serious UK Government concern over this directive .
It is important to strike a balance between protecting agency workers and avoiding burdens that could stop business engaging them , particularly for short-term assignments .
Temporary Work Agencies make an important contribution to the employment market in the UK and should not be penalised .
Increased administrative burdens could lead to increases in costs , which could be passed onto user organisations or cause the closure of the business and job losses .
The EPLP has thus voted against Amendment 42 calling for the deletion of the 6-week derogation from the original Commission proposal .
It feels that it is important that at least a 6-week derogation remains in the proposal .
The EPLP voted for Amendment 73 to support comprehensive and effective impact assessments .
This helps SMEs .
The EPLP submitted and supported Amendment 71 , calling for an extra transition period for the UK .
It is therefore necessary that there is an additional period of 3 years , allowing 5 years in total , for this directive to be implemented in the UK and Ireland .
The EPLP has supported this report at first reading but with the strong reservations set out here .
. ( PT ) The main reasons for using temporary workers and temporary employment agencies concern the need to deal with temporary variations in demand .
Statistical information , therefore , shows that placements in user companies are usually extremely short ; between one and six months .
In the particular case of Portugal , specific legislation is in place that respects this type of work , and which guarantees the basic rights of these workers , whilst also respecting the particular circumstances that determine the use of temporary labour .
Despite the Commission 's view that its proposal is quite flexible , the fact is that the attempt to include in this report the regulation of various basic conditions of temporary work , in my opinion , falls outside Community competence and has no precedent in European legislation , thereby breaching the principle of subsidiarity .
These , in short , are the reasons for my vote against this report .
. ( PT ) I have voted against this report because I believe that , by tabling various amendments to the Commission 's original text , we have ultimately created a framework that is clearly counterproductive to the interests it is intended to safeguard .
In fact , as the rapporteur acknowledges , there are some aspects on which the social partners involved have to date never reached agreement .
Furthermore , equating the factors of the legal relationship of temporary work with permanent work will ultimately lead to this soon no longer being a viable possibility for companies and therefore , one less window of opportunity for many workers .
It should be emphasised that we cannot and shall not allow the same provisions for safety , health and social rights that apply to other workers not to be applied to temporary workers . This protection already exists , in fact , in various regulatory instruments .
It would have been more useful for us to have seen a statistical breakdown of the use of temporary labour in Europe , which successive European Councils have seen as another instrument with which to combat unemployment and for the suggestion to have been made to impose limits on its use , thereby combating not temporary work itself but rather the unacceptable abuses of such work .
We voted against this motion for a joint resolution as , behind its convoluted words and self-congratulation , it is mainly seeking to clear the Russian authorities of responsibility for the dirty war that it is waging in Chechnya .
While we condemn terrorism in any form , it is shocking that the motion for a joint resolution only expresses its ' firm condemnation ' of the terrorist attacks in Moscow , and not of the state terrorism conducted by the Russian army against the civil population in Chechnya .
As for the progress of neutralisation of Chechen terrorists in Moscow , it not only shows the ignominy of terrorism , but also the total contempt of the Russian authorities for their own citizens .
We are in favour of establishing the closest possible links between the people of the European Union and Russia , but against the complicity between their leaders , some of which are preparing for war against Iraq while the others are at war against the Chechens .
Who can honestly be satisfied with the results of the EU-Russia Summit ?
The proponents of liberalism who only see Russia as another area for the market , competition and privatisations , particularly in the fields of energy , research and transport , certainly can .
As can Mr Putin , who , legitimised by the post-September 11 attitude adopted by the US , is flouting freedom of expression and increasing police and military pressure on all the peoples of the Russian Federation , particularly the Chechens .
We cannot acknowledge these results .
On the contrary , we are firmly on the side of the populations that are the victims of rampant capitalism and fight alongside them to maintain public and social services and to defend the right to work and to retirement .
We support the right of the Chechen people to self-determination even more strongly .
We condemn Russian military aggression and the hypocritical attitude of the EU and Denmark who , on the orders of the Russians , arrested Akhmed Zakaïev , the representative of the Chechen president , Mr Maskhadov .
In short , we cannot vote in favour of the joint resolution of the European Parliament authorising and legitimising military operations in Chechnya .
. ( PT ) Like all compromise texts , this motion for a resolution combines very positive recitals and conclusions , such as the references to the agreement on Kaliningrad , for example , with a dubious and rather weak speech rejecting the terrorist acts that have recently taken place in Russia and , particularly , the recent attack on the Moscow theatre by Chechen extremists .
With regard to the fight against terrorism , we believe that this must be constant and unswerving , because what we are seeing are cowardly and anonymous threats to the life and security of defenceless citizens , who will accept no excuses and no less rigorous support for the authorities combating this phenomenon .
This and this alone is the reason why I have voted against this motion for a resolution .
We could have voted in favour of this joint resolution , as it contains a number of sound recitals regarding General Musharraf 's military regime in Pakistan .
However , the condemnation does not go far enough .
Paragraph 2 legitimises the regime following the recent elections in October 2002 .
These elections were not democratic .
They were conducted like a commercial transaction .
The rich were able to buy votes from the poor without the electoral commission being able to stop them .
The military at all levels put pressure on the local administration to help their preferred candidates .
These elections were about encouraging politicians to follow the instructions and recommendations of the military , the ' new ' allies of imperialism in the region .
All the decisions taken were dictated by economic considerations : continuing with privatisations , deregulations , withdrawing collective agreements and mass unemployment .
According to the institute for planning sustainable development in Islamabad , 6.8 million Pakistanis fell below the poverty line during the last three years of the Musharraf regime .
It is the IMF and the World Bank who really give the orders in the regime .
There is no mention of that in this resolution and the condemnation of the Musharraf regime does not go far enough .
We therefore abstained .
Mr President , this time it was Mr Fatuzzo who came to me in a dream and said : ' Do not you think that the time has come at last for you to state clearly , in a forum as important as the European Parliament , that we need to press forward with research into prolonging citizens ' lives and research into eradicating as many diseases as possible ? '
' We are already doing that , ' I replied .
' No , I 'm very worried that there are groups of people who , in one way or another , are against cures for all diseases .
Maybe some pharmaceutical companies , or some hospitals .
It has been said that to think the worst of someone is a sin , but usually you are spot on .
I really would like to call for everything possible to be done , and only the European Union can do it , to carry out research into prolonging our lives and ensure that they are healthy , wholesome and free from disease . '
Mr President , I voted against Mrs Damião 's report because Amendment No 23 was not adopted .
I am in favour of maintaining the moratorium on genetically modified food , but on no account do I oppose research and biotechnology in general .
. ( EL ) It is clear from advances over recent years that biotechnology can help us enormously to understand how life develops , to combat disease and to develop new drugs .
At the same time , it harbours dangers , mainly when it comes to ' playing around ' with genetic material , altering genetic codes , cloning , preparing genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) , patenting living organisms and using DNA for keeping tabs on people .
The Commission and the European Parliament are not concerned with developing biotechnology for the benefit of society ; all they worry about is how the European monopolies can catch up with the American monopolies , but of course that does not surprise us .
The main battle in this war is being fought with GM foods and a race is being run here with the Americans .
Who cares about the risks inherent in messing about with life and making artificial changes ?
Who cares that it is impossible to predict the effect these organisms will have on our planet 's sensitive ecosystem ?
The responsibility for prevention has been shifted straight on to the consumer ( such as the starving millions in Africa ) .
This is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report .
We Swedish Moderates welcome the positive attitude adopted by the European Parliament and the Commission on life sciences and biotechnology in this report .
We would , however , emphasise that diversity and a wealth of ideas provide the best impetus to successful research .
This principle should not be lost through EU coordination .
Research policy within the EU must be based upon the principle of subsidiarity .
Research cooperation between the Member States is good , but the EU must not take charge of it .
Except in the case of its own research programmes , the EU lacks competence in the research area , and that is how matters should remain .
We have therefore voted against the proposal for a special Directorate General with chief responsibility for coordinating the biotechnology strategy .
We are in favour of the development of life sciences , biotechnology and , more broadly , of science in general .
This is because it is the means to provide the material basis for the progress of humanity and the intellectual basis for its emancipation from all types of prejudices , starting with the obscurantism that is used by religions and various reactionary ideologies , some of which are very fashionable at present , and which periodically bring back the kind of society in which men are not in control of their destiny but are crushed by an unjust , harmful and abhorrent social structure .
We reject , however , the many direct and indirect indulgences in the report of private companies .
These companies are in no way concerned with what is useful to humanity in terms of the development of science , but rather with what can be sold to customers who have the means to pay for it and provide a profit .
We also reject all the calls for public funding in the interests of private capital , even if those interests are hidden behind the needs of research .
We therefore abstained from voting on this report .
I voted against Amendments 31 and 37 as the wording would be interpreted to also include a ban on therapeutic cloning , which I support under proper ethical conditions .
I do not support the cloning of human beings .
Mr President , the document concerns the European Investment Bank annual report for 2001 .
I voted for the report because the Bank 's work is extremely important , particularly - and I want to stress this - in providing aid to finance infrastructure , especially in the candidate countries .
It is for this very reason that I want to emphasise the importance of Corridor 5 , which links southern Italy , the Puglia region , with Tirana , Skopje , Sofia , Plovdiv and Burgas . Above all , I would call for the European Investment Bank 's funds to be increased in order to finance the construction of the stretch of road and railway between Skopje and Sofia , which is completely non-existent at present , something which is preventing the swift completion of Corridor 5 , so important for work in the whole of the Balkan area .
Parliament is right to highlight the impact of the EIB on the growth of SMEs and on employment , particularly through risk-capital transactions .
This impact must be reinforced by operation structures for access by SMEs .
In particular , the invitation made to the EIB to adopt and apply the definition of SMEs established by the Commission is essential for access by the smallest SMEs .
In the same context , increasing investments in the field of accommodation will enhance the important construction sector .
Mr President , the van den Burg report on prudential supervision in the European Union is particularly interesting for the elderly and pensioners , who give their money both to the State which arranges their pensions , through compulsory national insurance schemes , and to private funds , through shares , bonds and investments .
Neither , however , are completely watertight .
To avoid this problem , all we can do , as I saw just now when I closed my eyes , is to undertake to build brick houses . In my view and in the view of the Pensioners ' Party , this is the best investment we can make for the future , in whichever part of the world they are built .
The implementation of careful supervision rules in the European Union will protect saving and give people confidence in investments in stocks and shares .
The globalisation of risks should further encourage the European authorities to develop supervision rules at international level .
In this context , the invitation made by Parliament to the Commission and the European Supervisory Committees to organise , jointly with the American Federal Reserve and the Security and Exchange Commission , a transatlantic financial forum , is going in the right direction .
Other , broader initiatives , should not , however , be ruled out .
. ( PT ) This report is based on some facts and on one basic misunderstanding .
The facts are those we saw in the social communication : the disturbing and unprecedented degree of instability in the world financial markets and the repercussions of this on the so-called ' real economy ' , with the surge in financial crises which become economic crises as a result of the ' financialisation ' of the economy , to which the gradual integration of pension schemes for private profit and the increasing volume of pension funds have largely contributed .
The mistake is to think that , by integrating the EU 's financial markets and establishing rules for minimum prudential supervision , under the auspices of new supranational bodies , and by increasing the powers of the Commission , we will resolve the problem of the financial markets ' volatility when the main issue is the ' free ' international movement of capital and its speculative and parasitical use , with enormous volumes of money concentrated in pension funds and in hedge funds , frequently using the platform of tax havens and instruments that encourage speculation , such as derivatives .
Furthermore , the fragmentation of the financial markets could be a positive factor in avoiding the risks of this financial globalisation , maintaining more localised supervisory systems and markets that are more flexible and adaptable to specific local characteristics .
. ( DE ) The appeal to national authorities to cooperate more closely in the fight against so-called white-collar crime is certainly to be welcomed .
If , however , you want to give examples of this white-collar crime , and mention money laundering , market abuse and financing of terrorist groups , you should be careful not to add tax evasion to the list .
We all agree that tax evasion should be stopped .
Everyone should fulfil their duty to pay taxes .
But this is no reason to confuse tax evasion with tax fraud .
There is a clear distinction between the two .
That is why I tabled an amendment in this regard in committee , but unfortunately it was not adopted .
The same amendment was tabled in the plenary on behalf of the PPE-DE Group .
This amendment also deletes the reference to the practice of blacklisting countries if they do not yet adhere to the various international standards in the field of fighting white-collar crime .
The ' naming and shaming ' method appears at first sight to be very attractive if the sole objective is to fight against this form of crime , but it actually reinforces the law of the most powerful in international relations .
You would think twice before putting the USA on a list of this kind .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( NL ) EU policy aims to give more elbow room to people at the helm of international companies , who are seen as magicians with the ability to guarantee prosperity and prompt economic growth .
During the time when share prices soared sky-high , these magicians were even allowed to line their own pockets quite handsomely with share option schemes .
Moreover , they are being encouraged to take on important government functions in the areas of postal services , energy supply and public transport .
Meanwhile , we have been able to witness in America what these magicians are capable of .
In some cases , the successes ascribed to them and the options paid out to them are based on forgeries .
Measures are now being taken in America to increase control , not so much to curb the omnipotence of large companies , as to restore investor and consumer confidence .
An initiative of this kind is also currently being proposed for the EU .
My support for it is mainly due to the lack of anything better .
Without changing the way in which the economy is organised , even the appointment of large numbers of inspectors would not solve the problems .
We would then be wasting Community funding on bureaucracy .
What is positive is the proposal to set up a common database collating the most important information pertaining to European financial institutions ' business data and making it accessible to the public .
The unprecedented crisis in the financial system is the result of the deep economic crisis in the capitalist system and the clash of interests and acute competition between monopolies .
The wave of scandals to hit large monopolies and financial service groups in the USA and Europe has exacerbated the lack of faith in the financial system by highlighting its unaccountability and revealing how the market , small investors and savers , pension funds and insurance companies are constantly deceived , with new ways being found of exploiting and sucking the masses dry .
And yet no control measures with any teeth have been introduced , which perhaps goes to show that the control mechanisms responsible have been hiding rather than monitoring information and have basically acted as consultants in deception .
' Creative ' , ' constructive ' accounting has been well and truly adopted even in national accounts as a way of deceiving citizens .
The only purpose of any supposed controls proposed or applied to date has been to placate justified grass-roots reaction ; nothing is being done to prevent or compensate the victims of unaccountable monopolies as they destroy workers and small and medium-sized enterprises , because that would jeopardise the social and economic system itself , based as it is on the principle of exploitation .
We are here to highlight the political dimensions of the economic crisis as we fight with the workers to overturn this rotten system .
The effects of constant announcements regarding the liberalisation of the gas and electricity markets that are not followed up with genuine results are a considerable handicap to European credibility with citizens .
These liberalisations should be genuinely set in motion so that they are perceptible to households .
Furthermore , based on the European ineffectiveness with regard to South Korea concerning unfair competition on the ship building market , we urgently need to implement the procedure for settling WTO disputes for the sector in question , also in order to open the way for the emergence of a competition policy at international level .
. ( PT ) We have voted against the report for the following reasons :
it reiterates its support for rapid progress towards liberalisation of the European markets in energy , transport and postal services and regrets the lack of progress in the effective liberalisation of gas and electricity , which we reject ;
we reject the report 's position on the acquisition of private companies in the electricity sector by public companies in sectors that have been or are about to be liberalised , which it is attempting to undermine ;
we disagree with its call for State aid to be reduced and with its misguided approach to State funding of private providers of general interest services ;
the report does not take account of the social consequences of mergers , specifically employment , or of the abuse of dominant positions , and plays down the importance of workers in merger decisions ;
we disagree with the report 's support for codecision in competition policy .
We obviously cannot ratify the report by Alain Lipietz , which expresses its ' profound disappointment at the lack of progress in the effective liberalisation of European gas and electricity markets ' .
On the contrary , we call on citizens to rise up against such a plan .
Like the majority of them , our ' awareness [ ? ] remains very limited ' of the benefits of the competition policy conducted at EU level , as it translates into restructuring , redundancies and a low-cost method of satisfying social needs .
Rather than this policy , which is at least as stupid as the Stability Pact , we are in favour of structural policies , planned at European level , for example in the fields of transport and energy .
In general , the Commission 's approach aims to make such policies entirely impossible , particularly by reducing state aid , which is systematically portrayed as being harmful .
Unlike the rapporteur , we do not support ' the Commission 's continued commitment to reducing state aid still further ' .
We will therefore vote against his text , which is a mark of unreservedly rallying to the neo-liberal ideology .

I wish to congratulate Mr Lipietz on the excellent report he has drawn up on the Commission 's 31st Report on Competition Policy 2001 , which I fully support , particularly with regard to ensuring constant and rigorous monitoring to prevent serious distortions of competition and with regard to the need to create a specialist body , at judicial level , in the field of competition and State aid , so that cases in this field can be dealt with quickly .
I should like , however , to emphasise that although I broadly agree with the rapporteur 's support for the Commission 's commitment to reducing State aid in the Community , there are still European regions , specifically the outermost regions , in which State aid is a vital measure for supporting their economic and social development .
This has been expressly acknowledged in Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
In these specific cases , we must continue to see a degree of flexibility in the granting and authorisation of aid which make a justified and effective contribution to the development of these unique territories and economies .
. ( PT ) I have supported this report , which concerns the Commission 's assessment of competition policy in 2001 , because I believe it does so in a well-considered way and makes constructive criticism .
As the rapporteur states , we must acknowledge the fact that the Commission is successfully pursuing its objectives by boldly applying the instruments at its disposal and therefore effectively protecting consumers and their best interests .
An objective contribution to this conclusion is the verified reduction in the number of cases examined and , at the same time , the sharp rise in fines imposed .
In fact , given the high speed of technological development , the march of globalisation , and not least the European economy characterised by frequent mergers , the rigour of competition policy and its scrupulous monitoring by the Commission is crucial .
This policy is crucial to promoting a climate of confidence and to affording proper protection for economic actors , preventing concerted practices , the abuse of dominant positions and other distortions of competition .
I also particularly welcome the rapporteur 's proposal to attach absolute priority to policies involving horizontal aid to help industry adjust to the Kyoto commitments .
This is the way forward for a European economy that aspires to be increasingly ' more dynamic and competitive ' but also ecologically balanced .
In recent years , the Commission has fulfilled its mission to hunt down state aid with a somewhat blind zeal , seeing aid to be criticised practically everywhere .
For the first time , the Council recently tried to moderate the Commission by using Article 88 ( 3 ) which allows it , ruling unanimously in exceptional circumstances , to exonerate some aid from any proceedings .
We regret that it did not have that courage earlier , for example when the Commission condemned public aid for employment in the French textiles sector .
The Court of Justice also put on another brake with the Ferring ruling of 22 November 2001 , which exonerates public aid when it solely compensates for the excess cost of a public service constraint .
We hope that this case law will be confirmed .
It seems to us that now the corresponding section of the Treaty ( Articles 87 to 89 ) should be updated in order to better define acceptable public aid , for example for employment , the environment or compensating for public service constraints .
Moreover , the Commission should not have exclusive and discretionary powers : the national democracies should also be able to have an input .
The report by Philippe Herzog proposes some minor adjustments to the scoreboard for state aid and gives some pious wishes .
Like him , we deplore the freezing of Research and Development aid , and like him , we are in favour of exceptional cases being considered .
However , the report must be severely criticised in terms of its content .
It deals with the absence of any evaluation procedure as just one point among many others .
It is however , the key issue : rather than being called to vote on a table of figures , according to democracy the European Parliament should have the opportunity to give an opinion based on genuine assessments .
The reason why this aspect is only mentioned in passing is that the rapporteur deprived it of all importance in advance by swearing allegiance to the neo-liberal dogma .
The report closes the discussion before it opens by stating that it supports ' the objectives of reducing aid granted by states or from state funds , in any form whatsoever , which distorts or threatens to distort competition ' .
The dominant theme of this report is therefore detailed arrangements with a logic of pure competition , and this is also why we voted against it .
. ( PT ) I wish to congratulate Mr Herzog on the excellent report he has produced on the 2001 scoreboard for State aid ( spring 2002 update ) , presented by the Commission , which I fully support .
In the framework of competition policy , the half-yearly publication of the scoreboard for State aid since 2001 is an important tool for transparency and debate .
Nevertheless , I share the opinion that the data included in this scoreboard are still not sufficient or adequate to enable a comparison to be made between the behaviour of the various Member States and the real benefits arising from State aid .
We would like to see such a comparison made in the short term because this is the only way in which an informed overall study can be undertaken so that decisions can be taken on the level of aid granted and / or its possible refocusing towards horizontal objectives of common interest , such as research and development , the environment , SMEs , training and employment .
. ( NL ) Within the EU , government aid is a dirty word these days .
There is no room for it in the pursuit of unlimited international competition and tax reduction .
However , a great deal of government aid is channelled to companies in a disguised form .
In some cases , there is an over-capacity on offer for the transport of freight , as new motorways , goods railways and canals are being built .
Consequently , companies are free to choose which part of this infrastructure they can utilise while keeping their transport costs to a minimum .
Many companies only managed to start up or survive thanks to government aid , and this is not likely to change a great deal in future .
This applies all the more if services of general interest , public services in other words , are considered as part of the economy .
Although those services are vital to the well-being of people and the conservation of our environment , they are , in many cases , running at a constant loss .
Only nepotism , the giving of government funding to business connections , should be prevented .
My colleague , Mr Herzog , as rapporteur , has stated all of this in a slightly less emphatic way , but has tabled sound proposals in order at least to bring the figures more on a par , to increase the ceiling for amounts that have to be declared to EUR 200 000 , to adopt an active , regional policy in areas of the Czech Republic and Poland with a strong steel industry , to abolish the inspection of aid to services of general interest and to give Parliament more control over policy .
The right-wing elements in this House will do everything in their power to obstruct this process .
In Stockholm , in June 2001 , the European Council adopted the objective of reducing the overall level of State aid as a percentage of GDP by 2003 , particularly ad hoc and sectoral aid .
The Barcelona Council of March 2002 confirmed this intention , calling on Member States to redirect such aid towards horizontal objectives of common interest , including economic and social cohesion , and target it to identified market failures .
I believe State aid to be a flexibility instrument that is crucial to correcting disparities and to addressing specific problems under European competition rules , which means that the legitimacy of its use should never be questioned , although it must be undertaken in a moderate and justifiable way .
In the specific context that led to the drafting of this report , I welcome the clear reduction in State aid granted and its redirection towards horizontal objectives , such as SMEs , the environment , R & D , employment and training , which fall beyond the strict remit of economic efficiency , but promote the better preparation of economic actors and Member States for the internal market .
Lastly , I disagree with the rapporteur 's call for the codecision procedure to be extended to this field . I welcome the amendments that have been adopted in various individual votes which , although the rapporteur might not like it , have significantly improved the final text of the resolution .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.40 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Mr President , I have just seen the verbatim report of the extraordinary debate on Tuesday morning on the Europarl website , and I noticed that the written statements that some Members , including myself , although I was not the only one , had made under Rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure , were quite simply deleted .
I am told that Rule 120 did not apply , and also that the very Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament did not apply during that extraordinary debate .
I find this to be very questionable reasoning that we could debate for some time and , in any case , in fairness , I think that it was a sufficiently important debate for written statements to be accepted from Members who were not able to take the floor .
I am therefore speaking on my own behalf but also on behalf of other Members and , Mr President , I would like our written statements , which were issued within the required time , to be annexed to the debate .
Mr Berthu , your remark does not pertain to the Minutes for yesterday . Nonetheless , it has been noted and a response will be provided when appropriate .
Mr President , further to a statement by Mr Gorostiaga last Monday , I wish to make one point clear .
Mr Gorostiaga referred to a report by the United Nations Committee Against Torture , and subsequently sent an e-mail to all Members of the House .
I shall forward the aforementioned committee 's full report to Members of the House so they can read for themselves the positive comments on action taken in Spain in recent years .
A number of adjustments have been made to legislation in order to prevent torture .
I should also like to emphasise that in my view it is somewhat surprising that Mr Gorostiaga himself should be condemning torture when he has failed to condemn the sustained attack on human rights we are enduring in the Basque Country .
This is particularly true for those of us holding elected office .
The most significant torture is actually that perpetrated by ETA terrorists as they murder , blackmail and kidnap .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0369 / 2002 ) by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on extending the provisions of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 to nationals of third countries who are not already covered by these provisions solely on the grounds of their nationality [ COM ( 2002 ) 59 - C5-0084 / 2002 - 2002 / 0039 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , it is with mixed feelings that I stand here , not because this debate failed to be concluded before lunch and I am due to give a speech this evening in my own country , but because on the one hand , I am pleased and delighted that we today managed to settle an issue that will be concluded successfully in the Council of Ministers and on the other , I would have taken the greatest pleasure in defending what we believe ourselves entitled to as a Parliament - and for which I would have been quite happy to go to the Court of Justice - namely the legal basis underlying Regulation 1408 , which involves codecision .
I did not do this and I am also grateful to my fellow MEPs who were dissuaded from fighting this battle .
Why are we not facing the battle ?
Because of the great importance of extending the regulation to include third-country nationals and due to the fact that something is finally being done about the legal position of those who reside legally in a European Member State but who subsequently , when they live or work elsewhere , have no rights whatsoever .
The European Court of Justice has said several times that the coordination regulation should apply to these legally resident citizens as well .
The Commission has submitted a directive , an amendment to a regulation , on this very subject .
It chose to use a different legal basis but failed to get the Council to ratify it .
I am indebted to the Commission , but also , as I have already stated , to my fellow MEPs , for deciding to turn their backs on envy and political squabbling and for opting , with good reason , to bring these citizens within the scope of Regulation 1408 .
I think that an institutional battle over what would have been the correct legal basis would have lasted for many years and would certainly not have benefited these people .
We as Parliament have therefore seized the earliest opportunity - and I believe that the Council of Ministers will be taking a decision on 3 December next - to establish the rights of these citizens - their duties have already been set out .
The fact that the Danes and even the British felt they should be involved in this regulation filled me with particular joy .
It will in any event also create clarity , which is desperately needed .
When the amendments will be adopted shortly , we will say to the Council that if further amendments are made to our opinion or if the legal position of the people concerned is changed , we will retain the right to join this institutional battle with the Council over these points .
What we have included is just about acceptable , but in any event , it contains the serious warning that if things are not going as planned and as agreed , we will keep the avenue to the Court in Luxembourg open .
I would once again like to thank all fellow MEPs who have worked on this system with great commitment and a great deal of dynamism and who , along with me , were prepared to support the Commission in this proposal .
In addition , I should like to make an observation which concerns one of your officials , Mr Verschueren , who is at the moment unwell at home , but who , in my view , is the best spokesperson on behalf of the Commission on this subject matter .
I should like to extend to him , via yourself , my warmest wishes for a very speedy recovery .
I am certain that I am also doing this on behalf of the fellow MEPs who are working on this dossier .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , and the MEPs for the excellent report and for their support for the Commission proposal .
It is an extremely important proposal and its adoption would be a significant political signal from the Union regarding the integration of third-country nationals legally residing in the European Union , since it offers them , in terms of social security , the same protection which Community citizens moving within the European Union enjoy .
It is therefore a major contribution to a balanced , coherent Community immigration policy .
On 27 October 1999 , this House called for prompt action regarding the fair treatment of third-country nationals legally residing in the Member States , so that they might be granted rights similar to those enjoyed by citizens of the Union .
The proposal in question responds to this call and goes even further , granting third-country nationals rights that are identical , and not just similar , to those enjoyed by Community citizens moving within the European Union .
The proposal will also encourage worker mobility , the importance of which was illustrated by the Commission 's action plan presented at the start of the year .
The proposal will therefore simplify the rules , reducing the number of national and international instruments which govern the coordination of social security systems for this category of people .
As the rapporteur rightly pointed out in her explanatory statement , this proposal for a regulation , based on Article 63 ( 4 ) of the Treaty , aims to build a bridge .
It simply extends the scope of Community regulations on social security to third-country nationals , regulations which are and will continue to be based on Article 42 of the Treaty .
This means that , for any future amendments to Regulation 1408 / 71 , Parliament will continue to be a codecision-maker .
As you know , the Commission proposal already contains a recital which refers to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , but I agree that there is a need for a specific reference to Article 34 ( 2 ) of the Charter .
The Commission is therefore able to support Amendment No 1 .
I fully agree with the assertion that the coordination of social security for third-country nationals is of great importance , but this is so obvious that it - and likewise a recital in this regard - is superfluous .
The importance of coordinating social security systems for third-country nationals is already amply conveyed in the first nine recitals proposed by the Commission .
While it agrees with the underlying concept , the Commission therefore cannot accept Amendment No 2 .
I understand that it is appropriate to refer to the forthcoming , imminent enlargement of the European Union in the recitals : the Commission can therefore accept Amendment No 3 .
It is , however , unable to support Amendments Nos 4 and 5 .
With regard to Amendment No 4 , it must be said that it is inappropriate to refer in a regulation to a proposal for a Community instrument , the outcome of which is still unknown .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 5 for a number of reasons .
First of all , the aim of the proposal is to grant third-country nationals legally residing in a Member State the same rights as Community citizens moving within the Union .
Amendment No 5 seeks to grant third-country nationals different rights to those given to Community citizens .
I do not see why an Afghan or Indian worker , in the Netherlands or Finland for example , should have to face profoundly different problems - owing to unfamiliarity with the language and / or with the administrative procedures in the host country - from those faced by a Greek or Portuguese colleague .
The Commission will also launch a vigorous information campaign and , once the proposal has been adopted , all those concerned will be made aware of it so that they can assert their rights when the time comes .
Moreover , there is already a high degree of media interest in this proposal .
Lastly , Mr President , I am extremely grateful to this House for having included the proposal on today 's agenda , thereby enabling the Council to formally adopt it at the meeting on 3 December .
You will understand that the Commission does not have enough time to submit an amended proposal to the Council , but my fellow Commissioner , Mrs Diamantopoulou , intends to recommend that the Council adopts the proposal together with those of Parliament 's amendments which we have just accepted .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to join the rapporteur in welcoming the prospect of implementing such a legislative provision , i.e. a position on the substance of the draft text .
Indeed it was high time , and the European Commission had a political responsibility towards the people affected by this draft regulation , particularly since the Tampere European Council in October 1999 , which had established , in its conclusions , the need to take swift measures to ensure that nationals from third countries living legally in the European Union are treated equally .
What we welcome is the respect for equal treatment for residents of third countries with regard to Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 and the social equality resulting from it which , as has been said , provides quite substantial help towards integrating them but also encourages mobility .
We are aware that this mobility , which we talk about so much , is much more difficult to put into practice than free movement of property and goods .
I would like to stress , because it should be done , the important contribution that the residents of third countries make to the European Union , both in terms of boosting the economy and in terms of a rich cultural diversity and when we talk about them we are potentially talking about around 13 million people in the Union .
That is not an insignificant number .
However , like the rapporteur , I would like to draw your attention to the issue of the legal basis chosen by the European Commission following pressure from the Council .
The European Parliament had the consultation procedure imposed on it , whereas the first proposal in 1997 was based on Article 51 , now Article 42 , which assumes codecision .
That decision , the motivation for which seems to be more than questionable , as pointed out by the rapporteur , and therefore contestable , in fact places the European Parliament in a dilemma , that it can only solve by giving in , because that is exactly what is happening here .
And unfortunately , it is not the first time that there has been an attempt to genuinely dismantle , as we could describe it , the prerogatives of our institution , which could be seen as a dangerous precedent .
I fear that there is an underlying trend , and I think that our institution will have to be vigilant .
The Commission , following the Council 's recommendations , knows full well that Parliament is going to choose the path of pragmatism , and that it will prefer to abandon what you , Madam , called , legal hair-splitting , in order not to endanger urgent Community legislation .
We would not like to take responsibility for the failure of something that we desire .
We do not wish to cross swords , but the question is there : in the future , should we penalise the citizens who are awaiting decisions from this House simply in order to ensure that Parliament 's position is respected ?
I think that this decision , the quite reasonable position of the European Parliament , should be used to help discussions on matters that will arise in the future or that we know are already being considered by the Council .
Mr President , on behalf of my group and on behalf of Jean Lambert , I want to warmly congratulate the rapporteur on her report .
We fully support Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's approach , including the way she handled the legal basis .
I think it important that agreements reached by way of European coordination now also apply to third-country nationals .
Speaking quite honestly , it is a scandal that such was not already the case , in view of the fact that these people do indeed pay taxes and social security contributions , but then find themselves falling between two stools when working across frontiers .
Parliament has already expressed its desire that the Tampere conclusions should be transposed into real action in a similar way as regards the rights of third-country nationals .
The regulation that we are now discussing has to do with cross-border working , but the others , a naturally far larger category , also have to have their social rights secured in the same way as those of workers originating from the European Union .
My group hopes that the struggle that must still be engaged in will lead to the necessary consensus being reached in this House .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the Commission statement on climate change .
Mr President , thank you for inviting the Commission to report to this House on the New Delhi Conference on Climate Change held in October 2002 .
I wish to begin by saying that the European Union adopted a strong and unified position during the talks and we would like to thank the Danish Presidency for its excellent work .
The Commission is also pleased to acknowledge the sound political support it received from the NGOs present at the meeting .
However , the Commission and my colleague Mrs Wallström particularly want to express our appreciation of the European Parliament 's ongoing support for the EU 's position in international climate negotiations and your continuing interest in this issue .
That interest was reflected by your dedicated parliamentary delegation led by Mrs García-Orcoyen Tormo in New Delhi .
We hope to continue our effective cooperation in the future .
Around 170 countries , representing over three-quarters of the world 's population , met in New Delhi for their eighth regular meeting as parties to the United Nation 's Framework Convention on Climate Change .
The meeting made good progress on a number of technical issues , such as monitoring and reporting , and paved the way for the use of the Clean Development Mechanism ( CDM ) .
The CDM is an important tool for reaching emission targets in developed countries and , at the same time , for reducing emissions in the developing world and contributing to its sustainable growth .
During the final ministerial part of the meeting , ministers and senior officials discussed the actions taken so far to combat climate change , the links between climate change and sustainable development and the disturbing findings of the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , which show that most of the acceleration in global warming is man-made .
They also debated the need for further action to continue the fight against climate change .
The meeting ended with the adoption of the Delhi Declaration .
Allow me to briefly outline the Commission 's political assessment of the New Delhi Conference .
The Delhi Ministerial Declaration represents the political outcome of the conference .
Although it includes the call for all countries to ratify the Kyoto Protocol and underlines the need for greater efforts to combat climate change in the coming decades , we would have liked it to be stronger in other areas .
Let me briefly address some shortcomings .
First , the Delhi Declaration fails to underline the need for a closer link between science and policy action .
The findings of the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change confirm that more emission cuts are needed if the ultimate objective of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change is to be attained .
This must be used as an important input for furthering the work of the climate change convention and the Kyoto Protocol .
A science-based approach will give us more confidence in our policy scenarios for the future being on the right track .
Secondly , our mandate as agreed by the Council on 17 October was to seek a forward-looking discussion on more inclusive and longer-term global cooperation based on broader and balanced action and participation consistent with the ultimate objective of the Convention .
Such discussions should have started at the Conference of the Parties at its first session after the entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol .
Regrettably , the EU did not succeed in persuading other parties to recognise the need for starting such a process .
However , through a number of bilateral contacts with other parties and groups of parties the EU did seize every opportunity to explain our way of thinking .
The issue is now on the table and these discussions have provided a solid foundation on which we can build .
A third but more general point is that the debate in Delhi tended to focus on sustainable development rather than on climate change .
While there is a clear understanding in the EU that climate change is strongly linked to sustainable development , the UN framework convention on climate change is about just that .
It is the framework for climate change which is well defined and in place .
We should not allow the sustainable development discussion to distract us from the climate change process .
Following this conference , what prospects can we see for the entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol ?
This is obviously a crucial question .
As you know this requires ratification by 55 parties representing at least 55 % of the CO2 emissions of the industrialised countries in 1990 .
The first threshold has been largely met - 97 countries as of 13 November - as ratification continues steadily .
In this context , we gladly welcome the confirmation by Canada that they will soon ratify .
However , we have only reached a figure of 37.4 % for the second threshold .
Given that the EU , Japan and almost all the candidate countries have now ratified , this means that ratification by Russia is necessary to bring the Protocol into effect .
It seems that Russia is still inclined to ratify , especially after the results of the recently published study on the effects of climate change in that country .
However , a final decision has yet to be made and no specific timetable has been set out .
It is the Commission 's intention to continue to encourage Russia to live up to its responsibility as a key player on climate change and to ratify the Kyoto Protocol as soon as possible .
Internally , the Commission will proceed within the framework of the European Climate Change Programme to enable the European Union to meet its emissions reductions targets as agreed .
Internationally , on the other hand , the Commission will continue its efforts to encourage our partners to ratify the Kyoto Protocol so that it can enter into force .
At the same time we will also continue to build on the good bilateral relationships we have established with some developing countries and with the majority of the developed countries in order to reach a better understanding on what needs to be done in the future .
Everybody knows that the Kyoto Protocol is only the first step in the fight against climate change and we have to start to discuss how to proceed beyond it .
I would like to conclude by stressing once again how deeply grateful the Commission is for the Parliament 's support and for its very dedicated presence in Delhi itself .
Mr President , I shall attempt the trick of representing two people here today - myself and Mrs Corbey , who was present at the New Delhi conference .
That does not mean that I shall convey two different messages . Instead , I shall try to make the message as stringent as possible .
Having read the Commission 's and Parliament 's report on the New Delhi conference , there is a question that keeps going round in my head .
What is it that causes us , or the EU , to fail in communicating our message and our desire for change to , above all , the developing countries ?
Why is the United States more successful in doing so ?
The United States 's message is , at least in our eyes , worse in terms of combating the climate change that is under way .
It is essential for the EU now jointly to begin to reflect upon how it might try to reduce the credibility gap that in actual fact exists between ourselves and those whom we wish to get on our side .
That also applies to the possibility of ratifying the Kyoto Protocol .
These all no doubt constitute the most important aspects of our continued strategy for trying to progress further .
It is , above all , a question of making further progress with the important work that will now commence when this part of the Kyoto Protocol has been concluded .
Mrs Corbey , who was present at the New Delhi conference , made some notes that I think are worth communicating to the House .
They are , above all , about the Kyoto process in actual fact constituting a serious political danger because political support for the whole process is evaporating .
There are two essential aspects to trying to increase political support again and to raising the issue for discussion at a more subtle and serious level .
One factor , for example , is the one I have just addressed , namely the situation in the developing countries and our relations with those countries .
At the New Delhi conference , quite a few of them reported extreme weather conditions .
It was not just one country but a number that did so , and they also expressed opinions as to what costs the situation would entail .
Even though we in the EU cannot accept responsibility for all these forms of climate change , we must nonetheless regard ourselves as one of the parties which , together with the rest of the industrialised world , has contributed most to creating the climate change now under way .
We must adopt a clearer role in helping the developing countries to protect themselves against climate change .
We must , of course , also help them find ways of making progress in terms of development that are not merely a case of taking the route that we ourselves do not consider to have been entirely successful .
What is perhaps most important is that , in spite of everything , the EU should continue to push for something 's happening after 2012 and that we should not give up , in spite of the surrounding world 's actually wanting something different .
That is perhaps the most important message to have come out of the New Delhi conference .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to start by congratulating the European Parliament delegation to the New Delhi Conference and I would single out Mrs Garcia-Orcoyen Tormo , who led the delegation .
I am sorry that once again the Commission and the Council did not allow Parliament 's delegation to participate in the EU coordination meetings .
We knew , even before the Conference started , that the outcome would be extremely hard to achieve : this Conference was designed to prepare for the second phase of the Kyoto Protocol , whereas the political priority is still , unfortunately , to ensure that the Kyoto Protocol enters into force in order for the first phase to begin .
Although it is regrettable that no result was achieved , it should nevertheless be highlighted that we managed to improve the definition of the Clean Development Mechanism and of emissions monitoring procedures .
What I believe to be more serious is not so much the failure to reach an outcome but rather the political attempt to water down the Kyoto Protocol .
There was a definite attempt by some delegations , specifically the delegation representing the United States , to take the debate on climate change backwards in time to 1997 , when there were neither targets nor protocols intended to achieve action .
It is also a pity that the developing countries have fallen into this trap .
It is precisely in the developing countries that the consequences of climate change are having the most damaging effects .
We believe the choice remains clear : firstly , the Kyoto Protocol is the only instrument capable of mitigating climate change .
Secondly , the second phase of the Protocol must be set even more ambitious targets than the first phase , which represents only a tiny step forwards .
Thirdly , action must first be undertaken in the industrialised countries and only later in the developing countries .
Mr President , this was the first time I had taken part in one of these delegations .
I found it fascinating , but also frustrating .
As has been said , this 8th Conference of the Parties to the Climate Change Convention in New Delhi was intended to be a transitional one - more a matter of keeping the momentum going on the climate change debate than making headline political decisions .
I concur with what colleagues have said and also express my frustration with the exclusion of the parliamentary delegation from the daily coordination meetings .
As a result , the Commission ended the last day trying to exclude us from the press conference , albeit very politely and diplomatically .
When we parliamentarians were briefed that morning , we indicated our frustration with the weakness of the draft declaration .
The Commission did not want us to express that view at a press conference when it was taking what it thought was a more diplomatic line .
These differences would not arise if we were part of the coordination meeting and on the inside .
The Commission was very good to us in that it gave us briefings outside the loop , but we need to be inside the loop if we are to be involved and if we are to be described as ' members as participants in the European Community delegation ' .
The Council and the Commission were on one side and Parliament on the other .
The draft declaration itself was rather weak and disappointing .
The title was changed from ' The Declaration on Climate Change ' to ' Declaration on Climate Change and Sustainability ' .
That is a precedent we have to be careful of .
It is very hard to talk about these issues , be objective and keep the focus on climate change if it is suggested that sustainable development is not included .
It is a sort of ' hit-me-with-a-child-in-my-arms ' argument , i.e. how can you justify what you are saying if you do not include sustainable development ?
The Americans and others used the serious issue of sustainable development to divert focus from climate change and from the Kyoto Protocol requirements in general .
It was a fascinating exercise .
I would like to thank the leader of our delegation , Mrs García-Orcoyen Tormo , and all colleagues for making it that .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what Mrs Doyle said gives great cause for concern in terms of both procedure and the subject matter , and it is this latter aspect which I would like to consider for a moment .
We are in a situation where agreements on the environment are never observed : the most striking example is the Kyoto Agreement .
I hope that the Commission will reflect on its future approach to cooperation with Members of Parliament - including outside the European Union - but above all , with regard to the subject matter , I hope that it will work much harder to preserve the conditions necessary for the survival not just of the European Union and its almost 400 million inhabitants - which soon will exceed 400 million - but of the whole planet .
While I am anything but anti-American , I nevertheless feel that great pressure needs to be exerted on President Bush 's administration so that issues such as the climate , climate change and the environment are given more attention and not just addressed from a financial perspective and with a narrow rather than a far-sighted monetary approach .
We should work much harder in this respect , and I trust the Commission will do so .
The debate is closed .
The next item is the statement by the Commission on the implementation of the so-called Erika package on maritime safety , and on the action required to deal with socio-economic and environmental disasters .
. ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate ought never to have been necessary .
Sadly , the Commission has today been proved right .
The Commission proposed the speedy withdrawal of old-fashioned single-hull tankers some time ago .
Unfortunately the Council did not follow our advice .
It failed to act with the necessary urgency and adopt the Commission 's proposals following discussion with Parliament .
Had it done so , the Prestige would have been banned since 1 September 2002 .
It would therefore never have broken up and sunk off the coast of Europe .
There are lessons to be learnt from all this .
Those were my very words when the Erika sank off the coast of Brittany .
I must reiterate them today , as we discuss the case of the Prestige which sunk off Spain , off the coast of Galicia to be precise .
There are lessons to be learnt and measures to be taken .
The first lesson is crystal clear .
Speed is of the essence , and so are determination and decisive action .
These situations need to be dealt with once and for all , to ensure no further similar tragedies happen .
The immediate action required is obvious .
The authorities must compensate those affected and they must undertake the clean-up operation required to return the coast to its previous condition .
I will remind the House that this is a particularly rich coast , both in terms of fish and shellfish production and from an environmental point of view .
Almost all of it is covered by Natura 2002 .
So , the affected areas need to be cleaned and restored .
The chain of events leading to the disaster must also be traced .
It should be borne in mind that back in 1997 a number of oil companies rejected this vessel , on the grounds that it was dangerous and unsafe .
It appears that the last time the vessel underwent an inspection as required in the European Union under the Paris Memorandum was in 1999 .
Furthermore , the vessel had put into two European ports before this summer . Regrettably , in neither of these was it inspected as required .
It is important to study all the links in the chain and establish what exactly happened and where responsibility lies .
The lessons to be learnt to prevent a repeat of such situations should then become clear .
The present situation involves a vessel with a Greek owner , flying the flag of the Bahamas , inspected by a United States classification society and managed by a Swiss company .
It has links with other countries too , all of which offer substantial tax advantages .
We are called on to take all the urgent action in our power to prevent a further tragedy of this kind .
That involves the immediate application and implementation of agreements and directives adopted by European Union Ministers .
Application of the Erika I package cannot wait until June of next year , nor can the Erika II package be left until February of 2004 .
They must be put into practice now .
They must be made effective , which means meeting the target of inspection of 25 % of vessels entering a port by the port authorities , 25 % of the most dangerous vessels , those posing the greatest risk .
The standards specified in existing provisions must be applied .
Single-hull tankers must be replaced by double-hull ones as a matter of urgency .
The Community system for following up information on maritime traffic in all areas must be set up at the earliest opportunity .
Steps should also be taken to facilitate emergency intervention , by designating protection areas , mooring areas and areas for emergency shelter .
The European Maritime Safety Agency should start operations too . It is tasked with ensuring that the correct procedures are followed in all European ports , and also with providing technical support to the various countries and to the Commission .
Discussions with the COPE Fund ought to be pursued . This fund was set up for the specific purpose of covering compensation and the cost of restoring and cleaning the environment .
This is over and above standard compensation .
It complements the FIPOL Fund .
In addition , at the next Council of Ministers meeting on 6 December , as an urgent measure , I shall propose the adoption of an administrative decision by all Member States of the Union to ensure that heavy fuel oil is only transported in double-hull tankers during the transitional period until single-hull tankers are phased out as already planned .
Heavy fuel oil is after all the most polluting of all these products .
Each of the vessels involved in the latest three accidents , namely the Erika , the Baltic and the Prestige , was an old-fashioned single-hull tanker carrying heavy fuel oil .
Heavy fuel oil is the most dangerous product .
Consequently , stricter safety measures are needed .
This could easily be achieved through an administrative decision by the governments of the Member States .
We need to go further .
That means working to increase the FIPOL and COPE Funds .
It also means persevering with the Commission 's work on future criminal sanctions in the European area .
Going further also means that port authorities should improve the application of the directive on inspection .
It has been shown that there are ports where hardly any inspection takes place .
These could almost be termed ports of convenience .
This amounts to taking fraudulent advantage of the present situation and has to be stopped .
In addition , going further means reconsidering the basis of international maritime law at global level within the framework of the International Maritime Organisation .
International maritime law is based on Nineteenth Century principles , yet here we are in the Twentieth Century , when our seas are criss-crossed daily by hundreds of thousands of vessels loaded with cargoes that are highly dangerous because of their volume or content .
A century and a half ago this just did not happen .
Going further also means strengthening the rights of coastal states in the 200-mile zone , and in straits .
In particular , these rights need to be strengthened so that they can be defended against the risks of those particularly dangerous cargoes .
Ladies and gentlemen , going further should also mean talking to our neighbours .
I have in mind those who share with us a common interest in certain enormously fragile seas .
For example , the Baltic which we share with Russia , the Mediterranean , and the Black Sea .
We should cooperate with Russia and with other states in Europe , the Middle East and North Africa .
In conclusion , I would like to emphasise that the Prestige disaster need never have happened .
As a Commission , we did everything in our power to prevent it .
We were unsuccessful , but we must ensure no second Erika or second Prestige founders off our coasts .
We must also strive to ensure that such incidents do not occur along the coasts of other seas , off other continents .
We should remember that the seas are a common heritage , and that our concern has to extend to their farthest reaches .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , as a native of Galicia I feel devastated .
I am quite overcome by the spectacle unfolding before us .
As a politician , I am keenly aware of the heavy responsibility we bear as Members of this House . We are charged with defending the interests of our constituents and we must succeed in so doing .
Vague statements and half-truths simply will not do any longer .
As the Commissioner said , this has to be the last tragedy at sea .
I should indeed like to begin by commending Commissioner de Palacio on her work .
To all intents and purposes , before she was appointed there was no such thing as a European policy on maritime safety .
We now have a substantial package of measures on the table , namely Erika I and Erika II .
The question as to whether these measures are adequate and whether they are being applied correctly has already been raised in the House .
Clearly , the answer is no .
The European Parliament must unite and throw its political weight behind the European Commission .
It has to send out a clear signal .
We need to work together to speed up implementation of these measures .
They must come into force .
The Commissioner referred to double hulls . The latter are compulsory in the United States , and had that been the case here , this accident probably would not have happened .
The Commissioner also mentioned inspections at ports within the European Community , which is where we should start , and at all other ports in Europe and across the world .
All ports should actually be monitored , be they colonies , tax havens or ports of convenience as some have been described .
The Maritime Safety Agency has to start operating as soon as possible .
Sadly , as a native of Galicia I am all too aware of the unfortunate record held by that part of Spain .
Eight such accidents have taken place there over the last thirty years . Six of these accidents happened in the last twenty years .
In Galicia the Atlantic coast of the Cape Finisterre area is known as the Coast of Death .
The European Agency should be located in an area affected by maritime accidents .
It should be in one that has experienced their consequences .
Perhaps others could offer more than my region .
Locating the Agency in Galicia could however go some way towards compensating the area .
I know this falls outside the competence of both Parliament and the Commission , but I feel moved to express my thoughts aloud .
In any case , the resolution calls for the establishment of special maritime fishing areas .
Undoubtedly , Galicia does fall into that category because of its rich shellfish and fishing resources mentioned earlier , and also because of its diversity and marine ecosystem .
We are eager to move what could be termed the lanes of death further away from where they now are .
We want to prevent our sea from becoming a sewer .
We want to prevent vessels that are no better than rusting hulks from sailing on it .
The sea is Galicia 's life . Galicia 's economy is based on it and I could go so far as to say that its distinctive culture is too .
Unfortunately , ladies and gentlemen , that sea is now poisoned .
These measures must be strictly implemented as from tomorrow .
We must insist that Member States do so .
Mr President , I really feel the time has come for European solidarity to make itself felt .
I would recall that we have ourselves shown solidarity to other Member States in the past .
We now call on them to respond in kind .
Any assistance offered to Galicia will be welcome . I would like to refer in particular to the Solidarity Fund .
I studied Article 2 and it certainly does apply in this instance , especially if the reports approved by the House are borne in mind .
It should also be taken into account that Galicia is an Objective 1 region whose fish and shellfish resources represent more than 10 % of its gross domestic product .
Given that these are in danger of being totally wiped out for an unspecified period , Galicia does indeed meet the conditions for benefiting from the Solidarity Fund .
In conclusion , I should like to assure the Commissioner that she can count on support from the Group of the European People 's Party .
Indeed I am sure the whole House will support her in her efforts .
We need to be able to start doing what is required as of tomorrow . Then we shall never again have to regret accidents of this kind .
Thank you in advance , ladies and gentlemen , for the support I am confident you will offer us .
Mr President , I should first like to thank the Commissioner for her presence in the House today .
It is evidence of the great interest I know she has in this issue which is causing such concern to us all .
The Prestige was carrying twice as much crude oil in its tanks as the Erika .
The oil slick it caused is already an economic , social and environmental disaster for Europe , especially for my home region .
It represents a mayor problem for Europe and its consequences will be felt for many long years .
More than 300 km of coastline have been polluted . Three further spills have been detected and the strong wind from the south-west is bringing them closer to the coast .
Shellfish production , inshore fishing , aquaculture , tourism and the very image of Galicia have all been seriously affected .
Galicia is known to be an area prone to oil spills , yet it remains unprotected , despite the fact that 70 % of Europe 's crude oil goes past its coastline .
No effective lessons seem to have been learnt , even after enduring five oil spills .
Sadly , it also has to be said that lack of equipment is currently hampering the efforts of many citizens eager to help .
Pictures of hundreds of fishermen sewing together an enormous net four kilometres long to create an amateur device for holding back the oil speak volumes . So do pictures of people on beaches armed with buckets and spades .
They show twenty-first century citizens coping with a nineteenth century disaster using Stone Age tools .
Information has failed too .
Spanish public opinion believes attempts were made to play down the gravity of the situation .
This is in stark contrast to the grave concern expressed by European governments .
The Commissioner rightly said that the disaster could have been prevented if European regulations had been applied .
In addition , she stated that the Erika package will come into force in 2003 .
She went on to say , however , that despite Parliament 's express wish to the contrary , vessels without protective ballast tanks will be able to ply the seas until 2012 .
Those that do have such protection will be permitted up to 2026 .
Furthermore , the requirement for double hulls does not apply to small tankers , so they will still be able to sail also .
That is why I am delighted with the Commissioner 's swift response .
I welcome it and urge Member States in the Council to accept her proposals as a matter of urgency .
Nonetheless , further action is needed .
For example , tankers carrying dangerous goods should be required to set routes along the furthermost part of the shipping lane , and the Finisterre lane should be relocated away from the coast .
It is certainly true that this issue calls for legislation at world level , but the European Union has to press ahead .
The Socialist Group calls for a policy on transport and sustainable development based on the principle of maximum safety and prevention .
Such a policy must reinforce cooperation within the Community , along with the means of inspection and safety standards .
We reiterate the call for Community funds to be channelled to this disaster .
Community aid must retain its credibility , however .
You will recall that Galicia was recently let down when no Community agreement was reached with Morocco .
The victims ' interests must come first .
We therefore believe that the European Solidarity Fund set up recently is the most appropriate instrument in this case , as it is flexible , immediate , and was devised as a Community instrument .
Mr President , Commissioner , you stated a moment ago that the sea belongs to all of us , but I should like to see it only being used by people who respect it .
This was clearly not the case here .
I have to say , I am shocked and I should like to ask my fellow MEPs from that region to extend the sympathy of our group to everyone involved .
As a legislator , I am furious , but also a little despondent because this is the second time that we have faced the same problem in less than three years .
We do not yet have all the facts by a long way , but we have a few .
The question I am asking is whether the Erika package is sufficient .
The Erika package is clearly valuable and should enter into force at the earliest opportunity , but is it sufficient ?
I have a question concerning airports .
I mentioned airports and safe berthing places in one of my previous reports .
I do not think that this legislation is completely incontrovertible .
I should like to know , once we have all the facts , what we can do to improve the situation , so that a ship in distress is not turned down , which , I assume , exacerbated the situation , but can berth somewhere so that the disaster is kept down to an absolute minimum .
Another reason why we should improve the situation is so that we can also mention compensation - something that was unmentionable in my report - for a port which suffers damage in this case .
No provision has been made for this .
We should do this .
In fact , a start is only just being made .
Secondly , as you have already stated , Commissioner , we are very weak internationally speaking .
Would it not at long last be possible within the IMO and if necessary just for our own sake to work with a black list of states that allow their flags to be misused and in that way enhance the power of the port state ?
Should we not reconsider all our options and use our influence to enhance the IMO 's role in the process ?
This is also a task for the Council ; we cannot do this on our own .
We therefore need to improve our rules .
This applies to the Commission , the European Parliament , all the groups - party politics should not come into this - but also and , above all , the Council and Member States .
However , we should , first and foremost , help the people involved and alleviate the despair in that region .
I believe this to be the duty of the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , my mother tongue is very rich in popular proverbs and sayings .
One of those sayings , which my mother and my grandmothers would use when some irreversible domestic accident happened , was ' why cry over spilt milk ? ' .
This saying is relevant here because we are once again having to express our regret at something we should have prevented through stricter control measures and by bringing forward the date for the disappearance of single-hull ships - and please note , Commissioner , that I wrote this before hearing you speak and I am therefore in agreement with what you said at the beginning .
We must demand compliance with the laws we adopt , but also revise those which are not sufficiently rigorous .
The wrecking of the Prestige once again damages an area which has suffered three serious accidents of this type over recent years : in 1976 , the Urquiola , the Mar Egeo in 1992 and the Prestige this year .
I have not yet been to Galicia - I am going tomorrow - but I am sure that one really needs to talk to the fishermen and shellfishermen in order to understand exactly the extent of the tragedy they are facing and their need for help , help which our Group is fully in favour of providing .
But we must prevent anything like this from happening again , because , as well as the social and economic disaster it represents , it is an ecological disaster which affects areas belonging to the Natura 2000 network , biodiversity and the wealth of a region such as Galicia .
Commissioner , when it comes to voting in this Parliament , we must remember this catastrophe , because in the coming months we are going to discuss a very important directive , which relates to responsibility for environmental damage , and all of us here will remember what it is we are voting for .
Because there are times when stricter measures are required and there is much resistance - on the part of the lobbies present in this very House - to voting for these stricter , more serious and more rigorous measures .
In the last few seconds remaining to me , Mr President , I would like to say - on behalf of my colleague , Ilda Figueiredo , who has had to leave - that she also would like to express her solidarity with the victims of the oil slick , that she demands more rigorous control measures in order to prevent it happening again , that she considers it important to establish a list of sensitive maritime areas and that they must be subject to special protection in Galicia , Brittany and , as she points out , Portugal as well - which is close by - and she insists that the Erika I and II packages must be applied , and their dates brought forward , and she requests effective measures against flags of convenience and the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund for the repair of environmental damage and compensation for the victims .
Mr President , Galicia 's national poet , Rosalia de Castro , who always felt great solidarity with the fate of the Galician people , coined the phrase ' black shadow ' to express a sense of anguish that troubled her .
Today Galicia , and also the whole of Europe , is suffering from the ' black shadow ' caused by political irresponsibility and the contemptible interests of the mafias that control maritime traffic and flags of convenience .
The Prestige disaster is now the fourth to have occurred off the coast of Galicia in recent years .
The names ' Urquiola ' , ' Aegean Sea ' and ' Casou ' are , together with that of the Prestige , part of our consciousness and of our collective misfortunes .
On the Coast of Death and in the Rias Baixas and the Rias Altas , these misfortunes are remembered even more sharply .
Therefore , in these emergency situations , we , the men and women of Galicia wonder : what good to us is the Spanish State - the authority whose main task and responsibility at this historic time is to protect our people , our nature , the marvellous Galician nature , and our economy , the persistent and long-suffering Galician economy ?
What good to us is the head of the State government who was absent from Galicia at a tragic time , whilst the inhabitants of the Coast of Death and the Rias were under attack from the Prestige , and who , to universal scorn , was in Prague with NATO , dining out and sycophantically applauding President Bush and his unilateral and ' preventive ' strikes ?
As a Galician and a supporter of European integration , I wonder , what major action have the Galician and EU authorities taken in this tragic situation ?
It is precisely in this Parliament that reactionary positions by Members contributed - and in this context I must agree with the Commissioner - to changing the legislation contained in the ' Erika ' package , which would have prevented this accursed ship from continuing to move around our seas .
Let us not be under any illusion : this disaster has consequences identical to those of a natural disaster , but it is really a political disaster and we know who the guilty parties are .
Mr President , the location of the European Safe Seas Agency has still not been decided on , in contravention of the ' Erika ' legislation .
Once again , the governments of the Member States have not been equal to the circumstances .
Following what has happened in Galicia , can any doubt remain that the Agency should be based in a region in which there is the greatest concentration of intercontinental traffic and where there is the greatest risk of accident ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the ' Prestige ' was a disaster waiting to happen and this is what makes the matter particularly intolerable and makes it all the more difficult for us to respond to the concerns , fear and desperation of the populations of Galicia and of the Minho in northern Portugal .
This was a disaster waiting to happen because we know how enormously vulnerable our coasts are , particularly in Brittany , Galicia and in Portugal 's seas , both in continental Portugal and in the seas around Madeira and the Azores , which are all busy maritime passages and crossroads .
It was also bound to happen because of the appalling conditions in which many ships still sail , carrying dangerous and highly polluting cargoes , whilst we are hesitant and slow at European and world level about adopting rigorous and mandatory measures for prevention and guidance , confiscation and destruction .
The disaster was bound to happen , lastly , because it could be seen that the Prestige would break up and sink , leaving questions as to whether the measures adopted at the time the emergency was declared one week ago and thereafter were correct and adequate .
We now have a time-bomb sitting at the bottom of the sea ; nobody really knows what it is going to do and at the same time the ecological , social and economic effects of the spilt fuel are already terrible for hundreds of kilometres of coastline and the threat hanging over the coast , the river estuaries and the immediate future of hundreds of thousands of people who are directly and indirectly affected , both our Galician brethren and those in the north of Portugal , who are praying for the danger to recede , is enormous .
We must provide three types of response : to the present , to the future and to the past .
We must respond to the present in four ways : we must mobilise all available means to monitor and minimise the polluting effects , rigorously investigate the risks arising from the sunken ship with 60 000 tonnes of oil in its tanks and keep them under strict control , we must make those responsible pay , provide sympathetic help for the frightened and worried populations by giving them all the help they need and by assisting the recovery of the local economy .
Next , we must respond to the future : we must get the European Safe Seas Agency up and running - I personally would like it to be based in Portugal - and increase resources for port and coastal inspection . Above all , however , we must go along with the positions of Commissioner de Palacio .
Commissioner , do not hesitate : go right ahead .
Parliament and the Council must prove themselves able to provide what these communities are calling for .
Lastly , we must respond to the past : preventing future disasters of this scale and more effectively limiting the damage caused require all the facts and the reactions to such disasters to be verified and established objectively and rigorously , enabling us to make a technical assessment of whether the reactions were right or wrong .
We must assure ourselves that in the face of any similar emergency in future , all the competent authorities will be able to respond rapidly and courageously in the way that most effectively anticipates real environmental damage and risks and consequently is most able to limit and control these .
Mr President , everything was said here during the months following the sinking of the Erika , on waste boats , the inadequacy of checks and the complacency of the flag states .
We voted on two blocks of measures .
Many of them are good .
However , nothing has changed , and while Parliament is talking , every day vessels set out into the Ouessant lane ready to pour out their oil onto the coasts of the Vendée or Galicia if by chance there is a storm .
As a lawyer , before joining Parliament , I spent hundreds of hours with the victims of the Erika , professionals and local groups .
Tomorrow , will I have to go back and say to them : ' we are moved , very moved , but we cannot be effective in less than three years because of codecision ' ?
Commissioner , you were just saying : ' I want it hic et nunc ' , but the system replies : ' non possumus ' .
So while the Americans protected themselves in a few months , with immediate measures , we take years to adopt measures with a delayed effect , the content of which will ultimately be inadequate .
Inadequate for two reasons .
First of all , because the Treaties do not allow the countries that are threatened , such as France and Spain or Portugal , to protect themselves unilaterally and rapidly when circumstances require it , and equally because those countries have to admit defeat with countries for whom maritime safety is not a priority .
Also , because we will not have done anything until we have forced the oil companies to take prime responsibility for transporting their goods , so that security is ensured by rich companies that are well-known and laying their reputation on the line , and not by ship owners with no identity or nationality .
Mr President , what happened off the coast of Galicia was indeed dramatic and we must express our support for the people and our honourable friends from the area ; of course , for me it is doubly dramatic because , by coincidence , this has happened in the country of the Commissioner responsible for transport who , as we all know , has made a tremendous effort to improve safety at sea .

Be that as it may , I think it is up to all of us here to investigate what happened and why it happened as quickly as possible and of course it is not easy to draw any conclusions when you have a ship flying under the flag of the Bahamas , a country which , I may remind you , is not on the black list , it is hardly even on the grey list of the so-called Paris ? ? U , a ship operated by a Liberian company , owned by a Greek and registered with an American shipping register , in fact one of the best shipping registers in the world , a ship which was built in China , comes from Latvia and Russia , was fitted out in Gibraltar and so on and so forth .

So we need to find out who of all these was or was not to blame and we must , of necessity , be level-headed and persistent .
I think that we will get to the bottom of this in the end and the European Commission will be a great help here .
So what do we need to do next ?
We obviously need a set of measures .
I have been talking with a number of Members over recent days who are all in favour of double hulls .
Others want port controls , others are talking about the responsibility of the shipping registers and flags of convenience , others still point to the lack of ports of refuge .
I think that those of us who happen to deal with these issues on a daily basis know that there is no universal panacea .
There is no panacea , ladies and gentlemen , we need a set of measures , we need to proceed on all these fronts at once .
If we are to do something about this , I think that , first , the European Commission needs to be strict in applying the Community legislation which is already in place .
Countries which do not comply with Community legislation should be hauled before the Court of Justice and I think Mrs Palacio will do so .
Secondly , we really must speed up the application of the Erika I and Erika II packages .
We adopted 5 directives almost unanimously here in Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , and they obviously need to be applied , together with a previous directive on dumping waste at sea which - theoretically - is being applied .
Now all that remains is to see if it is being applied in practice .
We also need to push ahead with the European Commission 's other proposal on a European Solidarity Fund .
May I remind you that the European Parliament approved these proposals by the European Commission and that the proposal has stuck with the Council .
So pressure needs to be brought to bear on the Council .
I totally agree with a ban on the carriage of heavy petroleum products by single-hull tankers .
May I remind you that , as rapporteur , I personally proposed this when we were discussing withdrawing single-hull vessels .
Unfortunately , it is recorded in the Minutes of the European Parliament but was not accepted because certain know-it-alls popped up left , right and centre and said that the proposal was not feasible .
I believed it was feasible then and I believe it is feasible now and that you should move in this direction , Commissioner .
What Mr Sterckx said about environmentally sensitive areas is also right .
We need to mark out corridors for tankers so as to ensure that these areas are not polluted .
Most importantly at this stage the European Union needs to show its solidarity with the people of Galicia .
We need to help these people .
We have the Structural Funds , we have the Solidarity Fund and we need to do our very best to help Galicia get back to normal as quickly as possible .
Mr President , the ' Prestige ' tanker disaster is an appalling tragedy .
We must show solidarity here , and - as our Portuguese and Spanish colleagues should know - it must be tangible rather than abstract .
That is why the region and the people there need assistance from Europe quickly .
I do not think that anyone would question this .
We should be aware , however , that this disaster could be repeated any day , Commissioner , because for years it has been the same old story .
The combination of an ancient tanker that is only fit for the scrap heap and a flag of convenience - this time of the Bahamas - is usually the cause .
Flags of convenience are synonymous with poor quality , a poor vessel , poor technology and a poor crew .
Usually the story ends with a coordinated reluctance to claim responsibility so that no one knows any more who is actually to blame for what .
That , Commissioner , is the reason for Paragraph 3 of our motion .
As soon as all of the information is on the table , we will expect to receive a report from you stating who was responsible for this disaster , when , how and why .
I think that a few words will also have to be reserved for the Spanish authorities in this context .
I have been surprised at some of the statements made by ministers of transport over the last few days and at the demands that they are now making .
Clearly these transport ministers have forgotten that , for example , the regulation on compensation in cases of liability for oil pollution , which the Commission and Parliament have passed , has been lying on the table in the Council for over a year without any action being taken .
Commissioner , you have Parliament 's full support if you want to put a bomb under these gentlemen in the Council so that we finally get legislation soon .
Where incidents of this kind are concerned , we have to call to account the oil companies , the shipowners , the cargo owners and the classification societies .
The system of flags of convenience cannot continue in its present form , Commissioner .
I appeal to you to consider making a proposal on this .
We need European shipping ; we need good European vessels with good European crews .
Flags of convenience are a blight on the system .
Help to eradicate them by making a good Commission proposal .
Parliament will give it speedy consideration .
Mr President , I as an EU citizen feel greatly affected by the fact that it was possible for this disaster to take place .
This is yet another disaster , although we said after the last one that it was too late to lock the stable door after the horse had bolted .
The stable door had clearly not been locked .
The facts had not been sufficiently spelled out , something for which the politicians are at fault .
I agree with Mrs de Palacio when she states that the Council has failed to assume its responsibility .
It has done a disservice to the people who live along the Spanish coast , a disservice to the fishing industry , a disservice to the environment and , above all , a disservice to transport by water , a topic to which we want to devote so much attention .
It is particularly unfortunate that we need another disaster to put this topic on the agenda .
I also think that we should adopt this resolution and that we all need to ensure that it is accepted across the political spectrum so as to avoid another repeat .
After all , citizens are not concerned with which political body is responsible for this .
They are left to pick up the pieces , so they need help .
I think it is our joint duty to keep a very close eye on this and also to monitor the implementation of the solution of the problem which we are now facing .
I see that the first towed hopper dredges are now at work .
However , according to the weather forecast , the winds will pick up this evening and then we are back to square one tomorrow .
In short , I hope that , given this thick crude oil , you will also ensure that oil can possibly be drained from the actual tanker .
Mr President , I am speaking here on behalf of Mr Dhaenen , my Flemish and Green colleague , who is a member of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
First of all , I should like to put on record my and our solidarity with the people in Galicia .
This is a social tragedy for those who live by the sea and tourism .
The true scale of this economic and ecological disaster is starting to dawn ever more clearly .
A true catastrophe is unfolding before our eyes .
Galicia 's green coast is gradually turning black .
The indignation is growing by the hour .
Everyone is asking how this is possible after all those previous disasters .
The disaster involving the Erika is still fresh in our memories and the wreck of the Amoco Cadiz in 1978 awakened an environmental awareness in many of my generation .
Every time a disaster strikes , we are faced with the disastrous consequences of negligence .
It is a disgrace that the agency for maritime safety is not to be launched until some time next year .
It is a disgrace that port control should only be scant and , in many cases , implemented in a questionable manner .
It is a disgrace that single-hulled wrecks should still be bobbing their way around the oceans and that they should take their course past vulnerable regions .
There is something fundamentally wrong with our transport sector .
I would quote Mr Rijnigerd , a former director of the Rotterdam-based recovery firm Smit , who stated that ' trying to transport an oil shipment as cheaply as possible from Latvia to Gibraltar in an obsolete and poorly maintained tanker is asking for trouble ' .
There are therefore bad apples that need to be removed .
They are sharks that slip through the net .
However , we should admit that the net that is supposed to catch them is yet to be put in place .
We as Greens support more transport by water , but those highways at sea should not be accessible to cowboys and environmental criminals .
We would argue in favour of less transport , less use of fossil fuels and more involvement by a greater , fully-fledged , ecological European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to begin , of course , by expressing my solidarity with the communities that have been affected .
On these occasions , we must focus on what is most urgent : the need to mobilise technical and financial resources in order to minimise environmental damage , to regenerate ecosystems and to support the economic activities that have been affected by this accident .
There is , however , a debate which , although not quite as urgent , is nonetheless of the utmost importance : that of responsibility .
In this matter , the ' polluter pays ' rule must be enforced , by investigating , prosecuting and punishing those responsible .
We must , however , go beyond looking for someone to blame .
We must determine the responsibility , firstly of those who should have inspected but did not and of those who did inspect but did not act .
Secondly , we must determine the responsibility of those who managed the crisis , in particular , we must clarify the reason why the EU as a whole was not involved in managing the risk from the very outset , given that it was known that the consequences of the accident would easily move beyond the confines of one country and would affect the entire natural heritage of Europe .
As for the future , I hope that the Member States will heed the well-drafted call and the leadership of Commissioner de Palacio , with a view to immediately implementing the ' Erika I ' and ' Erika II ' packages and give a boost to the creation of the European Safe Seas Agency .
Mr President , first of all , with the sincerity that everyone will acknowledge in a Frenchman from the Atlantic region , I would like to express my solidarity and compassion to all the people and professionals in Galicia and Portugal who are affected by this further disaster .
I think that the situation that we are in is extremely dangerous , as the public has good reason , as these disasters keep reoccurring , for wondering , doubting , becoming impatient and even rising up against the impotence of the public authorities .
However , Commissioner , you are right in saying that the European Union has done a great deal , that it has done its duty in a quite remarkable timescale in terms of legislation .
So where is the problem ?
I think that it was stated by Mr Varaut .
The problem is that we are in a field in which there is urgency , in which the task of the public authorities to ensure security is highly desired by the people and in which , in reality , joint sovereignty creates considerable problems .
My government , in recent days , was upset that measures had not yet entered into force ; France is lagging behind in terms of checks in ports .
I think that we will only overcome this situation if one day , as soon as possible , we manage to create an independent European area of maritime safety , with independent legislation , which would use regulations rather than directives - as the directives are still not practically transposed in any Member State - with independent checks and penalties .
I think that this should be our ambition , or we will fail and will condemn our people to the sad spectacle of a ping-pong match between the Commission and the European Union , on the one hand , and the Member States , on the other hand , each of them trying to beat the other in dramatic circumstances that the people do not understand .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is very little ' prestige ' here , quite the contrary .
What has happened off the Galician coasts with this peculiar oil tanker , originating from a tax haven , with a flag of convenience and furthermore , in unfair competition and trading oil in a very strange way , cannot and must not happen again in any of the seas of the planet .
It is clear that we must be increasingly demanding in terms of safety in transport , especially in the transport of dangerous goods and at sea .
In our case , we must adopt appropriate measures so that there is no repetition of disasters such as the one that has taken place with this dreadful oil slick , the significant ecological impact of which should oblige us Members of this Parliament to reflect .
It begs the question , how many more oil tankers do we have to endure ?
Has account been taken of the negative impact of this ecological disaster on fishing , on nature , on tourism , on the society in this Galicia Finisterre ?
Until when ?
It depends on us , but we must speed up and review the measures adopted in the Erika case - as the Commissioner has just rightly pointed out .
Finally , I would like once again to express our solidarity with the Galicians and I hope the European Union demonstrates that same solidarity through its actions .
Mr President , Commissioner , the feelings that we have in the face of this tragedy are feelings of anger .
Anger at its tragic consequences , and also anger because we have had enough of Europe being accused .
If we had followed the Commission , if we had followed the European Parliament , we would not be in this position .
We have had enough of being accused for no reason when we have adequate legislation and there is no further need to legislate .
The legislation needs to be applied and that is the problem .
After the sinking of the Erika , France , which then held the presidency of the European Union , and the Socialist government at the time , had made maritime safety an absolute priority .
If the situation was not so tragic , one could laugh at it .
You know the result !
France was criticised by the European Commission for not respecting the directive on checks in ports .
That is enough !
We have had enough of the failings of the Member States and the Council .
Indeed , the President of the French Republic , Jacques Chirac , has just asked for maritime safety to be a priority on the agenda of the next European Council meeting .
I hope that no coastal Member State will fail to answer that call .
We have the legislation , which is adequate , with the ' Erika II ' package .
It needs to be applied .
We need to increase checks , ensure the integrity of those who carry out those checks and define which ports should be able to receive vessels in distress .
We should also express our complete solidarity with the people of Galicia , who are going to suffer terribly in terms of fishing and tourism .
Having said that , the environmental tragedy is even worse , as it cannot be repaired by just giving subsidies .
Brittany is suffering and will continue to suffer for a long time in terms of its biodiversity and ecological balance , which are essential for maintaining fish resources and preserving species .
What is the use of ' Natura 2000 ' and our protection directives if we do nothing about maritime security ?
Today the Council is responsible for having blocked the legislation that we adopted .
Today , it is the people of the coastal States , European citizens , who are asking you , Commissioner , to be uncompromising .
Mr President , this is without doubt a global disaster affecting all European coastlines and Europe must pool all its resources to combat it .
That is why I am dismayed by the reports that the Commissioner is suggesting Gibraltar was in some way responsible because it failed to inspect the ship .
I would like to point out to the Commissioner that the Prestige has only called in at Gibraltar once in the last five years and then it did not even enter the port , it refuelled outside .
In that period it has also put in at several other ports , including Algeciras , Las Palmas , Dunkirk , Cork , Rotterdam and Kalamata .
We have a saying in Glasgow : if you live in a glasshouse you do not have sex with your gardener !
After the Braer sank off the coast of Scotland in 1992 , Neil Kinnock put forward legislation on double-hull vessels .
As the Commissioner rightly pointed out , that was deferred by the Council until 2015 .
However , we need new legislation now to close up the loopholes .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Prestige disaster once again demonstrates the insufficiency of Community actions to put an end to the strategies of certain ship owners and owners of oil cargoes of ignoring the legislation on safety in maritime transport .
Despite the fact that history repeats itself , it is still difficult to establish data on the origin and destination of the cargo , as well as its exact characteristics .
Old ships are still operating , using flags of convenience of countries which are less demanding in terms of safety , with crews which in most cases do not have the necessary professional qualifications and knowledge for this type of transport .
It is clear that a problem that is repeated so often and which has such serious consequences for the economy of a region and for its marine and coastal ecosystems must be dealt with rigorously and quickly by means of joint measures in all the Member States of the European Union .
Measures such as the extension of sea corridors should not be made to wait , so that ships transporting dangerous goods are further from the coast , especially when they are sailing through areas of high ecological sensitivity such as the Galician coasts .
We must also urgently consider bringing forward the obligatory demand for double hulls and intensify and improve the quality of inspections .
This has been said very clearly by Commissioner de Palacio .
Furthermore , all the Community legislation must enter into force as soon as possible : the Erika I and Erika II packages .
But above all it is essential that the existing rules are applied .
Neither must we forget the human face of this disaster and the importance of the aid reaching its destination as soon as possible .
Yesterday I was in Galicia , where the desolation of the fishermen is truly striking .
These people deserve , by means of this debate and the urgent measures stemming from it , a decisive contribution from the European Union aimed at recovering their confidence in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the incomparable natural landscape of Galicia 's coasts and the Minho estuary as well as the communities living along the coasts are once again under threat , this time from this appalling shipwreck , which is a veritable showcase of everything that should no longer be happening on our seas .
How many more disasters do we need before effective measures are adopted ?
There is considerable indignation , but this indignation must be followed up with emergency measures ; we must not simply wait for these long deadlines for the ' Erika I ' and ' Erika II ' packages to be met .
Expressing moral solidarity and demonstrating sympathy are not enough ; we must act as rapidly as possible and , as I said , adopt emergency measures .
There must now be effective solidarity , particularly with the communities of northern Portugal , which will be the first to suffer the consequences of this accident , of this shipwreck , the likes of which must never happen again on our coasts ; unless we adopt such measures , the people themselves will make their scepticism about Europe and European governments clear .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to say firstly that I am speaking on behalf of Mr Pérez Álvarez , a Galician , who has had to return to his region urgently .
I would like to say that I fully agree with the Commissioner 's words and support those measures which offer a clear line of action .
We also share her desire for their application to be speeded up .
This is what is needed , and what we do not need is any more political demagoguery such as that expressed in some speeches we have heard here .
Perhaps these are the thoughts of a Galician countryman , whose future and family situation is looking grim following what has been described as the worst ecological , economic and social disaster in the history of Galicia .
We understand that the people of Galicia are today sad and angry , and that sadness and anger has known and identifiable faces : each and every one of the people directly affected by the oil slick caused by the oil tanker disaster , and each and every one of the Galicians who , in Galicia and throughout the world , love their homeland and all of those of us who feel solidarity with them .
On the other side are the people responsible , whose faces are obscured behind flags of convenience and legal procedures distorted to this end , and with a view to fraudulently avoiding the rules of the internal market , without caring about possible ecological damage - which is now real - and social and economic harm , and , without wanting to be alarmist , the damage which may also be in store for other coastal areas as the result of a domino effect .
I believe that enough has been said and that we must look forward , learning from the lessons of the immediate past .
The Galician Government has said that it is not going to impose any limits on the aid to the people affected .
The Spanish Government and the European Commission is announcing measures .
But situations such as this cannot and must not happen again , and we must repair and prevent the effects which may yet extend to other areas of Galicia or Portugal , because the risk remains there .
We will all be grateful for the measures taken , especially those who live , work and suffer along our coasts .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to start by expressing my deepest political solidarity with our neighbours and friends in Galicia , for the suffering that this tragedy is causing them now and will cause in future .
The European Union and its Member States must therefore spare no effort to help to minimise the scale of the effects of the disaster and compensate the main victims as far as possible for the damage caused .
We must take the opportunity of the Prestige oil tanker disaster to make a few observations .
The first is that this accident must be subject to a rigorous inquiry , not only with regard to the EU 's safety rules covering this type of transport but also into the reason for the course taken by the ship , which having moved away to the west , suddenly headed southwards , and sank only thirty miles outside Portuguese waters .
My second observation is that we must understand that this disaster could also seriously affect the northern coast of Portugal , if not now , then later , and the European Union also needs to consider aid for Portugal to improve its resources for mobilisation , monitoring and prevention .
The fisheries sector , as a matter of fact , has already begun to be affected .
Lastly , despite the fact that the tragedy 's effects will clearly be felt in many sectors of the economy , there is no doubt that the most badly affected sector is that of fisheries and aquiculture .
I therefore feel it is crucial that , in the framework of the aid that is to be mobilised , thought is given to the need for a specific emergency plan for these sectors .
I do not think that the EUR 117.7 million Commissioner Fischler announced for Spain and the EUR 15 million for Portugal will resolve the problems , not only because of the overall amount , which is limited , but also because , where Portugal is concerned , the option must be left open for this amount to be increased if the situation on its coasts grows worse .
Furthermore , we will have to bear in mind that compensation for the prolonged suspension of fishing alone will not suffice .
What is needed , perhaps , is to think about another , more fundamental type of measure to provide alternative employment for these fishermen , for example , fishing in other waters in the medium term .
Mr President , the wreck of the oil tanker Prestige off the coast of Galicia is a great misfortune the like of which should never again have happened in the Union after the Erika accident .
Member States have committed to the practice whereby loading ports are obliged to assess the condition of vessels and , if necessary , stop the ship from leaving without repairs being done if the risk is considered to be too great .
Unfortunately , this practice still does not apply to the applicant countries , and this ship had picked up its cargo at a port in the Baltic Sea .
The risk is especially great in the Baltic , where there is heavy regular traffic and consignments often consist of materials and substances that the Baltic ecology simply would not be able to withstand if harmed by them .
As someone who lives on the Baltic coast I now wish to express my deep sorrow for the residents of Galicia and all those whose livelihood is now in great peril .
Obviously , making ports responsible for the condition of vessels to be loaded is not enough .
The owners of freight must also be made accountable , as they also have an interest in ensuring that their consignments are organised responsibly and safely .
Secondly , the practices of insurance companies and the terms and conditions they offer will have to be changed if necessary by means of Community legislation so that the cheapest option for a shipowner is not sinking his ship when it is in distress .
Insurance law must be based on the notion that rescuing the ship must be possible and the cheapest option for the policyholder .
We have to switch to these practices swiftly and without making any exceptions .
It is regrettable that the legislators should become wise and energetic only after an accident has happened .
When , however , the accident has faded in people 's memories no wise or urgent measures are taken to avoid accidents in the future .
On the contrary , everyone frantically starts looking after their own interests and the struggle to lengthen the periods of transition commences , as people want to dodge the regulations in the hope of getting off lightly .
We need a Prestige package as an extension to the Erika package , which the Commission should start drafting right away with a view to producing something quickly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to reply to Mr Miller , because I believe he has the wrong information .
I have here for your perusal the precise movements of the Prestige during 1999 , 2000 , 2001 and 2002 , provided by the maritime authority of the Bahamas .
In 1999 , it reached the port of Rotterdam and that is when for the last time it had an in-depth inspection in accordance with the Paris Memorandum in a European port .
Then , before the summer , it reached the port of Kalamata , in Greece , and I have contacted the port and authorities there to ask what the state of the Prestige was in Greece and it was not inspected in accordance with the Paris Memorandum .
It then reached the port of Gibraltar and I have also approached the British authorities to ask why they did not carry out the control .
It is true , ladies and gentlemen , that I have not just asked them about the Prestige .
I have asked the Greek and British authorities about the application of the current legislation , of the Directive which demands control by port authorities , in accordance with the commitments relating in practice to the Paris Memorandum .
I have asked about controls and the application in these ports - Kalamata and Gibraltar - of the Directive currently in force .
I must tell the honourable Member that I have some statistics .
I can say that in Gibraltar , in 1999 , five ships have been inspected .
In 2000 , six .
In 2001 , two .
In 2002 , twelve .
Those are the statistics .
That is why I am saying the legislation must be reviewed in order to guarantee that these controls by port authorities are carried out in all the ports of the European Union .
Because controls by port authorities have a deterrent effect , they have the effect of keeping away substandard ships , and this must happen in all ports .
Because if we leave gaps in our network , in our system , the whole thing is automatically weakened .
That is what I am saying .
This is not a criticism of any particular port .
In this case , these two are involved : Kalamata and Gibraltar . And I have asked for information .
But the problem is not with any particular port .
The problem , ladies and gentlemen , is that there has been an ecological disaster , a catastrophe which we should have prevented , and which we could have prevented if the Commission 's proposals had entered into force .
And I would like to extend all the gratitude and acknowledgement expressed here today to all the members of the Directorate-General for Transport who have worked like Trojans , that is , extraordinarily hard , without watching the clock , so that , when the Erika disaster happened , within just three months , we could present an entire coherent and global package to this House and the Council of Ministers so that these problems would not happen again .
That is what I am talking about .
And I am talking about the fact , ladies and gentlemen , that only 23 months have passed . And precisely because only 23 months have passed and because there was a lack of ambition - as we all know - there has been another disaster .
How many more ?
Well , that is my point .
Is it not possible that between now and June 2003 or February 2004 there will be a disaster in the Baltic , in the Mediterranean , in the Atlantic or off any other European Union coast , because the measures already adopted have not been implemented ?
Ladies and gentlemen , what we have to demand - and this is what I have done in a letter to the Ministers - is that they be applied now .
The problem is that the Governments are behaving incoherently .
The Heads of State and Government said in Nice that the implementation of these measures had to be brought forward and then they do not apply them ...
Infringement procedures have been opened against some of them for lack of application , not of the new rules , but of those currently in force , which are much less strict and much easier to comply with .
Our proposal meant that single-hull oil tankers , of category 1 , that is , the largest ones , would have a maximum life of 23 years .
Because there is clearly a problem with structures associated with the stress on metals caused by blows at sea , which arise after twenty or so years . And what I regret is that this proposal of ours should not be accepted and that it be raised from 23 to 27 years .
And that is what the current problems stem from .
Aid , ladies and gentlemen . We are working on this .
There will be the aid provided by the Spanish authorities .
What we clearly have are the FIPOL funds .
And I would point out that there is an expert from the Directorate-General for Transport , in Spain , cooperating with the Spanish authorities , just as it cooperated with the French authorities to facilitate the payment of all that aid and of that compensation for the various people affected .
We are also looking at issues relating to fishing to see what possibilities there may be for support in terms of the FIFG funds .
We are looking at the possibility of applying the Solidarity Fund , but I believe it will not be possible - I say this clearly .
The thresholds for the use of the Solidarity Fund are so high that I hope that the damage does not reach that level , because then it would really be an horrendous tragedy .
We would be talking about more than EUR 3 000 million , ladies and gentlemen .
Let us hope that it does not go that far .
We are therefore also looking at the support that can be provided if , despite everything , that EUR 3 000 million is not reached but there is a significant effect on the region of Galicia , in which case support could also be provided by means of this Solidarity Fund .
I hope that Portugal can be spared from this tragedy .
I hope that the winds will not allow the oil slick to reach their coast .
I would like the Spanish coasts not be to be affected any further , but let us hope , at least , that the Portuguese coasts stay clean .
In any event , if Portuguese coasts were also affected , the funds would be available to them as well , in the same form and the same way that they are available to the Spanish authorities and the Spanish people affected .
Ladies and gentlemen , what has been adopted must be put into practice .
There is a whole range of measures which form a coherent global whole , with a Maritime Safety Agency to guarantee , together with the Commission , the appropriate application of the rules .
We are going to set up this Maritime Safety Agency provisionally in Brussels , while they are deciding or not deciding on where the headquarters will be .
I am very sorry , but I am not going to wait for them to come to an agreement .
I hope it will be set up before the end of the year .
The second issue . Amongst the aspects which correspond to the countries - the strengthening of port control , strengthening the demands on classification societies - we are of course going to hold a full investigation into what has happened - as I said before - of the whole chain , and I will present the results of our investigations to you : the whole chain of events which has led us to the final result , in relation to the classification societies as well .
We will also demand that the States of the Union designate ports and refuge areas in order to deal with situations such as that of the Erika , which was also one of the controversial elements , or that of the Prestige in this case .
Strictness in application . In the application and the demand for compliance with the regulations .
We are talking about going further .
I have made this very clear : International Maritime Organisation , corridors for dangerous products , sea room distances , special control in passes and straits , greater capacities for coastal States .
All of this within the context of the International Maritime Organisation , genuinely adapting maritime law to the demands and new circumstances of the 21st Century .
Meanwhile , ladies and gentlemen , we also have to deal in more depth with the issue of responsibility , we must present the issue of the COPE Funds once again to the Council of Ministers , as a complement to the FIPOL Fund ; we must present the issue of criminal responsibility once again to the Council of Ministers and we must demand of the Ministers that , in all the Member States - and I believe this is possible in all of them by means of an administrative regulation - double hulls be required for the transportation of the most dangerous and polluting products , such as heavy fuel oil .
Mr Savary spoke of an autonomous European area of maritime safety .
The truth is that this is an issue which , of course , could be considered in the discussions within the Convention and the next Intergovernmental Conference .
I am sure you can imagine that it will not be I who disagrees with these ideas .
I would like to end by saying to Mrs Grossetête that , in fact , all I feel , with everything that has happened over recent days , is a great sense of anger and rage , knowing that we could have prevented it and did not do so .
( Applause )
Commissioner , Mrs Miguélez Ramos would like to ask you a further supplementary question .
Mr President , I will speak very briefly to say to the honourable Member that she knows I am especially sensitive to Galicia and that I can relate specific names , faces and landscapes to this tragedy , which undoubtedly means that one feels even more .
This does not mean that when the Erika accident happened - which was off the French coast - I acted any differently .
I went to Brittany then and tomorrow I am going to Galicia .
In any event , it will be a pleasure for me to present all the data on the issue of the FIPOL , on the analyses we make in relation to the Solidarity Fund , on whether it can be applied or not , on all the aspects , and I will also ask Commissioner Fischler for information on the fishing aspects , although I imagine he will give full explanations within the Committee on Fisheries .
Thank you , Commissioner de Palacio .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the debate on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( Rule 50 ) .
The next item is the joint debate on the following six motions for resolutions on the situation in Sudan :
B5-0593 / 2002 by Mr van den Bos and Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the human rights situation in Sudan ;
B5-0594 / 2002 by Mr Sjöstedt and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on Sudan ;
B5-0601 / 2002 by Mrs Maij-Weggen and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the situation in Sudan ;
B5-0604 / 2002 by Mr Belder , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the situation in Sudan ;
B5-0605 / 2002 by Mrs Carlotti and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on human rights in Sudan ;
B5-0610 / 2002 by Mrs Schörling and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Sudan .
Mr President , this debate on Sudan has had a successful outcome even before it has begun .
The invitation to the EU / ACP Assembly has , in the meantime , been withdrawn .
It is detrimental to cooperation in the spirit of Cotonou that the proposal of Sudan was adopted by the ACP states .
Did these states really think that we could hold an Assembly in a country where there are still constant and large-scale breaches of human rights ?
In a country in which women and children are kidnapped and enslaved ? In a country in which the people in the south could be scourged by bombing for years on end and where Western oil companies looked after the interests of their shareholders while turning a blind eye to the victims of the slaughter ?
There now , fortunately , appears to be a truce , but how long will it hold ?
There can be collaboration with the European Union only when there is a lasting peace and when the government restores all freedoms and puts an end to all the abominable injustices .
Only then will anything durable come of debates such as this one today .
Mr President , Commissioner , in this afternoon 's topical and urgent debate we must also turn our attention to the war in Sudan , one of the largest and most populous countries in Africa .
Civil war has been raging there for 19 years .
More than two million people have lost their lives because of this war .
It has brought immense suffering for the people in the south of Sudan who are fighting for cultural , political and economic independence .
In the larger part of Sudan that is under government control there is no freedom of thought or religion and no possibility of peaceful assembly .
Human rights continue to be treated with contempt .
Government forces are blanket-bombing regions in the south with heavy civilian casualties .
More than 200 death sentences have been passed by unconstitutional emergency courts in Darfur State .
The oil discoveries in Sudan have not yet led to a return to peace .
On the contrary , they serve to replenish the war chest of the Khartoum government .
There is a ray of hope : the peace talks in Machakos in Kenya , which have led to the conclusion of a ceasefire agreement .
This has been drafted , but is not yet in force .
First , unimpeded access must be provided for aid consignments for the people starving in the south of Sudan .
This must also lead to a permanent ceasefire on both sides , which is respected by everyone .
While the situation remains critical and the peace process has not yet made sufficient progress , there is no prospect of holding the sixth meeting of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in Sudan in spring 2003 .
In any case , we will not go there while the current situation persists .
We do hope , however , that this will be possible at a later stage .
I should like to stress that Sudan 's Ambassador here is doing a great deal through diplomatic channels to hasten a return to peace .
We therefore call on the African countries to organise the next ACP-EU Assembly in another , more peaceful country in Africa .
Mauritania , which wishes to take on this task , should be specifically encouraged to do so .
Mr President , the emergency in Sudan has become very acute .
We only need to consider the title of the recent report by the International Crisis Group , ' Ending starvation as a weapon of war in Sudan ' .
Indeed , famine and death from starvation on a huge scale are being used as weapons of war in Sudan .
Yet , as the report also says , we really have no idea of how serious the emergency is , because of the remoteness of regions in which the war is raging unabated and in which these weapons are being used .
In the meantime , the warring parties appear to have concluded an agreement to extend the memorandum of understanding on humanitarian aid and the suspension of hostilities to 31 March .
Despite this courageous development , the decision indicates that the final peace settlement has not yet been achieved .
Fundamental bones of contention such as the fair distribution of power and of the income from oil wells still need to be solved in ways acceptable to both parties .
Now that the negotiations are only to be resumed in January , the international pressure upon the warring parties to reach a definitive peace settlement definitely must not be relaxed , however , and certainly not now that a solution appears to be in sight to a conflict that has already lasted for 19 years .
It is estimated that approximately two million people have already lost their lives .
Twice as many people have been made homeless , and countless atrocities have been committed .
In particular , the Christians in the south have had to suffer severely from violence committed by the Muslims in the north .
I would therefore call upon the Council and the Commission to proceed extremely cautiously during the EU Troika mission to Sudan , planned for 9 and 10 December .
Only when a comprehensive peace settlement has been signed may relations between the EU and Sudan be normalised .
Finally , I would ask the Council , the Commission and also the Member States , if possible in cooperation with the Sudanese Government , painstakingly to investigate the rumours of a potential revival of al-Qa 'ida 's financial centre .
When all is said and done , we must not forget that , as you are all well aware , Sudan played host to Osama bin Laden from 1991 to 1996 , and it would therefore be very useful to know whether activities are still going on in that quarter .
Mr President , we have to bear in mind that the situation in Sudan varies greatly depending on the region .
In the north we are dealing with a problematic regime , which is however displaying clear reformist tendencies , and which is supported by Egypt .
In the south we have a brutal and bloody civil war , which it would be too simplistic to describe solely as a conflict between Islam and Christianity .
There are also conflicts amongst Muslims themselves and amongst Christian tribes , although the main conflict is indeed between Christians and Muslims .
This shows that this is not actually a war of religion but a series of tribal conflicts , ethnic conflicts , and that interested parties , including interested parties in the oil industry - for once this must be said - are systematically fanning the flames of these conflicts .
That is why I am very grateful that the motion addresses this issue very clearly : the problematic role of certain parties who have interests in the natural resources - we have seen this in the Caucasus and in Congo too - and who are abusing ethnic conflicts to brutally increase their own profits .
That is why as Europeans we are not only under a particular obligation to influence the people in Sudan , to work with them on a peace solution and to exert pressure on all of the parties in the conflict , but we also have a duty to hold serious talks with our European oil companies operating out there and to make it clear to them how great their responsibility is for this strategically important region and for the people who live there .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is true that the war in Sudan is the result of certain interests and ethnic tensions , but , in my opinion , the religious nature of the current conflict should be highlighted .
We cannot accept the application of Islamic law in the institutions , which is why we have to step up pressure on the Sudanese Government to annul it , nor can we accept the severe violations of the fundamental rights of non-Muslims , forced conversions , forced marriages and enslavement .
We cannot support a political solution which would mean turning back the clock and applying the principle : ' cuius regio , eius religio ' .
The path we choose should be to support the cause of the forces in the south and the north that are calling for a secular state and democratic institutions .
The solution cannot and must not be that of world division on the basis of religious beliefs .
Mr President , I may not look like Mr Schulz but I am deputising for him .
The Socialist Group is deeply concerned by the continuing civil war that has claimed around two million casualties over the last 19 years .
Of course we welcome the signing on 15 October of the peace agreement between the government in Sudan and the SPLA .
We will be looking very closely at whether the government 's pledge to respect human rights and the rule of law is met and whether there are moves towards democratisation that will result in the establishment of a democratically elected executive and legislature .
We ask the Commission to provide us with a report on the possible involvement of European oil companies in abuses committed against local communities in the oil- producing areas .
We certainly do not support the idea that the ACP-EU Parliamentary assembly should meet in Sudan next year .
It may be possible in the future but we will have to see how things develop in Sudan .
We need a dialogue between Sudan and the European Union , but before we resume normal relations we would want to see progress towards ending terrorism and support for terrorist groups , religious tolerance , human rights and of course an end to the civil war .
Mr President , promotion of a peaceful solution and respect for human rights and humanitarian law remain at the heart of relations between the Commission and Sudan .
The current conflict and the ongoing violations of human rights are the main obstacle to the socio-economic development of the country , as several speakers have rightly pointed out .
The Commission firmly believes that respect for human rights would enable peace to return to Sudan .
In accordance with the conclusions adopted by the Council in June 2002 , the Union intends to proceed step by step .
Until a peace agreement has been reached , the Union will continue political dialogue on the basis of the commitments made by the Sudanese Government for 2002 in the field of human rights , democracy and the rule of law , with particular emphasis on reaching a peace agreement .
Should such an agreement be reached , the Union will begin to normalise its relations with Sudan , within the framework of the Cotonou Agreement , basing them on respect for human rights , democratic principles and the rule of law .
At the same time , it will encourage the peace process and resolution of the conflicts .
We plan to endorse a national strategy document and a national indicative programme following the conclusion of the peace agreement or whenever the Commission considers it politically appropriate , following consultation with the Member States .
I would add , also in relation to specific points which have been raised , that the Commission is going to participate in the visit of the European Union Troika to Sudan , scheduled for December , during which we will assess EU / Sudan political dialogue over the course of 2002 .
I would , however , like to emphasise that the implementation of the measures laid down in the national strategy document is subject to progress in political dialogue .
Thank you , Commissioner Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following five motions for resolutions :
B5-0591 / 2002 by Mr Johan Van Hecke and Mr van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the torture and crimes committed by the military and on the human rights situation in Bangladesh ;
B5-0596 / 2002 by Mr Vinci , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on Bangladesh ;
B5-0602 / 2002 by Mr Thomas Mann and Mrs Martens , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on human rights in Bangladesh ;
B5-0606 / 2002 by Mrs Carrilho and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the human rights situation in Bangladesh ;
B5-0609 / 2002 by Mrs Lambert and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Bangladesh .
Acts of violence have afflicted Bangladesh ever since that country was founded .
From the beginning , the political system has been undermined by murder , revenge and rivalry between the most important families .
The spiral of ceaseless revenge has not been broken .
On the contrary , the situation is going from bad to worse , in particular through the alarming growth of radical Islamic groups .
The government 's approach is , unfortunately , not aimed at reducing the tension and solving the problems .
Members of Parliament are put in prison .
Large-scale indiscriminate arrests take place , and people are tortured and even murdered in prisons .
The European Union must actively concern itself with the situation in Bangladesh on the basis of the cooperation agreement we have with that country .
Cooperation cannot continue unconditionally if human rights are being violated on a huge scale .
We must insist that a national human rights commission be set up to carry out independent examinations , and immunity from punishment must be brought to an end .
The police and military must prevent and combat violence instead of fuelling it .
What is crucial to a solution is to restore a minimum basis of trust between government and opposition .
The future must not forever remain the hostage of the past .
Nothing will come of the development of this impoverished country if it is possible for the acts of violence to continue unabated .
Mr President , in the past few weeks the escalating violence in Bangladesh has reached new heights .
In October alone , around 40 000 soldiers were deployed in ' Operation Clean Heart ' on the pretext of fighting rising levels of crime and private gun ownership .
Several thousand people were arrested .
We know from reliable , independent sources that this military operation , ordered by the Islamist Government in Bangladesh , was directed primarily at the regime 's critics .
Among those arrested were opposition members of the Bangladeshi Parliament , including the former minister , Mr Chowdhury .
Leaders of unpopular NGOs were also arrested .
The army units carried them off without any legal authority .
Most of the suspects are either Hindus themselves or Hindu sympathisers .
This minority has however lived peacefully alongside the Muslim majority for decades .
The growing , and radical , Islamicisation of society and its political leaders is making everyday life increasingly difficult .
Those in custody are cut off from the outside world .
Many are being tortured .
Hundreds of injured detainees had to receive hospital treatment .
In the last month alone there were 25 deaths .
The army 's claim that they had all died of heart attacks is cynical .
This action is contemptuous of humankind and in violation of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
The PPE-DE Group 's position is clear : we call on the Bangladeshi Government to return to the rule of law , pluralism and parliamentary democracy .
The imprisoned members of parliament and other innocent detainees must be released .
I agree with Mr van den Bos : an independent body needs to be set up to investigate the arrests , ill-treatment and killings .
Only then will Bangladesh be able to recover the necessary internal stability .
The European Union must also make its contribution , Commissioner Monti .
In our motion , we have cross-party support for calling on the Commission to send observers to Bangladesh , and this should be done before there is further discrimination and persecution .
The agreement between the European Union and Bangladesh is based on consistent respect for human rights and on democratic principles .
Should these continue to be violated to the same degree then we will have to bring political pressure to bear and that means suspending our Cooperation Agreement .
Such important signals are easily understood throughout Asia as well as in other countries .
We in the SAARC Delegation can give many examples to confirm this .
We therefore hope that those responsible in Bangladesh will see reason and that they will do so because of the severe pressure that can be put on them within the SAARC .
Only then will our respectable counterparts in Bangladesh be taken seriously at international level .
Mr President , on 17 October this year 40 000 members of the armed forces launched Operation Clean Heart in Bangladesh .
It resulted in house-to-house raids and searches aimed specifically at the Awami League 's voters , party workers , the Hindu community and members of opposition political parties .
Thousands were arrested and held in incommunicado detention .
25 people are alleged to have died after being tortured while in detention .
The claim that these deaths were the results of heart attacks is frankly incredible .
We call upon the Government of Bangladesh to hold an independent inquiry into who is responsible for this , to release members of parliament and opposition political leaders and to establish a Bangladesh national human rights committee .
We would ask the Commission to liaise with the Government of Bangladesh under the cooperation agreement to ensure that violations stop and that human rights are protected , and request that the European Parliament be kept informed .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Italian Radical Members fully support the resolution that has been tabled .
At a meeting with the former Prime Minister of Bangladesh , Mrs Sheikh Hasina , attended by myself and a number of my fellow Members a few days ago in Brussels , we were told of the situation of ongoing violations , tyranny and improper use of the - de facto - army to repress civil rights , not to mention the political rights , of thousands of this country 's nationals .
The Commission should take steps to demand the withdrawal of the army , which is being used without a proper legal basis as a means of policing the public and of political repression .
Last January , when answering a parliamentary question , Commissioner Patten said that the situation in Bangladesh was improving and that the Commission would undertake to monitor it .
All the news , both direct and indirect , which comes out of the country shows that , in actual fact , the situation has taken a very dangerous and worrying turn , which is why we are calling on the Commission to take action .
Mr President , while politically motivated violence and confrontation , as well as the prevailing law and order situation , have been a major concern for the Bangladeshi population for years , the European Union and the international donor community in general are fully aware that the law and order situation has worsened during the last year .
The EU has underlined its concern at the deterioration of law and order and the increase in violence against minorities in its ' Human rights in the world ' speech at the 58th session of the UN Commission on Human Rights .
The European Union is very concerned about the general human rights situation and the continued reports of torture and deaths in custody , following the launch of Operation Clean Heart , aimed at halting the decline in law and order in Bangladesh , to which several Members referred to a few minutes ago .
We are also very concerned about the possible bias in the implementation of this operation and about the delays in implementing or failure to implement reforms such as the separation of the judiciary from the executive , the ombudsman and the creation of an independent human rights commission .
The EU consequently welcomes the European Parliament 's resolution on Operation Clean Heart and the general human rights situation in Bangladesh .
However , there are a couple of points in the resolution which we believe no longer reflect the current situation or are not substantiated by evidence on the ground .
If one compares the situation of politically-motivated violence against the Hindu community before and after the national elections , we can see that reported violence and intimidation of minorities has significantly decreased .
We should send a clear message calling on the government to ensure that the rights and security of all minority communities are fully respected .
As regards Operation Clean Heart , it must be noted that donor communities , as well as civil society , have frequently voiced their concern over the deteriorating law and order situation during this government 's first year in office .
The government launched the operation as a result of this pressure and the failure to deal with the situation by introducing new laws and tightening up on the existing ones .
While we acknowledge the need to improve the law and order situation - and we are ready to support the government of Bangladesh in its attempt to restore law and order - we firmly believe that this must be done under the rule of law and with full respect for human rights .
Under no circumstances can exceptions to these principles be allowed .
That is why the European Commission , through its delegation in Dhaka , will continue to monitor the situation and the political developments very closely .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following five motions for resolutions :
B5-0592 / 2002 by Mr van den Bos and Mrs Malmström , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on Iran ;
B5-0595 / 2002 by Mrs Boudjenah and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the case of Hashem Aghajari in Iran ;
B5-0603 / 2002 by Mr Gahler and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the case of Hashem Aghajari in Iran ;
B5-0607 / 2002 by Mrs Izquierdo Rojo and Mr van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the death sentence against Hashem Aghajari in Iran ;
B5-0608 / 2002 by Mrs Boumediene-Thiery and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Iran .
Mr President , even if Doctor Hachem Aghajari does not receive the death penalty , Iran nonetheless remains condemned to domination by its ultra-conservative religious leaders .
The success of the student demonstrations cannot conceal the fact that the human rights situation has not improved but has , in fact , deteriorated .
The stoning of women , public hanging , torture and other barbaric practices mean that Iran still does not fulfil the elementary demands of civilisation .
It is therefore astonishing that the European Union has not tabled a resolution concerning the situation in Iran in the UN General Assembly Third Committee .
Many Member States say that they have high expectations of the human rights dialogue but , in reality , instead have high expectations of their lucrative business interests .
The European Union must not let itself be taken for a ride .
On the day before the European delegation of negotiators arrived in Teheran , five people were publicly hanged .
The dialogue must not be a reason for failing to put the human rights situation in Iran on the agenda in international fora .
That is why , in the spring , the European Union must submit a resolution to the Commission on Human Rights in Geneva .
Naturally , it is important not to isolate Iran .
Contacts must be established , but good use must be made of these , and the reformers must be given as much support as possible .
A political dialogue clause in a future agreement is not enough .
In my group 's judgment , no cooperation agreement can be concluded as long as there is still gross and systematic abuse of human rights .
Aid to terrorist organisations is also an obstacle to such cooperation .
The situation in the country is becoming more explosive by the day , and it is therefore also high time that there were genuine reforms in Iran .
There can only be constructive dealings with Iran if the truth is allowed to prevail and if supreme authority lies with the people .
Mr President , it was on 23 October , not even a month ago , that we discussed , here in this Parliament , the human rights situation .
We all condemned the death sentences and stonings and the general way in which this inhumane Iranian regime treats its people .
At that time we also expressed regret - at least my group did - that the Council had decided not to table a human rights motion on Iran at the next meeting of the UN Commission on Human Rights .
Now , only a short time later , someone is sentenced to death when all he has done is to urge people to think things over , not to let their opinions be decided for them and not to blindly follow religious dogmatism .
In this situation the European Union is continuing to negotiate a cooperation agreement involving economic cooperation .
One of the statements in the motion is inadequate in my view .
It is obviously good if future cooperation agreements contain a human rights clause .
But I think it would be better - and I am saying this on behalf of my group - if there were no cooperation agreements at all and if they were not even concluded while human rights are not respected .
It is schizophrenic .
We only have a limited number of options when it actually comes to bringing pressure to bear .
We should not give up the possibility of exerting economic pressure on Iran .
Of course it is positive that the students are going out onto the streets .
Of course it is positive that President Khatami is saying that this verdict is unacceptable .
Of course it is positive that the Speaker in the Iranian Parliament is taking the same line .
But this has not come anywhere near to forcing a restructuring of Iranian society .
It is no accident either , in my view , that the Iranian religious leaders and the Iranian Government intend to remove the legitimate opposition in Iran by trying to make them out to be terrorist organisations and having them all put on the corresponding list so that they will have eliminated this opposition once and for all .
I think that we too have a great responsibility here .
We need to take more notice of who is put on these lists and why .
We should ask more questions ; the European Union should not always stand to one side like a junior prison warder .
That is why we are calling on the Commission to make it quite clear at the next negotiations that there will not be any cooperation with Iran , economic or otherwise , for as long as this inhumane system remains as contemptuous of human rights as it is at present .
Mr President , the case of Dr Aghajari has rightly aroused huge interest and concern in Iran and abroad .
I share the view expressed by the Speaker , the Speaker in the Iranian Parliament , Mehdi Karroubi , who called the death sentence a disgrace to the country 's judicial system .
However , I am not entirely convinced that it is as a matter of conviction that the country 's religious leader , Ayatollah Khamenei , has ordered the judiciary to review the verdict .
Khamenei 's previous record suggests rather that he is playing for time .
The student demonstrations should slowly die down , as should the interest shown in the case by the public both nationally and internationally .
It has , however , become clear in the demonstrations that the demonstrators are not only concerned about Dr Aghajari , but that they want more democracy altogether .
In fact this verdict , like many others , is not motivated by religious concerns , but by political ones .
We are familiar with this from European history , when the State and the church were not yet separate .
The rulers of the time used Christianity , too , as a means of realising their own claims to power until it could no longer be recognised as such .
Iranian society is , however , one step ahead of the conservative judiciary and clerics .
This is clear , amongst other things , from the most recent proposals for reform put forward by the Iranian Parliament , which seek to restrict the absolute power of the Council of Guardians .
I call on the Council and the Commission to pursue the dialogue on human rights in all their contacts with Iran and to be clear that without the European Parliament there will be no agreement on cooperation and trade .
The opposition in the Iranian Parliament , both in Iran and abroad , is also very hopeful that economic interests will not be our only reason to hold contacts with this country .
I think that we will also be able to make our views and basic position known when we welcome members of the Iranian Parliament on the occasion of their return visit to this House .
For our part , it will always be clear that we are on the side of more democracy and not on the side of those who want to turn the clock back several hundred years .
Mr President , I disagree with Mr Markov .
Iran is a complex society .
There is evidence of some progress towards an Islamic society that is in tune with the modern world .
President Khatami and his reformist allies are a symbol of that modernisation .
However , President Khatami is being constantly frustrated by the more fundamentalist elements of Iranian society .
That is why the EU is currently engaged in negotiating a trade and cooperation agreement with Iran .
This is not currently in doubt , though it must be clear to the Iranian authorities that at the same time we will expect and require an agreement on human rights .
The death sentence on Dr Hashem Aghajari for apostasy on the basis of some obscure theological dispute is incomprehensible to the West .
We welcome President Khatami 's intervention , the action of lecturers and students in protesting and Dr Aghajari 's own appeal for calm .
We welcome the threat of resignation by President Khatami , the cabinet and dozens of MPs , should the Council of Guardians veto legislation that is being proposed to limit its current absolute power .
However , we have to make it clear to the government of Iran that we will be watching the outcome of this and similar cases with close interest , in terms of our future relations with that country .
Mr President , this motion is about three points .
Firstly , it is about a man who is threatened with death and whom we must rescue .
Secondly , it is about a Dr Aghajari who , in the opinion of many prominent Muslims , is defending true Islam , this great world religion , from political abuse by the extremist forces that are in power in Iran .
And thirdly it is about the fate of Iran itself , because in Iran we are now seeing a power struggle between reformers on the one hand , who want gradually to open up this regime , like President Khatami and the aforementioned Speaker of the Iranian Parliament , and darker characters on the other hand whom to compare with the Middle Ages - I should like to make this clear - is an insult to the Middle Ages .
These are forces that are unfortunately adherents to a modern , totalitarian form of extremism and that are abusing the great world religion of Islam for their own suppressive and criminal ends .
In this context , allow me to say a final word to Mr Markov .
Mr Markov , I have expressed criticism of the weakness of the West and of the repression practised by a regime myself in the past , when the SED was still in power in East Berlin , and I have to say that you yourself would have described the words that you have just used as a throwback to the cold war .
At that time I certainly thought that democrats should be uncompromising where totalitarian forces were concerned .
That was true then , it is true today and it will also be true in the future !
( Sustained applause )
Mr President , we are greatly concerned about the new series of arrests and sentences which reformists and those who exercise their fundamental right to freedom of expression in Iran have been subject to .
Following his speech last June on religious reform , given in western Iran , the university professor , Hashem Aghajari , was arrested and , this month , was sentenced to 74 lashes , followed by eight years ' imprisonment and the death penalty .
Professor Aghajari , who lost his right leg during the Iran-Iraq War , needs medical attention .
He was expected to appeal to a higher court , but Professor Aghajari had the courage to defy the legal system by refusing to go to appeal .
For several days , Teheran has been the scene of heated student protests and , I am glad to say , President Khatami has announced that he does not support the sentence , which was ordered to be reviewed on 17 November by Supreme Leader Khamenei .
In the past , we have called repeatedly on Iran to apply the death penalty only to people who have committed the most serious crimes , in observance of the commitments assumed in accordance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
In its Conclusions on 21 October , the Council agreed to initiate a dialogue with Iran on human rights , thereby confirming its concern over this area , including violations of civil and political rights and , especially , freedom of expression .
The Council also mentioned its traditional , resolute opposition to the death penalty .
On 18 and 19 November in Brussels , President Prodi and Commissioner Patten met Iran 's Foreign Minister , Mr Kharrazi , who undertook to participate in future dialogue between the European Union and Iran on human rights , and challenged , together with other leading Iranian figures , Professor Aghajari 's unjustified sentence .
The dialogue on human rights is , in effect , an appropriate forum for the consideration of individual cases .
The Commission will monitor developments extremely closely and remain in contact with Parliament and the Member States .
I would like to add that the Commission feels that initiating the talks , which will also include a political dialogue , is in the interests of Iran and the European Union - see the Conclusions of 17 June 2002 - and , furthermore , the Trade and Cooperation Agreement will contain a clause on human rights .
In addition , the negotiation process will allow us to exert pressure while , at the same time , supporting President Khatami and the reformists .
Thank you , Commissioner Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place immediately after this debate .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Mr President , as a point of order I would like to request the floor before the vote on the two amendments , because I would like to propose an oral amendment to each of them .
I would also like to table a point of order , before moving on to the vote , which will be a joint one concerning the whole text , because there are some linguistic corrections which I would like to point out to the services , since we have worked very quickly and some errors have slipped in which I will now mention , Mr President .
We negotiators agreed that , by means of oral amendments and corrections , we could adapt the text if the circumstances had changed .
Recital A mentions ' recent hours ' , and much has happened since the hull was ruptured ; it should say ' recent days ' , because some days have passed rather than hours .
In Recital B , where it talks about oil , it should say ' fuel ' , because we have agreed that ' fuel ' should always be included .
In the Spanish version of Recital F the text ' especially birds ' appears and we had agreed that the word ' especially ' would not appear .
I therefore request that the word ' especially ' be removed .
The Spanish version of Recital G says ' sea craftsmen such as oyster farmers and seafood breeders ' .
I would ask that the Spanish version be corrected by saying ' sea workers such as mussel farmers , oyster farmers and other shellfishermen ' .
In point 3 , the Italian version does not match the other versions ; it is the only one in which , in line 7 , seven words have been included which must be removed since they do not appear in any of the other versions .
And finally , in point 11 , it says ' maritime and / or fishing areas ' and , in Spanish , it should say ' maritime-fishing areas ' .
That is all , Mr President .
Mr Varela , I will see to it that all of the language versions are cross-checked once more .
( The President established that there were no objections to the oral amendments )
Before the vote on Amendment No 1 :
Mr President , I would like to present an oral amendment , because the amendment by the UEN Group includes Portugal .
We are not against this , but Spain and France do not appear , but rather Galicia and Brittany , and we believe - and we have discussed this with the Portuguese Members - that it should say : ' Galicia , Brittany and Northern Portugal ' .
Mr President , I should like to do something that I have never done before , namely congratulate the Conference of Presidents in the plenary and thank them for including so many interesting debates on this afternoon 's agenda .
This has set the standard for future plenary sittings !
Congratulations are always welcome !
Mr President , did the Conference of Presidents take a decision regarding the exclusion of the two Zimbabwean diplomats who are on our banned list ?
I understand that the Conference of Presidents was to decide whether or not they should be banned from the building .
I should like to know what was their decision .
Mr Balfe , neither of the diplomats will be allowed to enter the House .
. ( FR ) The sinking of the ' Prestige ' was not an accident .
It was the logical consequence of a mixed , national and European decision-making system , which paralyses the Member States without actually imposing the necessary radical measures .
It thus leaves the way open to certain maritime transport mafias that operate in an area without law ... And everything is perhaps done for that .
Some of my colleagues think that we need to get out of this bad situation by imposing a central and supranational European authority .
This solution may seem attractive , but there is a risk of it being far removed from the people , badly democratically monitored , and therefore susceptible to the pressure of financial interests .
Moreover , there is no point in putting together the European Member States that are affected by the problem , and others that are not affected .
That would only slow down the decisions .
Without excluding European directives out of hand , they need to be supplemented by re-establishing the Member States ' right to protect themselves .
We also need to admit that the Member States that are threatened must be able to take measures together , outside of Community procedures .
And the bottom line is that we need to ban from our waters any vessel for which the person responsible is not clearly identified , cannot be located , is not credit-worthy or is not completely insured .
We are once again going to condemn the sinking of a waste boat that is 26 years old , was last inspected in 1999 , belonged to a Liberian company , was flying a flag of the Bahamas , was operated by a Greek company , chartered by the Swiss subsidiary ( Crown ) of a Russian conglomerate ( Alfa Group ) that obtained a navigation certificate from the American navigation office ...
We have had enough of the opaqueness , impunity and complacency in maritime transport , which present a danger to sailors , the environment and coastal populations .
We have had enough of the impotence of the European Union , which , on the orders of the United States , is capable of establishing anti-terrorist legislation that is an attack on freedom within a few weeks , but is incapable of applying the resolutions in the Erika I and Erika II packages .
We urgently need an international maritime law that can break with the complacency that can force shipowners , charterers and oil companies to take on a security attitude and high social standards for those working in maritime transport .
In short , we need the human ( inspectors , checkers , coastguards ) , material and financial resources to apply the law .
Without these minimal measures , Parliament will continue to adopt ineffe